United Nations S/PV.3595
95-86774 (E) This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fiftieth Year
3595th Meeting
Wednesday, 22 November 1995, 4 p.m.
New York
President: Mr. Al-Khussaiby . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Oman)
Members: Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Cárdenas
Botswana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Legwaila
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Qin Huasun
Czech Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Kovanda
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dejammet
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Eitel
Honduras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Martínez Blanco
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wisnumurti
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ferrarin
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Gambari
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Bakuramutsa
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Sir John Weston
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Albright
Agenda
The situation in the former Yugoslavia
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
The meeting was called to order at 4.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the former Yugoslavia
The President: I should like to inform the Security
Council that I have received letters from the representatives
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canada, Colombia, Croatia,
Egypt, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Japan, Malaysia,
Morocco, Norway, Pakistan, the Republic of Korea,
Slovenia, Spain, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey and Ukraine, in which they request to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The President: I welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sacirbey
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the Council
table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nobilo
(Croatia) took a seat at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Karsgaard
(Canada), Mr. Londoño-Paredes (Colombia),
Mr. Elaraby (Egypt), Mr. Kharrazi (Islamic Republic
of Iran), Mr. Owada (Japan), Mr. Razali (Malaysia),
Mr. Snoussi (Morocco), Mr. Biørn Lian (Norway),
Mr. Kamal (Pakistan), Mr. Park (Republic of Korea),
Mr. Türk (Slovenia), Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo (Spain),
Mr. Maleski (the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia), Mr. Celem (Turkey) and Mr. Zlenko
(Ukraine) took the seats reserved for them at the side
of the Council Chamber.
The President: I have received a request dated
22 November 1995 from Mr. Vladislav Jovanovic to
address the Council. With the consent of the Council, I
would propose to invite him to take a seat at the Council
table.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jovanovic
took a seat at the Council table.
The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/1995/977, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Argentina, France, Germany, Honduras,
Indonesia, Italy, Oman, Rwanda, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States
of America; and document S/1995/978, which contains
the text of a draft resolution submitted by Argentina, the
Czech Republic, France, Germany, Honduras, Italy, the
Russian Federation, Rwanda, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States
of America.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/1995/972, which contains the
text of a letter dated 20 November 1995 from the
Permanent Representative of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to vote on the two draft resolutions before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolutions to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting on both
draft resolutions.
Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): The Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina endorsed by the
parties yesterday at Dayton, Ohio, represents a historic
turning-point in a bitter conflict that has beset the Balkans
for the past four years. The British Government warmly
welcomes this Agreement. That may sound a rather
obvious statement. After all, as a member of the Contact
Group, as the major contributor for much of this year of
peace-keepers on the ground, and as one of the major
contributors to the programme of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for
2
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
the former Yugoslavia, the United Kingdom has played a
central role in the cumulative efforts over the past four
years that led to this Agreement.
But even if that is an obvious statement, it still needs
to be said loudly and clearly. There are already those
among the parties who claim that this Agreement is unfair,
that more could have been gained by continuing the fight.
They prefer to dissociate themselves from what was agreed
at Dayton, rather than grapple with the opportunities and
difficulties it presents. I cannot and do not share their view.
The British Government has always believed that a
negotiated settlement was the only way in which lasting
peace could be achieved. This Agreement preserves Bosnia
as a single State. It lays the basis for strengthening its
independence and security. It will allow — crucially — the
people of Bosnia, including those who have been forced to
flee their homes, to decide who should represent them. And
it provides the basis for the restoration of stability
throughout the entire Balkan region. It is for all these
reasons that the British Government warmly welcomes this
Agreement.
We also pay tribute to all those who helped to bring
about the Agreement. The United States played the
principal role at Dayton. We congratulate Secretary
Christopher, Assistant Secretary Holbrooke and all those
who worked so hard to achieve this Agreement. But it
would not have been possible without the international
community’s collective determination to secure a negotiated
settlement, without the dedication of past negotiators —
most recently Lord Owen and Thorvald Stoltenberg — or
of the European mediator Carl Bildt and the other Contact
Group teams represented at Dayton. Nor could it have been
achieved without the courage and perseverance of United
Nations troops, the UNHCR and other agencies on the
ground, and the commitment of Governments to make
peace-keeping troops available in the first place.
In August last year, Belgrade took a significant step in
deciding to close its border with the Bosnian Serbs until
they were prepared to accept a negotiated settlement. This
Council rightly responded by granting a limited package of
sanctions relief, conditional on that border remaining
closed. The existence of this Peace Agreement is the
clearest possible vindication of this Council’s use of
economic sanctions to bring about change. It is therefore
right that this Council should now reward Belgrade’s
contribution to the successful outcome of the Dayton
negotiations by granting very substantial sanctions relief.
But this Council — rightly, in our view — is giving
a conditional reward. The draft resolution before us holds
out the prospect of the permanent removal of sanctions
when the Agreement has been implemented and when
free and fair elections have been held. It also holds out
the prospect that sanctions relief can be taken away at any
time should there be failure to cooperate over
implementation. It is careful to avoid prejudicing the
complex issue of succession to the former Socialist
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which we hope the
countries of the region will now address urgently in order
to reach agreement on the disposal of assets. This draft
resolution provides that frozen assets that are the subject
of claims, including from any one of the successor States,
shall remain frozen until the claims have been resolved.
In this context, the British Government will, when
implementing the resolution, interpret claims as meaning
those raised in current legal proceedings, which we
believe is the sense of this draft resolution.
As well as suspending sanctions, it is also right that
this Council should allow a phased lifting of the arms
embargo in the context of implementation of the Peace
Agreement and given the shared interests of all the States
in the region to conclude regional arms control
arrangements. The British Government attaches particular
importance to the conclusion of such arms-control
arrangements and we expect those concerned strictly to
uphold their obligations set out in the Annex to the
Agreement on Regional Stabilization. This Council has
seen several lively debates on the question of the arms
embargo over the past few years. It remains a contentious
issue. But there can be no doubt that both economic
sanctions and the arms embargo played an important part
in containing the conflict and persuading the parties to
turn aside from the military option and to negotiate in
earnest.
This Agreement, welcome though it is, will be worth
little if it is not implemented urgently and in full by the
parties. This will require dedication and perseverance.
There will be many difficulties along the way. But the
parties must remain determined to see this task through,
because their only alternative is a slide back into the
suffering and misery of the past four years.
The next step is for the parties to sign the
Agreement at the conference to be held in Paris in the
near future. That will help open the way for an
implementation force to deploy and for the civilian
implementation structures to take shape, but in turn, the
parties need to be able to count on the active involvement
3
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
of the international community in helping them implement
this Agreement. We are ready to play our part. There is
likely to be a very substantial British contribution, including
by making troops available to take part in the
implementation force. We will also be working with our
European partners to support international efforts to
promote the voluntary return of refugees, the monitoring of
human rights, the holding of free and fair elections and the
promotion of long-term economic reconstruction.
So that this work can go forward smoothly, the British
Government will convene a peace-implementation
conference in London in the very near future, so that those
Governments, organizations and agencies most involved in
implementation can work out the practicalities of how best
this should be done. The United Nations will play an
important role in those arrangements and we look forward
to the Secretary-General’s taking part in the London
conference.
There is one very important aspect of this Council’s
policy towards the situation in Bosnia that is only briefly
referred to in the draft resolutions before us. That is the
work of the International Tribunal. It remains more
important than ever, now that peace is truly in prospect for
Bosnia, that all sides cooperate fully with the Tribunal, for,
if reconciliation is one of the vital ingredients in the process
of rebuilding a war-torn society, then that process must also
include a place for justice. No Government — Serbian,
Croatian or indeed any other — should suppose that it is at
liberty to obstruct the Tribunal’s work. Less than two
weeks ago, for example, this Council demanded, inter alia,
that the Bosnian Serb authorities cooperate in the efforts to
establish the fate of thousands of civilians missing from
Srebrenica. Nothing that happened at Dayton yesterday
should be allowed to eclipse the need to establish the facts
in such cases and to ensure that justice in the end prevails.
Mr. Eitel (Germany): The Agreement of Dayton is a
major achievement and an important step forward. We are
grateful to all those who have made it possible. Imperfect
as it may be, it represents the best chance in a long time for
a durable peace in the region. All sides have had to make
painful concessions. Nobody is entirely satisfied with the
outcome. That is a sign that the Agreement as a whole has
a realistic basis. We therefore urge the parties to be
steadfast in their acceptance and pursuit of a peace as
outlined in the Agreement and in its implementation.
When we say this, we think of all the victims of the
war in former Yugoslavia. We think of innocent men,
women and children who were killed senselessly. Our
thoughts go to the missing men and boys of, in particular,
Srebrenica, Zepa and the Banja Luka region. We honour
the Blue Helmets who gave their lives for peace. Their
sacrifice and suffering bestow an enormous responsibility
upon all those who have to implement the Dayton
Agreement in good faith. The signatories and other parties
to the Agreement must fully use the present opportunity,
which offers the best of all the possible conditions for
peace.
We warn, however, against too much optimism.
Much difficulty still lies ahead. The decision to make
peace will be put to many trials. At the same time, we
share the feeling of others that the current intensity of the
mediation and negotiation effort — almost an
overstretch — cannot continue indefinitely. The parties
must realize in word and deed: it is essentially
themselves, and not the international community, who
must build a durable peace, who must fill the Peace
Agreement with life and make it a success.
The draft resolutions on, respectively, the lifting of
the arms embargo and the suspension of sanctions against
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia mark the first step of
the implementation of the Peace Agreement reached in
Dayton. By our decision today, the arms embargo will be
lifted in three phases. It covered attacker and defender,
aggressor and aggressed simultaneously. It was, therefore,
not always easy to reconcile it with Article 51 of the
United Nations Charter.
As did the arms embargo, the economic sanctions as
well proved to be important in the peace process. We
share the view of Ambassador Cárdenas, the Chairman of
the Sanctions Committee on the former Yugoslavia, that
our common experience confirms that the sanctions
regime has essentially been effective.
Neighbouring States and the international community
have contributed to the implementation of the sanctions.
That is why we pay a special tribute to those
neighbouring States which have been affected by them.
We are aware that they had to sever important
commercial and transport links. At the same time, they
had to cope with preserving economic stability and
continuing economic market- reform programmes.
We acknowledge also the contribution of all those
who were involved in the sanctions implementation
apparatus: the European Union/Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (EU/OSCE) Sanctions
Coordinator; the Sanctions Liaison Office, SAMCOMM,
4
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
at the European Union Commission Headquarters in
Brussels; the International Sanctions Assistance Missions
stationed in the neighbouring countries; the International
Conference on the former Yugoslavia (ICFY) mission; the
Western European Union (WEU) operation on the Danube;
and the “Sharp-Guard” North Atlantic Treaty
Organization/Western European Union (NATO/WEU)
operation in the Adriatic Sea. We share the view that until
the complete termination of the sanctions regime these
instruments must be kept intact. We also hope that the
experience gathered will make similar operations — should
they ever become necessary — more effective in future.
The defreezing of funds and assets which can be
allocated to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia will,
hopefully, enable it to re-establish trade links and
commerce with other countries right from the start once the
sanctions are suspended. At the same time, the draft
resolution requests that assets and funds that are subject to
third-party claims — mainly claims from the other
successor States of the former Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia — remain frozen or impounded. We will take
all measures with respect to those assets and funds to
ensure that they remain impounded in accordance with the
applicable law, and thus protect the interests of the other
successor States. With regard to conflicting claims of the
successor States, we urge them to seek an agreement on the
distribution of disputed funds and assets and the allocation
of liabilities in general as soon as possible. This would
make it possible to use released funds and assets for a
positive development of the economy in the countries
concerned and the region as a whole.
We appeal to the international community to continue
to do all it can to further the successful completion of the
peace process. Let us remember that the military
implementation of the agreement — that is, the separation
of forces, the cease-fire and the agreement on arms-control
measures — is one important aspect. The civilian
reconstruction effort led by the new High Representative is
another. The economic benefits of peace will be decisive in
showing what there is to gain by proceeding on the path to
peace and what there is to lose by choosing war.
Germany will do its part. We have, in the past, been
intensively involved in the negotiation efforts of the
international Contact Group. We have contributed to the
talks in Dayton in a number of ways. We place special
emphasis on the human rights aspects of the Agreement, on
the responsibility of States to cooperate with the
International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, and on the
possibility for refugees to return to their original homes.
We identify closely with the provisions of the Federation
Treaty, which we helped elaborate.
Germany particularly stresses the importance of
substantial arms control agreements as outlined in
Annex 1 B of the Peace Agreement to offset the danger
of the lifting of the arms embargo triggering a new arms
race in the region. The military balance in the region
should be established at the lowest possible level.
Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel has, therefore, asked
me to inform the Council about his intention to invite all
parties concerned to a first meeting on arms control in
Bonn, at the earliest possible date. We want to give an
initial momentum to these crucial negotiations under the
auspices of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe as envisaged by the “Agreement on Regional
Stabilization” as contained in Annex 1 B of the Peace
Agreement.
A last, but important, point: In reaffirming our
support and sympathy to our French allies, we will
continue to follow closely the fate of the two missing
French pilots.
Germany will vote in favour of the two draft
resolutions.
Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): Yesterday, a
demarcation line was drawn between war and peace in the
former Yugoslavia. After four years of bloody conflict,
which have inflicted immense suffering on the people of
the region, on a scale unparalleled in Europe since the
Second World War, we are finally poised to embark on
a new and promising stage in the unfolding peace
process.
We welcome the initialling in Dayton, Ohio, of the
General Framework for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and would like to pay a warm tribute to all those who
have directly and indirectly contributed to the efforts in
bringing peace to the territories of the former Yugoslavia.
It is due to their unfailing determination to sustain their
endeavours even in the face of difficult challenges that
the talks in Dayton came to a successful conclusion.
While the Agreement constitutes a milestone in the
efforts towards the attainment of a comprehensive peace
in the former Yugoslavia, it is to be recognized that the
solution to the conflict as agreed in Dayton is perhaps
less than what fairness and justice require. This is
especially true in view of the fact that some of the basic
5
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
elements contained in the Agreement reflect a virtual
recognition of the gains and losses as a consequence of the
war. We should be under no illusion that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is the real victim of the conflict in the former
Yugoslavia.
That being said, it is our fervent hope that the parties
will make the Agreement work and that this Agreement will
lead to the achievement of the ultimate goal not only of
preserving Bosnia and Herzegovina as a single State under
international law, but also of preserving the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina as one nation.
The Council has before it today two draft resolutions
on the termination of the arms embargo and the suspension
of sanctions imposed by the relevant Security Council
resolutions. It is incumbent upon the Council to decide
urgently on these two draft resolutions, which form part of
the overall agreement reached in Dayton.
Over the past four years, the delegation of Indonesia
has consistently called on the Security Council to
pronounce itself unequivocally on the non-applicability of
Security Council resolution 713 (1991) to the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The arms embargo imposed in
1991 on the former Yugoslavia had the unintended effect of
freezing the advantage in weapons in favour of the Bosnian
Serbs, who ruthlessly exploited it with harrowing
consequences in human life and suffering. The Government
of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina was thus
effectively denied its right to defend itself as enshrined in
the Charter. We therefore decided to join in sponsoring the
draft resolution on the termination of the arms embargo
imposed by Security Council resolution 713 (1991).
The tragic conflict in the former Yugoslavia cannot be
expected to provide an infallible general thesis on the
complex relationship between war and peace, between
diplomacy and warfare or even between swords and
ploughshares. But there are sufficient grounds to believe
that stark military imbalance in favour of the Bosnian Serbs
has helped to sustain their aggression and that the recent
revitalization of the peace process cannot be entirely
detached from the noticeably more determined response by
the international community to Bosnian Serb violations of
Security Council resolutions. It is therefore imperative to
ensure that such conditions of sharp military imbalances,
which have been so destabilizing in the past, are not
allowed to repeat themselves.
However, military balance or parity is clearly
something more complex than an objective or quantitative
fact. More often than not, perceptions and mental
constructs bear most heavily on a State’s assessment of
the absence or existence of military balance. We are
familiar with the vicious cycle of insecurity and arms
build-up generated by worst case scenarios of each other’s
intentions and capabilities. The international community
must therefore seek to encourage mutual confidence and
trust among the parties concerned in the former
Yugoslavia. We have also come to appreciate that
long-term stability can only be realized through
confidence-building measures rather than by a massive
arms build-up undertaken to compensate for perceived
vulnerability and insecurity. In this regard, we note the
commitment of the parties set out in Annex 1B
(Agreement on Regional Stabilization) of the Peace
Agreement, including the arms control agreement
contained therein, and hope that this instrument will
contribute toward peace and security in the region.
We are sensitive to the inherent limitations of
sanctions as an instrument to maintain or restore
international security. Nevertheless, as regards the
situation in the former Yugoslavia, it is our view that the
Council has succeeded in clearly defining the objectives
of the application of sanctions. The sanctions imposed by
the Security Council were not punitive measures designed
to inflict hardship and pain on the people of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, but were intended to encourage
the Government in Belgrade to modify its policy by
playing a constructive role in the peace process
commensurate with its influence in the region.
My delegation believes that the sanctions imposed
on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia have contributed
to its adoption of a more realistic and balanced approach
to the peace talks. Rather than remaining peripheral to the
important considerations involved in the peace process, its
Government became far more actively engaged, as
demonstrated by its constructive input during negotiation
of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
The delegation of Indonesia welcomes the positive
role which the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has
recently played in the peace process and hence deems it
appropriate for the Council to suspend the sanctions
imposed against it. At the same time, however, we would
like to emphasize that the continuation of the suspension
of sanctions is contingent upon the fulfilment by the
authorities in Belgrade and by the Bosnian Serbs of their
obligations under the Peace Agreement. With regard to
the provisions contained in the draft resolution relating to
6
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
funds and assets frozen or impounded by the Security
Council resolutions, my delegation would like to underscore
the need for caution. It is our view that funds or assets
should not be unfrozen prematurely, inasmuch as such hasty
action may preempt a consensual agreement among the
successor States as to the disposition of such funds and
assets.
While my delegation is optimistic that the peace
process has the potential to lead towards meaningful
progress as a consequence of the agreements reached in
Dayton, we are also cognizant of the myriad challenges and
difficulties that flow from these agreements. Clearly,
various aspects of the agreements reached in Dayton still
require the Council’s urgent and careful consideration
aimed at securing decisions which not only meet the
challenges and tasks emanating from the field, but are also
consistent with the purposes and principles of the United
Nations.
With specific reference to the proposed international
force to implement the peace accord (IFOR), we feel that
the legitimacy and credibility as well as the ultimate
success of this force will, to a large extent, be influenced
by the process or manner by which the Council reaches its
ultimate decisions. Transparency, consultation and
consensus should be the minimum criteria in guiding these
critical and urgent decisions of the Council. We are
confident that through such a participatory process, the
decisions reached by the Council, including those relating
to the mandate and composition of the prospective IFOR,
will enjoy the level of support necessary for its success.
It is my delegation’s view that the Security Council
should be fully exposed to all ongoing deliberations on the
subject of the formation of IFOR by being informed of
such discussions and, above all, by being directly involved
in this process at the earliest stage of the policy conception
and formulation. In this way, at the appropriate time, the
Council will be sufficiently prepared to engage its full
potential in future deliberations directed towards reaching
a decision on IFOR following the conclusion of a peace
agreement among the parties concerned.
Before concluding, I should like to convey my
delegation’s fervent hope that the historic outcome of the
talks in Dayton and the subsequent formal signing of a
comprehensive settlement will usher in a new era, one
which would allow the healing process to begin, so that the
people of the region will be able to resume peaceful, secure
and productive lives.
In the light of these considerations, my delegation
will vote in favour of the two draft resolutions before the
Security Council. We expect that the adoption of these
draft resolutions will make a positive contribution to the
ongoing peace process by affirming the Council’s
readiness to fulfil its responsibilities under the Charter in
an expeditious and effective manner.
Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): After various setbacks in the Bosnian peace
process, the leaders of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, Croatia, and Bosnia and Herzegovina have
finally reached a comprehensive Peace Agreement, which
represents a breakthrough in the process of the political
settlement of the Bosnian question and creates important
conditions for the settlement of the crisis in the region of
the former Yugoslavia. The Chinese delegation welcomes
this development. We have all along followed closely the
developments in the region, particularly those in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and believe that the initialling of the
Peace Agreement serves the fundamental interests of all
peoples in the region and contributes to peace and
stability in Europe and the world as a whole.
As a Chinese saying goes, “Peace at home brings
prosperity; peace in the country promises success”. The
initialling of the Peace Agreement has reflected the
war-weariness of the people in the region and their
sincere desire for peace and a tranquil life at an early
date. However, we have also noted that the initialling of
the Agreement is just the start of a comprehensive
political settlement of the question of the former
Yugoslavia. It is essential to implement the Agreement in
order to translate the desire for peace into reality. We
therefore hope that the parties concerned will cherish this
hard-won peace opportunity by implementing the
Agreement in earnest so as to end for good the four-year
war, thus restoring peace to the region and enabling all
ethnic groups and countries in the region to live in amity.
We hope that the international community will create
favourable conditions for the implementation of the
Agreement.
The international community, the Security Council
in particular, has all along made unremitting political and
diplomatic efforts to push forward the peace process in
the region of the former Yugoslavia. We are of the view
that any action taken by the Council at this critical turn
for the better in the peace process should contribute to,
rather than undermine, the consolidation of the negotiation
results and the realization of peace and stability at an
early date, so as to enable the people in the region to live
7
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
and work in peace and contentment. Still less should it
trigger an arms race. We fear that lifting the arms embargo
now might have an adverse impact on peace and stability
in the region.
China has never been in favour of exerting pressure by
means of sanctions in the region of the former Yugoslavia,
and stands for an early lifting of sanctions against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The tremendous efforts
made the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to promote the
Bosnian peace process should be acknowledged by the
international community. It should be pointed out that it is
extremely inappropriate to link the lifting of sanctions
against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia with the holding
of elections in Bosnia. Such a practice is unheard of. We
believe that this will set a bad precedent and therefore
express our serious reservations, which we request to have
placed on record. We also deem it necessary to consider
addressing the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia’s status in
the United Nations after the Peace Agreement is signed by
all parties.
Based on our principled position of supporting the
peaceful settlement of the question of the former
Yugoslavia, and considering the attitude of the parties
concerned and the desire of the non-aligned countries, the
Chinese delegation will vote in favour of the two draft
resolutions before us.
Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): The former Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia was a friendly country with which
Nigeria enjoyed years of fruitful and mutually beneficial
relations. We have therefore supported all the peace efforts
and diplomatic initiatives that have been aimed at reaching
a comprehensive resolution of the crisis in the country. As
testimony to that concern, my country was one of the very
first to contribute a battalion of troops to the initial United
Nations peace-keeping operation deployed in Croatia in
1992; even now our personnel are part of the military
observer component of the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR). Furthermore, since joining the Security
Council my delegation has supported all well-meaning
proposals, either in the form of resolutions or presidential
statements, that have been adopted by the Council with the
aim of moving the peace process forward.
It was in this context that we supported the proximity
talks that were recently concluded in Dayton, Ohio, here in
the United States. And today my delegation is happy to join
in welcoming the initialling, on 21 November 1995, of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Annexes thereto by the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia, the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the other parties
thereto. We are particularly delighted that the three
leaders did not allow the opportunity offered by the
Dayton talks to slip away, despite enormous difficulties
and hurdles to transcend.
This development, in our view, represents an
important breakthrough in the peace process. Although it
is just one step in what undoubtedly remains a long and
difficult journey to peace, we none the less believe it
represents the best opportunity thus far to end the
conflict. We therefore call upon all the parties to sign the
General Peace Agreement, when the signing takes place,
as expected, in Paris in a few weeks’ time. In the
meantime, we urge them to refrain from any activities
that could destabilize the fragile truce on the ground.
My delegation would also like to pay deserved
tribute to all the States and Governments that have
worked assiduously for peace in the region. We must pay
special tribute to our Secretary-General and the Secretariat
for their tireless efforts in the cause of peace.
The General Peace Agreement requires a lot more
work and painstaking negotiations in the weeks and
months ahead if we are to make the peace process truly
irreversible. We therefore hope that all parties will deploy
the necessary efforts in this regard.
The two draft resolutions before us are testimony to
the Security Council’s concern for the situation in the
former Yugoslavia as well as the readiness of its
members to give all the necessary assistance and support
to the parties by creating an enabling environment that
will assist them to implement the Agreement. To this
extent, and consistent with my Government’s position, my
delegation is able to go along with the thrust of the draft
resolutions as a package that is meant to underpin the
Peace Agreement and thus promote the overriding goal of
peace and stability in a region that has recently been
ravaged by war. Let me, however, make the following
specific comments with regard to each of the draft
resolutions.
Concerning the draft resolution on the lifting of the
arms embargo, my delegation hopes that none of the
parties will view this as a license to relaunch any military
campaign. We would like to hope that the lifting of the
arms embargo will play a positive and reassuring role by
ensuring that all the States of the region will have the
means to defend their respective sovereignty and
8
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
territorial integrity. In this regard, Annex 1 B of the
Agreement, concerning regional stabilization, is a necessary
and important corollary to the lifting of the arms embargo,
and we urge all those concerned to abide by the spirit as
well as the letter of that Annex.
With respect to the suspension of the sanctions against
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and
Montenegro), this is consistent with our belief that
sanctions should not be punitive in and of themselves, but
should be designed to modify the behaviour of
Governments. We would hope that this flexible approach to
the question of sanctions would be applied to other
sanctions regimes, as objective conditions on the ground do
change.
Later today we shall, hopefully, be adopting a draft
resolution on the Basic Agreement on the Region of
Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium, which was
signed on 12 November 1995, between the Government of
the Republic of Croatia and the local Serb representatives.
Let me say that my delegation welcomes the Agreement
and calls upon the parties to it to implement fully their
commitments thereunder.
As we look ahead to the next crucial phase of the
peace process — that of the actual implementation on the
ground of the various aspects of the agreement, which will
entail a reconfiguration of the force that will oversee its
implementation — my delegation at this stage would like
to thank all those who have served under UNPROFOR for
their tireless sacrifice in stabilizing the situation and saving
perhaps thousands of lives. Without their efforts, the
conditions in the Balkans could have been worse, and
would have been worse, and a conducive climate for the
recent peace talks may not have been created.
In concluding, my delegation hopes that the parties in
conflict in the former Yugoslavia will now give peace a
chance. They must translate the promise of peace on paper
into peace in action, and it is only in this way that the
international community will be in a better position to help
concretely in building lasting peace in that region.
Mr. Kovanda (Czech Republic): Today we meet on
a happy occasion by any standards — except that the name
of Dayton, having become a part of history, will cause
difficulties to future generations of schoolchildren.
We have, indeed, had precious few occasions to
celebrate anything concerning Bosnia and Herzegovina in
the Council in recent years. We may not have the end of
the war, but we do have the beginning of peace. The next
weeks and months will show how this beginning will
unfold. It will show which of all the complex
arrangements of Dayton will live, even flourish, and
whether any will die on the vine.
The Security Council has been sidelined for several
months when it comes to the former Yugoslavia, at least
since the Contact Group assumed the initiative in dealing
with that part of the world. It was, of course, the
formidable resources of United States diplomacy and
military might which brought about and pulled off
Dayton. We sincerely congratulate all concerned. Our
own role here in the Council is one of a supporting actor:
to undo, now that peace is looming, measures which we
adopted in very different circumstances.
My country is pleased to have co-sponsored the draft
resolution providing for the suspension and eventual
termination of economic sanctions against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and, in due course, Bosnian Serb
territories of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The easing of
sanctions is deliberate and leaves open ways for reversing
the suspension should the subjects of the sanctions fail in
taking the steps anticipated of them in Dayton.
Our sanctions draft mentions compliance with the
requests and orders of the International Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia as constituting an essential aspect of
implementing the Peace Agreement. This mention appears
in the preamble, but not in the operative section of the
draft. My delegation would warn, however, against
interpreting this fact as diminishing its importance. In
resolution after resolution the Council has insisted on
individual responsibility of perpetrators of “ethnic
cleansing”. We have never abandoned this insistence.
Individual responsibility, established by and punished by
the International Tribunal, is necessary not only for
justice to be done, but also to prevent the emergence in
Bosnia and Herzegovina of a culture of impunity, a
culture which leaves victims and their children with a
feeling that if any justice is to be done they have to seek
it themselves, thus sowing the wind which will possibly
yield another whirlwind of war.
One of the difficult open issues among the south
Slav States is the matter of succession. The draft rightly
stresses the need for successors to the former Socialist
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to reach necessary
agreements on the distribution of funds and assets. The
Czech Republic has some experience of peaceably
9
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
dividing countries and their assets and would, I am sure,
gladly provide advice about how to go about it.
The phased lifting of the arms embargo may be
viewed as the obverse of the removal of sanctions. My
Government, however, is uncertain whether lifting the
embargo three months into a peace, a peace which will be
so new an experience for all citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, is absolutely indispensable — and this, at a
time when tens of thousands of defenders of peace, namely,
the implementation force, will be pouring into the country.
Serious discussions are under way even as I speak which
should lead to a serious and substantive contribution of
Czech soldiers to the implementation force. We would hate
to suffer any casualties resulting from a freshly legal inflow
of arms into the cauldron of killing that is Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
In all, though, my delegation will vote in favour of
both draft resolutions before us.
Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): The delegation of
Botswana welcomes the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina concluded and initialled
yesterday by the Presidents of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. It is indeed a historic agreement
that promises to bring to an end three and half years of a
brutal conflict, three and half years of one of the most
devastating wars in the history of modern Europe, a war
which is estimated to have claimed close to a quarter of a
million innocent lives.
It is our ardent hope that after almost four years of a
painful and tortuous war the peoples of the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina are now ready to resolve their
differences amicably and to live with each other as good
neighbours. It is also our hope that the initialling and
consequent signature of the Agreement will be not an end
in themselves, but the beginning of a process that will bring
about peace and stability in that war-ravaged country.
In fact, all the peoples of former Yugoslavia are
yearning for peace. It is clear, however, that peace will only
come if they can learn to tolerate one another and adopt
live-and-let-live attitudes towards one another. It is time
they realized that the right to existence of one ethnic group
is not a negation of the right of other groups to existence,
nor should it necessarily present a threat to such existence.
It is only with that realization that coexistence in that area
and mutual trust will return to former Yugoslavia.
As early as 25 September 1991 the Security Council
adopted resolution 713 (1991), which imposed a general
and complete embargo on all deliveries of weapons and
military equipment to Yugoslavia. The idea was to restrict
the flow of arms to the conflicting parties and minimize
the possibility of a wider conflagration in the Balkans.
We therefore find it a bit ironic that the Agreement
allows for the lifting of the arms embargo before there is
certainty of durable peace. We are a little worried that the
amassing of weapons by the parties may lead to the
reigniting of the conflict. None the less, we appreciate
that the situation on the ground has changed, and there is
no cause for alarm, at least for now. My delegation
therefore has no problem supporting the draft resolution
on the lifting of the arms embargo.
My delegation will also vote in favour of the draft
resolution on the suspension of sanctions imposed on the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The sanctions were
imposed to pressure the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
to accept political dialogue as opposed to the logic of
war, and now that this objective has been realized we feel
it is indeed time the sanctions were suspended and,
finally, lifted.
We recognize that much remains to be done to
secure peace in the Balkans. The resolve of the parties to
remain committed to a peaceful settlement of their
differences is the only way forward. They need our
continuous encouragement and persuasion. Our support
for the suspension of the sanctions until such time as the
Peace Agreement is implemented should be understood in
this context. It is our hope that the Government of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia will do everything in its
power to ensure that the implementation of the Peace
Agreement progresses without let or hindrance, which
would in turn open the way for the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to take its rightful place in the family of
nations.
Although we welcome the Peace Agreement, we still
face imponderables. We do not as yet have a full
appreciation of what the Agreement really entails, nor do
we know what the parties themselves believe they have
achieved. This could have a bearing on the
implementation of the Agreement. We also believe that at
an appropriate time in the near future the Security
Council will have to hold substantive discussions on the
role of the United Nations in the implementation of the
General Framework Agreement, including the
authorization of a multinational force, its mandate,
composition and command-and-control structure and the
10
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
nature of the relationship that would be established between
the United Nations and the Force Commander for purposes
of coordination and information flow. In other words, there
are several questions in our minds that still beg for answers,
and we hope the answers will not be long in coming.
Indeed, there is a particular, nagging question to which we
desperately seek an answer: are those who have been
indicted for the commission of acts of genocide now
beyond the reach of the arm of the law? Have they been
saved by the Dayton agreements?
In conclusion, let me congratulate the parties on a
fruitful and worthwhile three weeks of negotiations in
Dayton, Ohio. They have given their people a promise of
peace and, hopefully, a future free of war and human
suffering. We can only request them fully to honour the
commitments they have made and translate into concrete
action what they have agreed on paper.
I should like also to pay a well-deserved tribute to the
mediators for their determination and perseverance, even
when the negotiations appeared to falter. The Government
of the United States deserves a pat on the back for a job
well done. It worked very hard to reconcile what appeared
irreconcilable, which says a lot about its diplomatic skills.
And lastly, a special word of deep appreciation to the
men and women of the United Nations Peace Forces, under
the able leadership of our Secretary-General. They did a
wonderful job in very trying circumstances, and in the
process many of them lost their precious lives. They
definitely deserved better.
Mr. Martínez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from
Spanish): My delegation welcomed with great satisfaction
the news of the initialling yesterday in Dayton, Ohio, of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace and the Annexes
thereto by the leaders of the Republics of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, which is to put an end to more than three years
of bloody conflict that has claimed almost a quarter of a
million lives in that part of the world. The imminent formal
signing of the Peace Agreement and the fulfilment of the
commitments envisaged will undoubtedly lead to the
establishment of a lasting peace in the Balkans region and
to a new era in which trust and mutual cooperation will
erase forever the anguish and suffering caused by the war.
The delegation of Honduras has on a number of
occasions stated in the Council its position in favour of a
negotiated political settlement to the conflicts in the former
Yugoslavia that would preserve the territorial integrity of all
the States of the region within their internationally
recognized borders. Accordingly, we welcome the Peace
Agreement’s provision that the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina will continue to be a sovereign State within
its existing international borders. But we have all the
more reason to hail the parties’ agreement to guarantee
the utmost respect for human rights and their decision to
cooperate fully in the investigation and punishment of war
crimes, which we have unswervingly condemned.
Now that the parties have succeeded in arriving at a
lasting peace settlement in Bosnia and Herzegovina, this
will for peace must be translated into specific actions, in
full compliance with the provisions of the Peace
Agreement and the Annexes thereto. In this respect, we
believe that the decisions that the Council will soon have
to take will assist in this process. However, we recognize
that the situation in the region still constitutes a threat to
international peace and security. For this reason, we
support the ending of the embargo on arms and military
equipment imposed by resolution 713 (1991), on the
conditions stipulated in the draft resolution that we will
be adopting, and an indefinite suspension of the measures
imposed by the Council, in particular on the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and on the Bosnian Serb party, on
the conditions that are also spelt out in the pertinent draft
resolution.
Honduras hopes that the commitments reached in
Dayton, Ohio, will be successfully fulfilled, for the sake
of peace in the successor States of the former Yugoslavia
and in the world. As a sponsor of both draft resolutions,
we will be voting in favour of them.
We wish to express our deep appreciation to the
Contact Group — and in particular to the Government of
the United States of America — for its tireless diplomatic
efforts to bring about a negotiated peace for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We also appreciate the important
contribution made by the Mission of the International
Conference on the Former Yugoslavia, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and other
intergovernmental missions.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation
from Russian): The Russian Federation welcomes the
initialling in Dayton by the parties to the Bosnian conflict
of the package of documents on the peace settlement in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. A major step has been taken
towards a comprehensive settlement of the most tragic
conflict to have taken place in post-war Europe. Russia,
the United States, the United Kingdom, France, Germany
11
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
and the European Union, acting in concert in the framework
of the Contact Group, have done some solid work. The
United Nations assistance at various stages of the peace
process was an important factor in achieving progress. We
would like to pay a tribute to the courageous personnel of
the United Nations Forces, who carried out their mandate
in extremely difficult circumstances.
Four years after the beginning of the tragedy in the
Balkans, we can conclude only that nothing has come of
this conflict but grief, suffering and devastation. There were
no victors in this conflict, nor could there be any. Everyone
has lost — the Serbs, the Croatians, the Muslims and
Europe as a whole.
We would like to pay tribute to the spirit of realism
and of profound responsibility to their peoples that was
displayed by the leaders of the States parties to the conflict.
They mustered sufficient strength and courage to rise above
their enmities and to make the difficult choice in favour of
peace — the only correct one.
What is now essential is for the parties to sign
forthwith the Agreement that has been reached and to start
faithfully to implement them. In this regard, they will be
answerable to their peoples and the international
community. Only by continuing political dialogue and
seeking compromise, taking account of the interests and
equal rights of all, can there be durable peace in this
region.
Before us lies the difficult process of implementing
the Peace Agreement, the final parameters of which still
need to be spelled out. In this connection, I would like to
recall that the Russian side, when initialling the Agreement
in Dayton, reserved its position regarding military
implementation. On this matter, Russia continues to
entertain serious doubts, in particular with regard to the
absence of the necessary political control on the part of the
Security Council over the military operation. But we will,
of course, be returning to this question.
As an active participant in the Dayton talks, Russia
intends to continue contributing to the development of the
peace process and will be prepared to continue discussing
the military aspect of the settlement both on a multilateral
and a bilateral basis.
We attach particular importance to the fact that
immediately after the initialling of the Agreement in Dayton
the provision of the draft resolution before us relating to the
indefinite suspension of economic sanctions against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY) and the Republic
of Serbia should come into operation. This is an
extremely important step, albeit belated. We remain
convinced that the conditions for the final lifting of the
sanctions were met long ago, when the demands of
resolution 757 (1992) were met and Belgrade actively
joined in the efforts of the Contact Group on the Bosnian
settlement; it has now guaranteed the adoption of the
peace plan. While welcoming the end of the economic
blockade against Yugoslavia and declaring our readiness
to promote comprehensive cooperation between our States
to rebuild the region, we believe that this is all the more
timely since the humanitarian crisis there, of an
unprecedented scale, has worsened considerably in recent
months due to the influx into the FRY of hundreds of
thousands of refugees from Croatia and Bosnia, which
requires the adoption of immediate steps to relieve their
plight.
The draft resolution, of which Russia is a
co-sponsor, is a balanced document which envisages
various situations, including unfavourable scenarios in the
development of the situation, including the possibility of
the reintroduction of sanctions if there should be any
gross violation of the commitments made under the Peace
Agreement. To this end, it provides that reports be made
to the Security Council after joint consultations of senior
leaders of the international military and civilian structures
in Bosnia. The Security Council may take its own
decision, depending on who is responsible for such
violations.
The other draft resolution, on the lifting of the
military embargo, has certain merits. First and foremost,
this represents an even approach to all parties in the light
of the phased removal of restrictions on the supply of
weapons and also in the light of the fact that the text
includes, at our insistence, the obligation of the Security
Council to exercise control over measures to prevent an
arms race in the region. This should also be helped by the
work of the Sanctions Committee, to which the draft
resolution has issued corresponding instructions.
Nevertheless, despite these merits, this draft
resolution raises serious doubts and concerns for the
Russian Federation. This is because neither the spirit nor
the letter of the text follow the logic of the political
process, which is aimed at ending military confrontation
in the region. This has already been mentioned by several
of my colleagues today. We believe that the Balkans
should never again pose a threat to international security
and stability. Therefore, we are in favour not of an arms
12
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
build-up in the region, but of a restriction and reduction of
arms. Furthermore, we would have preferred the draft to
provide for a more clear-cut mechanism to operate in the
event the peace process should be derailed. We believe that
in this matter a more carefully considered and responsible
approach was needed, particularly since these are serious
matters whose significance goes well beyond the confines
of the region itself. Of particular importance in this
connection will be the reports from the Secretary-General
to the Security Council to the effect that the parties are in
fact fulfilling their obligations on arms limitation. We look
forward to such reports.
In view of the amendments made to the draft
resolution and the fact that it is an integral part of the
Agreement package approved in Dayton by the leaders of
Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and the FRY, the Russian
delegation, although unable to associate itself with this draft
resolution, will abstain in the voting.
The President: I shall now put to the vote the draft
resolution contained in document S/1995/977.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Botswana, China, Czech Republic, France,
Germany, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy, Nigeria, Oman,
Rwanda, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Russian Federation
The President: The result of the voting is as follows:
14 votes in favour, none against and 1 abstention. The draft
resolution has been adopted as resolution 1021 (1995).
I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/1995/978.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Botswana, China, Czech Republic, France,
Germany, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy, Nigeria, Oman,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1022 (1995).
I shall now call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements following the voting.
Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from
French): France, through its highest authorities,
immediately welcomed the successful outcome of the
talks in Dayton under the auspices of the Contact Group,
which is a decisive stage in the progress towards peace.
This success is the fruit of the efforts of the Contact
Group negotiators and an illustration of the courage and
vision of the parties, who in the final analysis chose the
path towards reconciliation. The international conference
shortly to be held in Paris will place the seal on the cycle
of negotiations with the signing of the Peace Agreement
and open the way for a process of stability and good
neighbourliness.
France has spared no effort on the ground and in the
diplomatic negotiations to contribute to this result. It
remains determined to take steps to reaffirm the identity
of a united, multicultural and democratic Bosnia and
Herzegovina that can take its rightful place in Europe. It
will continue to lend its full support to the establishment
and maintenance of a fair and lasting peace.
Today, our thoughts go first and foremost to the
refugees, those who have been forced onto the roads of
exodus, and the relatives of the countless victims whose
grief we share and whose will for justice we understand.
But how can we fail today also to pay tribute to
those who, in the service of the United Nations, gave
their lives in the former Yugoslavia? How can we fail to
thank the neighbours of the parties to the conflict, which
have had to bear a weighty burden to prevent the war
from spreading and to ensure respect for the decisions of
the international community? And how can we fail to
express our gratitude to all the United Nations participants
who, in circumstances that were always difficult and often
thankless, worked tirelessly to save lives, strove to renew
the dialogue and sustained the conditions for and hopes of
a peaceful settlement?
The role of the United Nations has been and remains
a vital one. The resolutions we have just adopted attest to
that role. They turn a page of history: from the page of
war to the page of peace. They are the first phase in the
13
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
implementation of the final agreement, which the Council
will be addressing in due course.
Four years ago the United Nations Security Council
decided to impose an arms embargo in order to prevent the
spread of the conflict. Today, we have just adopted a
resolution which, in the very different context of the
Dayton commitments, provides for the gradual lifting of
that embargo.
Yet peace cannot be achieved through the arms race,
but only through the quest for stability and arms control.
That is why, in resolution 1021 (1995), the Council
welcomes the commitments of the parties set out in the
Agreement on Regional Stabilization, in terms of arms
control, ceilings for categories of weapons and confidence-
building measures. The lifting of the embargo will be
phased. The Security Council will receive a report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of the Agreement
on Regional Stabilization, and the Council will assume its
responsibilities on the basis of that report. For once again
it is important to couple peace with stability by seeking a
balance in arms at a reduced level, rather than carrying on
a destructive race to acquire new weapons.
Three years ago the Council decided to put in place a
system of binding sanctions to enforce its decisions on a
peaceful settlement. These sanctions have successively been
tightened, eased and maintained. Today we are able to
agree on the immediate suspension of the sanctions
imposed on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, a
suspension that only a significant failure to comply with the
provisions of the Agreement can cut short.
This decision reflects our assessment of the positive
role played in recent months by the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. France is particularly gratified by this decision,
which will enable the population of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to return quickly to normal life, while affording
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia the opportunity fully to
rejoin the international community. In this connection,
France supports the appeal to all States concerned to work
promptly in the competent international forums to resolve
issues relating to succession in the former Yugoslavia, with
respect for the legitimate interests of all those States.
The suspension of the sanctions imposed on the
Bosnian Serbs, once forces have been withdrawn to agreed
lines, is another gesture of encouragement towards that
community.
I wish, however, to recall in this connection a key
provision to which France attaches the highest value.
Resolution 1022 (1995), on sanctions, notes the
Concluding Statement issued at Dayton, in which all
parties undertook to do everything possible to assist in
locating the two French pilots missing in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and to ensure their immediate and safe
return. This is a formal undertaking by the parties
concerned, which we mean to see fulfilled. The resolution
on sanctions refers to this undertaking in its paragraph 2.
France will see to it that this provision is implemented.
We are grateful for the solidarity and sympathy expressed
in the Council.
The final lifting of sanctions can take place only
after a certain lapse of time. Key phases of the
Agreement will first have to be achieved. Respect for
these phases will enable us to confirm the firm
commitment of the Bosnian Serbs to a peaceful settlement
of the conflict by democratic means.
The two resolutions the Council has adopted today
constitute a balanced whole. They reflect the turning-point
marked by the results achieved at Dayton. They provide
a positive incentive to all parties to implement, faithfully
and fully, the provisions of the Peace Agreement that will
soon be signed at Paris. France is pleased at their
adoption.
Mrs. Albright (United States of America): We meet
today to respond, on behalf of the international
community, to the Peace Agreement initialled yesterday
in Dayton, Ohio. The world can be grateful for the
tireless diplomacy of Deputy Foreign Minister Ivanov,
Foreign Minister Bildt and, I am proud to say, American
diplomats led by Secretary of State Warren Christopher
and by Assistant Secretary Richard Holbrooke.
Their efforts succeeded because the leaders of the
three countries involved were willing to make the hard
choices necessary to bridge past grievances and embrace
future possibilities. Their efforts succeeded because of the
prayers of average citizens in the region and around the
world who have been horrified by the senseless suffering
inflicted by this war. And their efforts succeeded because
of the heroic humanitarian work of United Nations peace-
keepers from countries on this Council and from around
the world.
For the Council, our task in adopting these
resolutions is to provide the first concrete results
reflecting the decisions of Dayton. Today we take another
14
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
step down the long road towards peace. By lifting the arms
embargo and suspending economic sanctions, we have kick-
started that long journey, and we have given the parties the
support they need to sign this historic Agreement and
ensure its effective implementation.
After many years, after many debates, after many
resolutions and after innumerable statements, this Council
is today truly helping to make the promise of peace a
reality.
The first of the two resolutions we have adopted
provides for the phased lifting of the embargo on the sale
or transfer of arms to States within the former Yugoslavia.
Under the resolution, the arms embargo will remain in
place for 90 days after a final Peace Agreement is signed.
A prohibition on the transfer of heavy weapons will
continue until 180 days have elapsed, or until the arms-
control pact envisioned by the Agreement is signed. The
Council will watch the effect of this regime with interest.
It is logical now, in the light of the events in Dayton,
to lift the embargo against Bosnia. An embargo should not
be maintained against a country whose only crime was to
preserve its sovereignty, defend its people and sign every
peace agreement put before it. Today we bring that injustice
and folly to an end.
But now we must move beyond past debates to focus
on the future. Our goal is to translate yesterday’s promise
of peace into tomorrow’s enduring reality of peace. Our
plan is to discourage an arms race and to encourage a
stable balance of military power. Our desire is to nourish a
conviction on all sides that negotiation, not confrontation,
is the practical way to resolve disputes.
To these ends the Framework Agreement places
restrictions on the military forces and heavy weapons of
each party, it establishes an arms control mechanism, and
it calls for talks to begin on measures to increase the
confidence of all sides that no side will seek to evade or
take military advantage of this Agreement.
I should also note that our action today will terminate
the arms embargo for all the successor States that arose
from the breakup of Yugoslavia, including the Republics of
Slovenia and Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia.
The second resolution we adopted today suspends the
economic sanctions that were imposed against Serbia and
Montenegro. This is a conditional step. The sanctions will
be reimposed if the Government in Belgrade fails to sign
the formal Peace Agreement and the other parties do.
Sanctions will also be reimposed if Belgrade or the Pale
Serbs fail to meet their obligations under the Peace
Agreement.
On this point, let me be clear. The international
community must be vigilant in monitoring compliance
with the terms of this agreement. We must insist that
words on paper become facts on the ground, and we must
heed the explicit language of this resolution, which notes
that compliance with the requests and orders of the
International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia — the
war-crimes Tribunal — is an essential part of the
agreement’s implementation.
To answer the Ambassador of Botswana, let me say
that the war criminals are not freed by Dayton. On the
contrary, the obligations to cooperate with the war-crimes
Tribunal are strengthened.
The suspension of sanctions under this resolution
will not apply immediately to measures imposed on the
Bosnian Serbs. Those measures will remain in effect until
all Bosnian Serb military forces have withdrawn behind
the zones of separation established in the Peace
Agreement.
Especially given the statements we have heard from
Pale over the past 24 hours, compliance by the Bosnian
Serbs cannot be assumed. After the siege of Sarajevo, the
market-place shelling, the years of “ethnic cleansing” and
the unforgivable savagery at Srebrenica, the world has
had enough of Bosnian Serb arrogance and brutality.
Their compliance with this agreement must be demanded
by the Government in Belgrade; it must be demanded by
this Council; and it must be demanded by every civilized
person on Earth.
The adoption of this resolution reflects not a change
in policy but a change in circumstances. This Council
imposed economic sanctions for the explicit purpose of
encouraging Serbia to choose the path of peace. The
sanctions appear to have achieved their purpose — far
later than we would have hoped, but still earlier than
some predicted. Indeed, this much-criticized sanctions tool
has proved critical in bringing about the decision in
Dayton, and the leverage it brings us will continue to
serve us well in the complicated task of implementation.
The terms of the resolution are calibrated to the
realities of the situation in the former Yugoslavia. If the
15
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
Government in Belgrade or the Pale Serbs fail to fulfil their
obligations, the sanctions will be reimposed. With that
unwelcome possibility in mind, my Government believes
strongly that the infrastructure established and a cadre of
personnel assigned to monitor sanctions enforcement should
remain in place until sanctions are fully and finally lifted.
But this resolution also creates a strong incentive for
the parties to act in accordance with the Framework
Agreement. By so doing, the parties may free themselves
and their citizens to pursue the hard but rewarding work of
providing for the economic and social well-being of their
societies. In that work, the United States and the
international community are prepared to help all those truly
committed to peace.
I note that in crafting this resolution the Council also
sought to protect the interests of all the States that were
part of the former Yugoslavia, including those not directly
involved in the fighting. The resolution is not intended to
allow any Member State currently blocking assets of the
former Yugoslavia to release those assets where there exists
the possibility of ownership, in whole or in part, by another
successor State.
My Government believes there should be an orderly
and equitable distribution of real and financial property of
the former Yugoslavia between the successor States. To
achieve this goal, successor States must be provided with
sufficient notice of assets under consideration for release,
to allow them an opportunity to submit claims before a
decision is made with respect to the disposition of those
assets. This could be accomplished through a registration,
a census or some other orderly process whereby all parties
are given an opportunity to claim ownership.
To this end, the United States does not intend to
release any assets itself until all assets are examined against
possible claims by the successor States and against
outstanding commercial or private claims. We do not
believe any asset should be considered releasable until it
has been examined in these contexts.
The time has come for the voices of reason and simple
human decency in the former Yugoslavia to prevail over
the still-present apostles of intolerance and hate. We cannot
underestimate the difficulties. Member States must do
everything within their power to accelerate the momentum
towards lasting peace, to discourage further outbreaks of
aggression and to give those who want to live as
neighbours, not enemies, the confidence to do so.
The lesson of the past four years is that war in this
region produces no victors — only victims. This
morning’s newspaper quotes a 67-year-old woman in
Sarajevo whose husband was killed by a shell while
sitting on the balcony of their apartment two years ago.
She said the agreement in Dayton “means a rebirth.” She
said,
“I have been crying ever since I found out. ... We
all just want peace and to be allowed out of the
house to fetch our groceries without worrying about
being shot.” (In Weary Bosnian Capital, Joy, and
Tears for the Dead, The New York Times,
22 November 1995, p. A10)
Yesterday’s agreement in Dayton marked the end of
one era in the Balkans, and the beginning of a new one.
Let us do all we can to define this new era within a
framework of law and justice — not as abstract
principles, but as realities in the day-to-day lives of
people throughout the region.
Let us do all we can to see that after years of fear
and deprivation, Serb, Croat and Bosnian families —
Serb, Croat and Bosnian children — are finally able to
know the quiet miracle of a normal life.
Mr. Ferrarin (Italy): First of all, I wish to associate
myself fully with the statement that the Permanent
Representative of Spain is about to make on behalf of the
European Union. I wish to add some comments to that
statement.
For four long years Italy has anxiously followed the
protraction of the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina, a
country to which we are close geographically and with
which we have close historical and cultural ties of long
standing.
The images of that conflict, particularly of the
suffering of the civilian population, have left a profound
impression on the conscience of the Italian people and of
the whole international community. It was therefore with
feelings of deep satisfaction and relief that we learned
yesterday that a Peace Agreement had been initialled in
Dayton. This is a historic event, and we wish to express
our gratitude to those who worked to promote it,
particularly the United States Government and
Mr. Holbrooke personally, whose extraordinary diplomatic
skills played such an important part.
16
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
Now we must take advantage of this crucial
development to consolidate the prospects for peace. We
must not lose the momentum gained in Dayton. We believe
that the Peace Agreement should be quickly signed in Paris
and that the upcoming London Conference can help to
create the basis for the economic reconstruction of the
former Yugoslavia. In fact, Italy feels that economic
rehabilitation and development are essential components of
the general process of pacification and reconciliation, a
process that will necessarily be long and complex, given the
deep wounds left by the conflict. Italy, which convened a
meeting in Rome last October to discuss this subject, is
ready to make a significant contribution for this purpose,
together with its partners in the European Union.
Italy is one of the sponsors of the two resolutions
adopted today by the Security Council. They are closely
tied to the Agreement signed in Dayton yesterday, and they
must be viewed in that perspective. The resolution on the
arms embargo against the former Yugoslavia provides for
a phased lifting of the embargo. For us, what is particularly
important is its linkage with the Agreement on Regional
Stabilization, reached by the parties in Dayton and included
in the Peace Agreement as Annex 1B. This is an essential
instrument for preventing the lifting of the embargo from
turning into a new arms race, which would inevitably
threaten to rekindle a conflict that has finally ended.
The resolution to suspend sanctions against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia is an important step towards full
reintegration of that country into the family of nations. In
recent months, particularly during the past weeks in Dayton,
the Belgrade Government has made an important
contribution to the positive outcome of the negotiating
process. Today’s resolution recognizes this positive role and
encourages Yugoslavia to continue in this direction.
As for the Bosnian Serbs, the suspension of sanctions
against them is made dependant on the withdrawal of their
forces behind the zone of separation established in the
Peace Agreement. Moreover, the termination of sanctions
depends on the holding of free and fair elections — an
important provision, since it points to the full restoration of
democratic rule at a crucial moment in the implementation
of the Peace Agreement.
I wish to emphasize the importance of urging the
successor States of the former Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to reach an agreement on the problem of
succession to that State, including the distribution of its
funds and assets and the allocation of its liabilities. Only an
agreement of this kind can allow, among other things, a
final and satisfactory solution to the question of the
frozen funds and assets of the former Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.
I wish to conclude by emphasizing the importance of
firm respect for human rights throughout the former
Yugoslavia. This is an absolute condition for a full
normalization of the situation in a region so close to us.
In this context, my country strongly appeals to all the
parties affected by today’s resolutions to collaborate with
the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia,
whose activity we consider indispensable to healing the
wounds of the past.
Mr. Cárdenas (Argentina) (interpretation from
Spanish): I wish at the outset to express my delegation’s
satisfaction at the results of the recent peace talks on the
crisis in the former Yugoslavia. The initialling in Dayton,
Ohio, of the documents that constitute its legal structure
marks a significant step forward. It consolidates the
process that perhaps began to take clear shape with the
cease-fire and gives us grounds for hope that lasting
peace can finally be established in the Balkans.
The suffering civilian population of that area can
now dream of a violence-free future that will allow all
their children to live in diversity, with respect for each
other’s dignity and rights.
My delegation wishes to express its deep
appreciation for the work for peace done by the Contact
Group, especially by the United States, as well as that of
the troop-contributing countries and their valiant and
noble personnel. All those tireless efforts have produced
the results I have just described.
In particular, with respect to the indefinite — and,
for now, conditional — suspension of the economic
sanctions imposed on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and, as appropriate, of those on the Bosnian Serbs, I wish
to stress that sanctions have on this occasion proved their
effectiveness; they have shown that they can be a
valuable instrument, as envisaged in the Charter, for the
international community to persuade those against whom
they are directed to pursue the objectives of peace sought
by the international community through this Organization.
While, as has been said, the work of the Security
Council sanctions Committee established by resolution
724 (1991) does not necessarily end here, as has been
mentioned, I wish to draw attention to the tribute in
operative paragraph 9 of today’s resolution to all those
17
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
who worked tirelessly with us to make the sanctions regime
effective. It was precisely this shared and coordinated
endeavour that made the sanctions effective.
As Chairman of the sanctions Committee, I have had
the opportunity daily to witness the dedication of all those
with whom I have worked directly and indirectly. As a
result of that dedication, the difficult task entrusted to us
has been performed to date in a satisfactory manner.
We must now quickly study and amend the existing
operational guidelines in the light of the resolution that has
just been adopted. This will not be easy, either, since
certain important questions remain to be answered. For
example, we must decide what policy to follow with regard
to the ongoing investigations. But I have no doubt that
between us we can, with due diligence, agree on answers.
It is vital, at least for the time being, to maintain the
Committee’s monitoring capacity, in particular that
provided by SAMCOMM, whose cooperation, in my view,
will continue to be necessary, at least for the foreseeable
future. For all these reasons, I appeal for the understanding
of those ultimately responsible to ensure that this
cooperation continues for as long as necessary. I take that
for granted.
Our last thought on this issue is for the people of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, whose daily lives — as
usually happens — have for long been gravely affected by
the burden of sanctions. Their leaders were certainly
responsible for that. Now that the correct course has been
set, the people must strive to avoid any backsliding or
deviation from the cause of peace. In that way — and only
in that way — will the sacrifices made assume their proper
significance.
I wish to say a few brief words on the resolution
ending — again, conditionally for now — the embargo on
arms and military equipment imposed by resolution
713 (1991). My comments are addressed specifically to
those responsible for the decisions that will need to be
taken on this issue in the future. May God give them eyes
to see that progress towards peace will be strengthened if
they resist the temptation to enter into an arms race, with
all its destabilizing effects, and if they commit themselves
sincerely to the arms control and reduction efforts provided
for in the agreement initialled in Dayton. I hope they will
understand that at this time the best thing to strive for is the
greatest possible degree of disarmament for all.
While the tragic violations of humanitarian law in
the region are still fresh in our minds — events that we
have witnessed with disbelief or horror — we must
continue our efforts to replace armed violence with
peaceful dialogue and atrocities with mutual respect.
Coexistence involves not only preserving the identity of
others, but also benefiting by them and maximizing the
mutual enrichment that is always the reward of life lived
in diversity.
Mr. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda) (interpretation from
French): My delegation would like, through you, Sir, to
welcome His Excellency, Mr. Muhamed Sacirbey,
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
My delegation would like to say how much we share his
feelings at this historic moment which his country has just
gone through.
My delegation would also like to convey its
congratulations to the United States of America on the
occasion of the peace agreement among the various
parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
At the same time, my delegation would like to
congratulate these various parties for having agreed to
make concessions and, thereby, to put an end to four
years of fratricidal warfare, rife with crimes against
humanity. “Ethnic cleansing” was beginning to become
such a widespread practice that everyone was becoming
more and more reluctant to speak about it, even in
resolutions of the Security Council.
My delegation is particularly gratified that these
agreements are putting an end to a war in which innocent
people have suffered, particularly women, children and
other people who were not directly involved in the
hostilities. What happened in Bosnia, as well as what
happened in my country, Rwanda, is a lesson from which
the world and all of us should learn. It is a lesson in
humility for mankind, because what happened in this
country is evidence of the fact that this can happen
anywhere in the world. This type of crime knows no
boundaries; nor is it peculiar to any one society.
The second lesson impresses upon the international
community the need to do everything possible to combat
crimes against humanity, and also the fact that this is a
battle which must begin in the Security Council.
We are delighted that these two resolutions will now
make it possible for a balance to be struck among the
various forces involved. After the end of the Second
18
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
World War, appropriate machinery was created in order to
handle conflicts, in order to avoid such events — events
which were similar to the two nightmares which humanity
experienced at the beginning and in the middle of this
century. But the generalized historical amnesia which
prevailed after the Second World War, nationalist interests,
and the thirst for power leading to the creation of zones of
political influence simply undermined all these hopes.
After having broken out of the deadlock in the
negotiations regarding the division of territory, the
maintenance of peace will no longer be a question of
territorial claims, but rather a question of political will on
the part of the parties concerned.
The embargo imposed upon Bosnia-Herzegovina is in
many respects similar to that which is now inflicted upon
the current Government of Rwanda. We are very pleased
that it has been lifted, and it is our hope that this will bring
about a balance of forces which will make it possible for
better understanding to prevail in the region.
My delegation is confident that henceforth the member
countries of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, as well
as the Russian Federation, will have sufficient leeway to
consolidate the peace thus restored and that they will
assume stewardship for stability in the region.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Oman.
It gives me great pleasure to preside over the work of
the Security Council at this historic moment when we are
meeting today to consider the situation in the former
Yugoslavia, after the signing of the Peace Agreement at
Dayton, Ohio.
It has been more than three years since hostilities
broke out in the area of the former Yugoslavia — a war
that resulted in the deaths of more than a quarter of a
million people, in millions of refugees and displaced
persons, as well as in massive violations of international
humanitarian law.
This meeting of the Security Council, which is held in
connection with the Peace Agreement reached at Dayton,
Ohio, yesterday, 21 November 1995, between the parties to
the conflict, is no doubt a historic one indeed. And for its
achievement, we sincerely hope that the peace agreement
and its annexes will be implemented in good faith by all the
parties. We believe the area will now have a chance to
avoid being haunted by war and killings, and that the
region will enter on the path of peace and normalcy —
elements that have been missing for some time.
All along, Oman believed in dialogue and political
solutions to settle problems and resolve differences — not
only in the area of the former Yugoslavia but in all areas
where conflicts do exist. In the area of the former
Yugoslavia, the warring parties have at last realized this
fact, and have also realized that violence produces nothing
but bitter experiences. Military solutions cannot establish
nations — especially peace-loving nations.
Oman commends the special and exemplary role
played by the United States of America in bringing about
this agreement and making it a reality. Nor can we fail to
commend the role played by the Russian Federation, the
European Union and the complementary role of the
United Nations on the level of the proximity talks held at
Dayton, Ohio.
This Agreement, with its annexes, is not, in our
opinion, an end in itself. It is rather a first step in the
direction of peace and normalcy in the area of the former
Yugoslavia. The days to come will be a testing-ground
for the intentions of all parties, an opportunity for them
to translate their commitments into a working and genuine
reality. In this connection, my country attaches great
importance to the question of mutual recognition of all
States in the region, to the preservation of their territorial
integrity, sovereignty and political independence, within
their internationally recognized borders — a step we see
as consistent with the recently reached Peace Agreement.
Today Oman joins others in voting in favour of two
important resolutions: one that suspends all measures
imposed by, or reaffirmed in, various relevant Security
Council resolutions relating to the sanctions on the former
Yugoslavia, and the other resolution relating to the lifting
of the arms embargo imposed by resolution 713 (1991).
We are happy to be a member of the Security Council at
this point in time. We believe the international
community, the Secretary-General and the United Nations
peace-keepers have done commendable work and deserve
our appreciation, especially for their relentless efforts in
trying to help the parties to resolve their differences and
to minimize the humanitarian difficulties. It is now in the
hands of the States in the region to work together for
confidence and peace in order to alleviate the suffering of
their people. They bear the full responsibility for building
upon the Peace Agreement and bringing the region a step
closer to stability.
19
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
The days to come will be crucial in harnessing peace
in the former Yugoslavia. We believe that unreserved
cooperation from the parties is important in making it
possible to save succeeding generations in the Balkans from
the scourge of war.
I now resume my function as President of the Security
Council.
The Security Council has thus concluded its voting
procedure.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of Brazil, in which
he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite that representative to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Valle (Brazil)
took the seat reserved for him at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: I now call on the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina, His Excellency
Mr. Muhamed Sacirbey.
Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina): This day —
the day of the lifting of the arms embargo on Bosnia and
Herzegovina — should have come much, much sooner. If
it had, peace would also have come earlier — at a lower
cost to the international community, its principles and its
most prized institutions; at a lower cost to justice and, most
important, at a lower cost to the thousands — the
millions — of Bosnia’s victimized.
But this is not just a lesson of history. We must,
today, look forward and secure the means to safeguard the
Peace Agreement reached in Dayton yesterday.
Weapons in the hands of the victim will not be used
to correct yesterday’s wrongs, but rather to deter a
resumption of the aggression and crimes. Yesterday’s
wrongs and crimes must be redressed by the institutions of
law and justice, in particular the International War Crimes
Tribunal.
However, the defence of tomorrow’s peace will
ultimately be left to the Bosnians when all the negotiators
have turned their attention elsewhere and the foreign
peace-keepers have left our country.
By securing Bosnia’s capability to defend itself, we
also lessen the qualitative, quantitative and durational
commitment for foreign peace-keepers. This is one of the
most significant objectives of equipping the Bosnian
defensive forces.
In concert, we do also place our hopes in regional
disarmament. However, assuming the highest standard of
commitment to disarmament and cooperation from our
neighbours, the Bosnians would still have to increase the
number and quality of weapons to produce the goal of
regional balance.
We are prepared to do our part for the cause of
peace and commit ourselves not only to our defence but
to those standards which will in fact increase stability in
the region.
We will be in Bonn.
The sanctions regime with respect to the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) is a
self-inflicted wound. Ours is not. None the less, we wish
them a quick recovery. We also look forward to the
improvement of mutual relations.
We should, however, make sure that it is understood
that this is only a reprieve and not an exoneration. Failure
to fully honour the peace, its implementation and our
sovereignty and territorial integrity will result in the
immediate reversal and re-imposition of sanctions.
Suspension of sanctions is only one step necessary
for the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and
Montenegro) to be brought back, fully, into the family of
nations. Sanctions cannot be fully terminated until the
Peace Agreement is fully implemented.
Moreover, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia must
reverse its current course and exhibit a commitment to
respect the national and minority rights of the people of
Kosovo, Sandzak, and Vojvodina. This should go hand in
hand with the introduction of compliance with human
rights and democratic standards in all of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.
20
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
Finally, the commitment to peace and justice — a new
page turned — can only be ascertained from the willingness
of both Belgrade and the Bosnian Serbs to comply fully
with the international war crimes Tribunal.
No sanctions can be lifted until such compliance is
committed to and exhibited. The Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia cannot be admitted as a Member of the United
Nations and other relevant international institutions until
there is such compliance. This is the minimum that we can
do to support the efforts of the Prosecutor, Judge Richard
Goldstone, the Tribunal Justices and others associated with
the war crimes Tribunal at The Hague. Less would be
betrayal.
Bosnia and Herzegovina will not betray justice and the
opportunity for real, durable peace dependent upon this
elementary piece of justice.
The last thing that we ask of the Council is that it
commit itself also to the same. After all, we and the
countless forgotten victims as well as the new generation
yearning for real peace deserve this minimum after having
been disappointed on so many other occasions.
On a more personal note, sitting here today and during
the last few critical moments of bringing the Dayton talks
to an end, I reflect on the many who are affected or who
have affected this outcome today and the Peace Agreement
reached yesterday.
I reflect upon the past and present members of the
Council from Ambassador Diego Arria, the former
Permanent Representative of Venezuela, to Ambassador
Albright, who fought nobly to free the hands of the victim
and I also note my special appreciation for the solidarity
and statement of support that we received from the victims
of genocide in Rwanda through their Permanent
Representative in the Council.
We also think of the many United Nations peace-
keepers and persons from non-governmental organizations
who sacrificed, sometimes even their lives, to minimize
injustice while more decisive measures were awaited year
after year. We think of the three martyred American
diplomats. We think of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina still in their homes and we could all see their
expressions of joy and commitment to peace as they
celebrated the news yesterday.
At the same time I worry that the thousands of
refugees and displaced persons and the victims of crime
may feel that they have in fact been abandoned as well as
forgotten.
I pledge — we must pledge ourselves — to ensure
that the right of refugees to return does in fact become a
real opportunity to return; that justice is not only evoked
but secured by supporting the War Crimes Tribunal. I
hope to God this is a real comfort to the victims lest our
souls be damned.
I note that the Jewish survivors of the holocaust
were able to look forward only by knowing that their
tormentors would be pursued by the most unforgetting
justice indefinitely in the courts and in our common
historical recollection.
And a moment of horror is now upon me. What
about the hundreds, maybe thousands, of victims, still
missing, who were recently rounded up around towns like
Banja Luka, confined to concentration camps and forced
to labour until death overtakes them? What of the two
missing French pilots? Have these living ghosts even
heard of the Peace Agreement? Will it make any
difference to them? Will they survive to rejoice?I ask all
representatives to labour for their safety and for our
mutual salvation.
And, finally, to our former enemies we offer one
word: “Peace”.
The President: I now call on the representative of
Croatia.
Mr. Nobilo (Croatia): Allow me to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for the month
of November and to express our gratitude for your
understanding and cooperation regarding the
circumstances related to one of the draft resolutions
before us.
I should also like to extend my congratulations to
the delegation of Nigeria for the exemplary way in which
it guided the work of the Council during the month of
October.
Croatia warmly welcomes the Dayton accords that
were initialled yesterday. They become valid pending
expected mutual recognition among all successor States of
the former Yugoslavia next month. We firmly believe that
with these accords, and imminent mutual recognition, we
have overcome the biggest policy obstacle to a lasting and
just peace in the region once and for all. All of this was
21
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
achieved because the Council’s sanctions regime against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)
fulfilled its intentions, because the joint Croatian/Bosnian
offensives and later the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) intervention created new realities on the ground,
and thereafter, because of the new leadership role assumed
by the United States.
My Government has always called for a peaceful and
negotiated settlement of this kind for the region as a whole.
In fact, we have for years argued that NATO is the only
institution that can impose peace in the region and provide
a lasting and stable environment that will render
belligerence expendable and reconciliation and economic
reconstruction profitable. Thanks to the leadership of the
United States and the efforts of the European Union and the
Russian Federation, we have now finally been able to
achieve both a negotiated settlement and an implementation
force that promises stability but also envisages remedies for
the horrible crimes of a sort recorded only during the
darkest days of history.
The Dayton accords were a compromise for all parties,
but we firmly believe that Croatia made the largest
compromise. We have foregone two days of war for one
year of patience. The Dayton accords have offered us many
promises and commitments. We believe that they were
made with the parties’ full intention of carrying them out.
About 125,000 non-Serb Croatian citizens, who have been
“ethnically cleansed” in a most brutal way in the occupied
Vukovar region since 1991, would never forgive us if they
were still displaced or refugees one year from now — if
those commitments had been made in vain.
Croatia’s compromises for peace, when it clearly could
have chosen another option, demonstrate once more its
long-standing commitment to a policy based on peaceful
resolution of the conflict. Almost four years of utmost
patience under less than promising circumstances, prior to
our recent short but credible appliance of force, also
demonstrate our commitment to peace.
I must also add that precisely these short but credible
actions by Croatia made the Dayton accords possible. Who
can dispute the fact that only four months ago the Bihac
safe area was on the verge of being overrun, that Europe
was about to be faced with another 200,000 Bosnian
refugees, and that the moral conscience of the world was
about to be shaken by a possible repeat of the Srebrenica
massacre in Bihac? The balance of power established by
the Croatian Army should secure peace and stability in the
region for a long time to come, but only if NATO and the
international community now fulfil their promises and
commitments to both Bosnia and Herzegovina and to
Croatia. The problems in both countries will need to be
addressed with the same instruments and with equal
vigour. The occupied Vukovar region of Croatia should
be no more and no less important than the occupied parts
in Bosnia if we are to have just and lasting peace in the
region.
Furthermore, often unprecedented scrutiny and
outlandish criticisms of Croatia, especially by some
delegations in this Chamber, should come to an end.
Clearly, over the past four years Croatia has played a
substantially constructive role in the region. It has
provided solutions — not problems. For instance, its
strategic and humanitarian assistance to the politically
supported but effectively abandoned Bosnian Muslim
community, has regrettably never been acknowledged by
this Chamber.
My Government supports the draft resolutions now
before us. It hopes that the draft resolution on sanctions
relief will send a message to the Serbian people that the
world is not against them, as they have been told by their
leaders. The sanctions regime was a just and necessary
mechanism to have those leaders accept responsibility for
the ills they brought upon other people and their own
ethnic kin in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Regarding paragraphs 5 and 6 of that draft resolution, it
is Croatia’s understanding that the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) would be prevented
from transferring and using common funds of all
successor States of the dissolved Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia until an agreement on succession
and distribution of common assets has been reached
among all successor States and approved by the Council.
Any unfreezing and misuse of funds by Governments and
international financial institutions could potentially nullify
the succession negotiations, and worst of all, the whole
peace process. The best way to eliminate this risk is for
the Council to act immediately and endorse the existing
succession and asset distribution agreement proposed by
the European Union and the Russian Federation.
Further, Croatia hopes that the draft resolution lifting
the embargo will achieve its goal of maintaining a
balance of power in the region, and not become a source
of new instability. In that regard, Croatia calls for prudent
use of the draft resolution, within a broader framework of
collective security arrangements in Europe.
22
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
My delegation especially welcomes the imminent
adoption of the third draft resolution related to the Dayton
accords — the draft resolution that endorses the Basic
Agreement on the Region of Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium, and reaffirms that these areas are integral
parts of Croatia. The Basic Agreement was among the first
accords achieved in Dayton, and set the pace for the later
accords that completed the so-called package arrangement
for the region as a whole.
That resolution is needed to establish the necessary
technical framework for defining the new implementation
force for Croatia. The force should be established as
quickly as possible. It should have an active mandate under
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, with clearly
defined military and civilian roles, as called for in the Erdut
Basic Agreement and the preceding Erdut Principles. The
Council has both of these documents at its disposal, and
can consult both as it begins its consideration of the issue.
The two documents, both of which are equally valid, will
eliminate any misunderstandings or lack of information. We
emphasize this point, given the discussion and the questions
brought up by the members of the Council following the
briefing last Friday by the Co-Chairman of the Steering
Committee of the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia (ICFY), Mr. Thorvald Stoltenberg. The Basic
Agreement did not need to be more specific when the Erdut
Principles were so clear. For example, the Erdut Principles
leave no ambiguities about the structure of the transitional
authority and the new police force. They eliminate the legal
and security vacuum in the occupied Vukovar region by
reinstating Croatian law, social and utility services, and
border controls throughout the region. They call for the
timely return of all displaced persons and refugees to their
homes prior to local elections in the region. They require
that the region must be demilitarized in 30 days. The only
missing elements that still need to be decided upon are
related to the economic reconstruction package for the
region, especially the demolished city of Vukovar, and the
division of responsibility between the military and civilian
components of the new transitional implementation
mechanism.
In this regard, we must keep in mind that the mandate
of the United Nations Confidence Restoration Operation in
Croatia (UNCRO) expires in nine days. My Government
has made it clear that UNCRO’s mandate cannot be
extended, not because we do not trust the United Nations,
but because the Organization could not fulfil its two
mandates while operating under Chapter VI of the Charter.
The situation in Croatia requires a Chapter VII mandate
that can only be realized through regional arrangements.
While the present UNCRO mandate will end on 30
November, existing UNCRO resources can remain in
Croatia as a nucleus for the new implementation force.
The Belgian and Russian battalions could be quickly
reinforced by the United States battalion, so that the most
important element of the Basic Agreement, the
demilitarization of the region, can commence
immediately.
My Government is of the view that a large and
expensive force is not needed. Rather, what is needed is
a proactive and robust force that can implement the
demilitarization requirements immediately, and quickly
turn over the remaining elements of the mandate to the
civilian administration. We look forward to continuing
United States leadership in this regard, not only because
the United States is trusted by both sides in the region,
but also because of its commitment to utilize all elements
of the peace process, including the credible threat and use
of force. Following demilitarization, the emphasis should
be on the role of the civilian sector in the reconstruction
and confidence-building aspects. Again, this part of the
mandate will require not a large force but a reasonable
number of specialists and non-military professionals. My
Government also supports the appointment of a United
States national to lead the civilian part of the mandate as
head of the Transitional Administration.
Finally, the new implementation force and the
Transitional Administration cannot overlook still-relevant
elements and the spirit of previous Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions, operative paragraph 12 of
resolution 820 (1993) in particular. I should like to
remind the Council that that paragraph is not related to
the sanctions regime imposed on the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and now suspended.
That paragraph simply supports the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Croatia by allowing the Croatian
Government to regulate all export, import and
transshipment activity through its territory, and therefore
it remains valid.
Needless to say, my Government will expect the
Council, and thus the implementation force and
Transitional Administration, to respect this important
element of sovereignty granted to all Member States by
the Charter. Moreover, we are of the strong view that this
element should be reflected in no ambiguous terms in
future documents and resolutions on this issue.
The President: I thank the representative of Croatia
for his kind words addressed to me.
23
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
In accordance with the decision taken earlier in the
meeting, I now call upon Mr. Vladislav Jovanovic.
Mr. Jovanovic: The Peace Agreement initialled
yesterday finally puts an end to the tragic and bloody
four-year-old civil war and creates conditions for turning
the dangerous crisis in Bosnia and Herzegovina into a
period of peace, stability and cooperation. This Peace
Agreement is not a perfect one, something that can, indeed,
be said of a great majority of the peace agreements
concluded throughout history. It is a result of necessary and
reasonable — although at times painful and difficult —
compromises. All parties to the civil war and the Bosnian
crisis have come to realize that an imperfect peace is better
than a protracted and uncertain war and that only in peace
can just goals be best achieved. Even though by this Peace
Agreement a victory over war has been achieved,
nevertheless a war for the implementation of the Peace
Agreement provisions must be won and mutual confidence
must be restored, as well as true stability and cooperation
in the region.
It would have been best had the bloody civil war in
Bosnia and Herzegovina not been waged at all. It could
have been avoided, had Ambassador Cutileiro’s plan been
accepted in time and had not one of the sides, encouraged
from the outside, subsequently withdrawn its consent. The
Yugoslav side, as is well known, had strongly supported the
Cutileiro plan and solemnly expressed its readiness to
recognize Bosnia and Herzegovina as an independent State
after its completion. This most effectively contradicts all
subsequent charges that Yugoslavia has had territorial
pretensions against this former Yugoslav republic.
I have no wish to respond to the attacks and threats
against my country put forward by the Minister of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. They are in sharp contrast to the letter
and spirit of the initialled Peace Agreement, and we hope
that they do not announce a departure from the commitment
to peace.
By putting an end to the war and crisis in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, a major step has been taken towards
overcoming the crisis in the former Yugoslavia as a whole.
However, that step alone is not sufficient. It is necessary
immediately to end all other forms of war, which,
throughout the crisis in the previous Yugoslavia, have been
systematically waged against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Serb people as a whole. Media,
economic, psychological and propaganda warfare against
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Serb people
represent an essential part of the war in Bosnia, and
therefore with its ending they should also be eliminated.
The cruel and comprehensive sanctions against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which have brought
enormous suffering to the civilian population and
economically crippled the entire region of south-eastern
Europe, should immediately cease. The Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia expects that its rights in the United Nations
and other international organizations will be quickly
restored.
By its active and consistent contribution to the
process of negotiation and conclusion of the Agreement,
as well as by the decisive acceptance of all previous
peace proposals in connection with the Bosnian crisis, the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has unequivocally
demonstrated its commitment to peace and to overcoming
the consequences of the four-year-old civil war in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. As was the case throughout the peace
process, Yugoslavia will continue to be a reliable bulwark
in the process of implementation of the Peace Agreement
as well. We are confident that the Republic of Srpska will
closely follow the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in its
constructive approach to the Peace Agreement. We hope
that other sides to the Agreement will do the same.
In that regard, a huge responsibility rests with the
international community, particularly as embodied in the
Security Council and the Contact Group. The international
community should treat all sides to the conflict equally.
Equality is an essential element of the Peace Agreement
and a basic precondition if the Agreement is to be
sincerely and fully implemented by all the sides.
The Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia expresses its gratitude for the hospitality of
the Government of the United States as well as for the
huge efforts that it and other members of the Contact
Group have invested, efforts without which this Peace
Agreement could hardly have been reached. The Yugoslav
Government also wishes to express its gratitude to all
members of the Security Council for their efforts during
the peace process which culminated in today’s crucial
decision.
From the outset of the crisis and the conflicts in the
previous Yugoslavia, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
has been consistently committed to the equality, freedom
and dignity of all the peoples of the previous Yugoslavia.
The fact that the secessionist Republic of Croatia decided
to deny these rights to the Serb people led to their
legitimate resistance against the new Croat regime. After
Croatia’s genocidal attacks on the United Nations
24
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
Protected Areas (UNPAs), known as Sectors West, South
and North, and the enormous suffering that led to the
exodus of more than 200,000 Serbs from their ancestral
homes, a Peace Agreement on the region of Eastern
Slavonia, Baranja and Western Srem (Sirmium) finally
provides hope that the problems can be resolved without
military means and in a peaceful, negotiated manner.
The Basic Agreement on the Region of Eastern
Slavonia, Baranja and Western Srem (Sirmium) is of prime
importance for the peace, stability and normalization of the
situation and relations in the previous Yugoslavia and in
this part of Europe. The Agreement underlines the
predominant role of the forces of peace and reason in the
peace drive and is an effort to use political means and
compromise to solve the extremely complex problems
created after Croatia carried out a unilateral and forcible
secession from the former Yugoslavia in mid-1991.
The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia believes that the
Agreement represents a solid basis for the full honouring
and effective and lasting protection of the rights of the
region’s Serb population by ensuring it peace, freedom and
equality.
The Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia is of the opinion that by placing the Eastern
Slavonia, Baranja and Western Srem region under a
Transitional Administration, the Security Council and its
members have taken on a lasting responsibility for the
security of the region and for respecting the human rights,
basic freedoms and welfare of all its inhabitants.
Conversely, the Transitional Administration and the
multinational forces should be responsible to the Security
Council. It is quite evident that all the residents of the
region should have equal rights, including all refugees and
displaced persons from Krajina. It is imperative that the
mandate, structure and organization of the Transitional
Administration be in full accordance with the essence of the
Basic Agreement and encompass the protection and full
equality of all residents.
The Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia expects the Transitional Administration to take
control of, and enhance, all existing public services and
administration, because they enjoy the trust of the
population. It is imperative that the proportionality of the
ethnic structure of the region be maintained, both in the
number of people employed in general and, especially, in
the number in top-level management jobs. The principle of
proportionality must be especially respected in the police
and judicial system.
It is clear from the Agreement that the control of
border crossings and the issuance of personal documents
is under the jurisdiction of the Transitional
Administration. The first regional elections must be free
and fair and carried out at the regional, county and
municipal levels, safeguarding the identity of the region.
A council of municipalities with sufficient regional
regulative power will have to be established, which would
represent and protect the interests of the people of the
region. It should be clear that the permanent presence in
the region of the international community, as a guarantor
of respect for the human rights of all residents, should be
maintained even after the end of the transitional period.
The restoration of the confidence of the population
of the region is a key element of the implementation of
the Basic Agreement. For that reason, it is important to
restrain any attempt or action that may interfere with the
provisions of the Basic Agreement and hinder the process
of its implementation.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Ukraine. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Zlenko (Ukraine): Since this is the first time I
have spoken in the Security Council in the month of
November, I should like, on behalf of the delegation of
Ukraine, to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the most important and responsible post of the presidency
of the Security Council. We believe in your diplomatic
experience and skills and hope that they will help you to
overcome successfully all the difficulties the Security
Council could face in the performance of its duties.
Ukraine granted the initialling of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Annexes thereto with a feeling of
deep relief and satisfaction, and the President of Ukraine
today issued a statement in this connection. After
43 months of fratricidal war in the Balkans, the ordinary
people — children, women and the elderly — finally
have a chance to wake up in the morning without fear of
being killed and to look to the future with well-grounded
optimism. By initialling the provisions of the Peace
Agreement, the leaders of the three Balkan States made
a choice in favour of peace. In his statement on the
Agreement, the President of Ukraine stressed that
“its implementation may be reached only on the
condition of the continuation of intensive
25
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
negotiations and if all the parties back, by real deeds,
their aspirations to peace”.
Common sense and the logic of life have prevailed
over the irrationality of war. We pay tribute to the courage
and political wisdom of the Presidents of Croatia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Serbia, who managed to rise above
the existing mutual mistrust, suspicion and feelings of
revenge and frustration and take a step towards each other.
We cannot but agree with the words that Mr. Richard
Holbrooke said yesterday in Dayton:
“On paper we have peace; to make it work is our
greatest challenge”.
The delegation of Ukraine believes that the main
responsibility for the further development of the peace
process rests with the parties to the conflict. Without their
political will, it will be impossible to make this process
irreversible and break the vicious circle of violence in the
Balkans. We hope that all of the parties to the Peace
Agreement will faithfully honour the obligations they are
going to undertake by signing it.
At the same time, we are convinced that the
international community must contribute to the process of
implementing the Peace Agreement. Ukraine supports the
idea of deploying a peace implementation force in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and will participate in its mission along
with troops on the ground.
The initialling of the Peace Agreement is only the first
step on the road to rehabilitation and renewal. This includes
not only the rebuilding of the destroyed houses and
factories, but also the restoration of confidence among the
peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Ukraine is ready to join in the efforts of other States
in reconstructing that war-torn country in order to
contribute to the normalization of the lives of the ordinary
people. We hope that the feelings of traditional friendship
and mutual understanding that have always existed between
the peoples of Ukraine and the peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina will help us in this process.
In addressing the Security Council a few weeks ago,
the Ukrainian delegation raised the issue of the suspension
of the economic sanctions against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. We are deeply satisfied at the fact that our
confidence in the good will of its leaders and in their
aspiration to peace in the Balkans proved to be correct
and was again reconfirmed by yesterday’s events.
The initiation of the process of suspending the
economic sanctions will, in our opinion, contribute to the
confidence-building process in the Balkans and give an
additional, powerful impetus to the faithful
implementation of the Peace Agreement.
The suspension and eventual lifting of the sanctions
regime against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is an
event of extreme importance. It will give a powerful
incentive for the economic development of the
neighbouring countries and to the re-establishment of the
traditional economic links between the countries in the
region. We are confident that peace will bring prosperity
to all.
We believe that it is time to start the process of
reintegrating the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia into the
international community. The delegation of Ukraine hopes
that all the successor States to the Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia can arrive at appropriate and
mutually acceptable decisions.
The delegation of Ukraine finds the tribute paid by
the Security Council in the draft resolution to the
neighbouring States for their significant contribution to
the achievement of a negotiated peace exceptionally
important from the political and moral point of view.
Ukraine, as well as a number of other States, has suffered
huge economic losses but has strictly observed the
sanctions imposed by the international community.
The delegation of Ukraine has some doubts
concerning the provisions of the resolution on the lifting
of the arms embargo. At the same time, we understand
that it is a part of a compromise reached by the parties
that gives us grounds to support it. We would like to look
at this decision of the Security Council in the light of the
confidence-building measures and we hope that the
meeting on arms control in Bonn will make a military
build-up in the region redundant.
The delegation of Ukraine wants to express its
sincere gratitude and appreciation to all those who by
consistent efforts and deep convictions, regardless of their
despair, doubts and hesitations, went on until the end and
finally succeeded. We pay a special tribute to the United
States of America, the Secretary of State,
Mr. Christopher, his assistant, Mr. Richard Holbrooke and
his devoted team, to the members of the Contact Group,
26
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
to Mr. Stoltenberg and Mr. Bildt, as well as to dozens of
others who helped to bring peace to the region.
Let me remind you, Mr. President, of the words from
the Holy Book — the Bible:
“Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called
the children of God”. (The Holy Bible, Matthew 5:9).
The President: I thank the representative of Ukraine
for his kind words addressed to me. The next speaker is the
representative of Turkey. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Celem (Turkey): It gives me great pleasure to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
November. We are confident that under your able guidance,
the Council will successfully carry out its responsibilities.
I would also like to pay a tribute to Ambassador Gambari
of Nigeria for the remarkable manner in which he
conducted the work of the Council in October.
Yesterday can become a historic landmark on the long
and difficult road to peace which will put an end to the
cruellest crimes against humanity since the Second World
War. For almost four years now, the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina have suffered enormously. We hope that the
initialling of the General Framework Agreement for Peace
in Bosnia and Herzegovina by the three Presidents in
Dayton will end this suffering and pave the way for a just
and viable peace. The process has begun. The commitments
undertaken with this Agreement should be honoured with
good will. The focus of the attention of the international
community should now be put on the bona fide
implementation of the Framework Agreement and the
reconstruction of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The preservation of the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina within its internationally recognized borders is,
and will remain, vital for a lasting peace and for stability in
the region. With this in mind, we welcome the Agreement
initialled yesterday, and the resolutions just adopted. These
resolutions will mark the beginning of the peace
implementation phase.
Turkey remains committed to shouldering its share of
the responsibility for a successful implementation of the
Agreement. As a coordinator of the Assistance Mobilization
Group established within the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, and on a bilateral basis, we will actively
participate in the rehabilitation and reconstruction work
ahead. Therefore, we attach the utmost importance to the
international conferences to be convened in the coming
weeks. Turkey stands ready to take part in these
conferences. We will contribute to the military and
civilian aspects of the peace implementation. Preparations
are under way for our participation in the implementation
force.
As the President of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed on the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991,
Mr. Antonio Cassese, underlined in his statement to the
General Assembly two weeks ago, peace without justice
is no peace at all.
I must emphasize once again that we fully endorse
the following admonition of Mr. Cassese:
“If there is to be a lasting peace, it must be
accompanied by a sense of justice in the minds of
all the citizens and in particular the victims of
atrocities in the former Yugoslavia ... If at the end
of a war torturers and their victims are treated alike,
the war’s legacy of hatred, resentment and acrimony
will not have been snuffed out; rather, it will
continue to smoulder. The existence of peace in such
a climate would be precarious indeed.” (Official
Records of the General Assembly, Fiftieth Session,
Plenary Meetings, 52nd meeting, p. 12)
Indeed, if peace is to triumph, justice must prevail.
And only then can a climate be created in which the
people can live and work together free from fear. We will
continue to stand by the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in their struggle for freedom and democracy.
The President: I thank the representative of Turkey
for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Kharrazi (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let me
begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of November. I would also like to pay a tribute
to the Permanent Representative of Nigeria, Ambassador
Gambari, for the excellent manner in which he guided the
work of the Council during the last month.
27
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
Today, the Security Council is, once again,
considering the situation in the former Yugoslavia. Unlike
its previous meetings on the subject, the Council has
adopted today two important resolutions following
yesterday’s peace agreement in Dayton, an agreement that
could, it is hoped, be the basis for the establishment of
peace and tranquillity in the region.
Since the beginning of the crisis in the Balkans, we
have witnessed the tremendous sufferings of the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in dealing with foreign aggression.
Numerous documents of the United Nations, as well as the
television pictures of the horrors inflicted upon the Bosnian
people by the Serbs, testify to the magnitude of the crimes.
The rape, murder, mass killings, wanton destruction of
properties and “ethnic cleansing” have been persistently
practised against Muslims in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In
fact, the conscience of the whole world is wounded by the
level of these atrocities.
That was the reason behind the establishment of the
war crimes Tribunal for former Yugoslavia. Therefore, the
world has the right to expect that, regardless of political
considerations, the perpetrators of these grave crimes
against humanity and the violators of international law will
be brought to justice as soon as possible.
The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina has
always sought a peaceful settlement of the crisis and the
achievement of peace and justice in that country, and has
shown the utmost flexibility in the negotiations. Yesterday’s
Agreement proves once more the desire of the Bosnian
Government to achieve a peaceful conclusion to the conflict
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We share the sentiment
expressed by Bosnians that, although the Agreement is not
just it is a move towards preventing further bloodshed in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We believe that despite its many
shortcomings every effort should be made to implement the
Agreement, which, inter alia, guarantees the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina with a
unified capital, and gives refugees and displaced persons
the legal right to reclaim their homes or receive
compensation.
What is needed now is supervision by the international
community of the implementation of the Agreement in
order to maintain the unity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
to restore lasting peace and security to that country. Events
of the past have demonstrated that the Bosnian Serbs have
not honoured their commitments. The Security Council has
to ensure compliance with the Agreement and must
immediately take the necessary measures in case of non-
compliance.
An overwhelming majority of Member States have
on numerous occasions called for the lifting of the arms
embargo against the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and have affirmed the non-applicability of resolution
713 (1991) to that Republic. Now, with the signing of the
Ohio Agreement and its Annexes and the adoption of a
new resolution by the Council on lifting the arms
embargo, we hope that the defence requirements of the
victim will be adequately addressed so that future
aggression against Bosnia is prevented.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
responsibility of the United Nations with respect to the
operation of the international force to be dispatched to
monitor the Agreement. We believe that the United
Nations should have the final say in the operation, and
that any arrangement in this regard should have the clear
endorsement of the Security Council. Furthermore, the
international force should embrace all those who are
willing to offer troops to it.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Malaysia. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Razali (Malaysia): The Malaysian delegation is
very happy, Sir, to see you presiding over the Security
Council, especially at this particular time, when the
Council is taking very important decisions on the issue of
the former Yugoslavia. My appreciation and respects are
extended also to your predecessor, the representative of
Nigeria.
The Malaysian delegation joins in the universal relief
at the initialling of the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. All the parties and
participants who worked indefatigably during the 21-day
proximity peace talks deserve appreciation for their
perseverance and for making the fateful choice for a
chance for peace instead of sending soldiers back to the
front lines.
The role of the United States has been pivotal to the
outcome. Others too, including the Russian Federation,
have made contributions. Malaysia has consistently
maintained that a clear application of political and
military resolve would force even aggressors to the
negotiating table.
28
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
My delegation wishes to single out the courageous
decision of President Alija Izetbegovic, who represents the
aggrieved party and the victim of aggression, which
experienced brutalization and devastation, the horrors of
which remain a blot on our conscience. It takes
monumental conviction and abiding faith to be able
dispassionately to choose priorities and invest in a chance
for peace instead of demanding redress and retribution. We
pray that events of the months ahead will prove that that
faith was justifiably placed, that the Dayton Agreement will
be fully honoured and that the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina will be able to embark on the long road to
healing and reconciliation.
Important lessons have also been learned. Containment
and ambivalence of policies, as well as uncertainties in the
mandate coming out of a dominated Security Council,
leading to a blurring of commitment to universal values,
have resulted in untold tragedies. In the long term, the
Framework Agreement provides opportunities to rectify and
redress; to rededicate, to re-establish a commitment to
values and to take steps to re-establish faith in the United
Nations.
On paper, the Framework Agreement and all its
Annexes provide a formula for the peaceful return to
normalcy of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
note that the Annexes to the Agreement address important
issues such as agreement on military aspects of the
settlement, stabilization, boundaries, elections, the
Constitution, human rights, and refugees and displaced
persons, to name only some. At the same time, we note that
certain critical issues have not been clarified. These include
the arming and training of Bosnian Government forces so
as to equalize force strength. Further, there is no provision
to ensure safe and secure elections.
Neither the international implementation force (IFOR)
nor the international police task force has been entrusted
with this task, which therefore becomes the responsibility
of the respective police forces of the entities. This vacuum
in the enforcement of security leading up to, during and just
after the first elections is highly unsatisfactory since it
provides the opportunity for intimidation, duress and fear.
Finally, the Dayton documents have sidestepped the
obligation to arrest suspects and hand them over to the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia to be tried
for the atrocities they have committed.
These concerns raise the question of whether the
outcome of Dayton has served the cause of lasting peace
and a just settlement. One can also ask whether “ethnic
cleansing” has been legitimized and whether aggression
has been rewarded, and whether the issue of crimes
against humanity has been put aside. The full and timely
implementation of the Agreement and its Annexes will
help dispel these serious concerns.
The Council today has debated two relevant
resolutions, one dealing with the arms embargo and the
other with economic sanctions. The arms embargo must
be lifted immediately to ensure that the Bosnians are
adequately prepared to defend themselves, an inherent
right recognized in Article 51 of the Charter. Malaysia
continues to oppose the lifting of economic sanctions
without verifiable actions showing that the Serbs are
honouring their part of the Agreement. These two
resolutions are important steps in the implementation of
the Agreement.
The Council would also have to be involved in the
implementation of the international force to be led by the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). The Council
has also to decide formally on the future of the United
Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR). In the
consideration of the relationship between IFOR and the
Security Council, it will be necessary to clarify all aspects
of the issue, both military and non-military, political and
humanitarian alike. Malaysia has conveyed to NATO its
intention to participate in the international force. We
expect specific details pertaining to the involvement of
non-NATO forces to be resolved expeditiously. We
cannot but emphasize the importance of the involvement
of non-NATO forces, including those from countries of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), in
securing the full and balanced implementation of the
Dayton Agreement.
For those not part of NATO, we especially look to
the United Nations to define its role as an overall
authority for overseeing the full implementation of the
Framework Agreement.
Of all the challenges confronting Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the most immediate and fundamental is
reconstruction — reconstruction of its economy and its
infrastructure, as well as its society. The people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina must find reason to believe once again
in the region in which they live and in a multilateral
system and vehicle that will not let them down. We must
help to ensure that it remains pluralistic and enjoys
economic growth and social development. The Muslim
community in Bosnia and Herzegovina must enjoy the
29
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
right to development and to an environment free of
coercion and threat.
It is equally important that the entity of the Republic
of Srpska adhere to the spirit and substance of the
Agreement and not attempt to undermine the territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The international
guarantees so necessary to ensure fulfilment of the Dayton
Agreement must ensure that Srpska remains part of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
The Security Council cannot ignore the issue of
succession. It is a complex issue with implications not just
for the Balkan parties at Dayton but also for the parties that
were not there. The issue of succession can be resolved
only through negotiations, and not by any one party seeking
to unilaterally assume the position of successor.
Finally, I want to reiterate that the international
community must stand behind President Izetbegovic and the
Bosnians as we try to give peace, however imperfect or
fragile, a chance to take root.
The President: I thank the representative of Malaysia
for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Egypt. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
Allow me, at the outset, to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of November. We are confident that your
sagacity and leadership skills will enable the Council to
achieve fruitful results in dealing with the important and
sensitive issues before it.
I wish also to pay tribute to Ambassador Gambari of
Nigeria for the exemplary manner in which he conducted
the work of the Council last month.
We witness today a historic development in the events
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, a country whose people and
Government have suffered, for years, the agonies of a
bloody conflict which has claimed many lives and caused
tremendous material damage as a result of hateful military
practices that aimed at achieving regional expansionist
aims.
Today, the problem enters upon a new phase, a phase
of transformation that has taken concrete shape in the
initialling yesterday of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. This development
paves the way towards putting an end to this human
tragedy. As we look forward to the final signing of the
Peace Agreement in Paris in the first half of December,
we should like to thank all the States that took part in
sponsoring and supporting the negotiations, especially the
United States of America.
Egypt has persistently emphasized, both in word and
in deed, its support for the cause of the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, for the right of this newly independent
people to live in peace and security within the
internationally recognized borders of its State and for the
enablement of that people to exercise fully the rights of
membership of this Organization.
Today we welcome the step agreed to by the
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We have
declared before that we shall accept and support all that
the Government of Bosnia accepts. We hope that this step
will lead to preserving Bosnia and Herzegovina as one
State. We also applaud the Agreement’s preservation of
the special identity of Sarajevo as a unified city and a
capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as Sarajevo is the
symbol of peaceful coexistence of various ethnic groups.
In this connection, we call upon the international
community to contribute to the reconstruction efforts so
that this historic city of Sarajevo may be restored to its
former glory.
As I have just said, the signing of agreements is a
very important step. However, we need to see practical
implementation — true, bona fide implementation on the
ground. Here, it is extremely important that all parties
fulfil the international obligations enshrined in the
Agreement and that they abide by the procedures that will
have to be adopted to ensure its complete implementation.
In this respect, the delegation of Egypt wishes to
underscore that the follow up of implementation should
reflect the international community’s commitment to the
following: guaranteeing the voluntary return of all
refugees, displaced persons and expelled Bosnians, to
their homes, under international protection and with
appropriate compensation; bringing all those responsible
for the perpetration of war crimes to trial, so that others
may be deterred from committing similar crimes in
future; and according priority to supporting the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, in the rehabilitation and
reconstruction process after the war, to ensure the return
to normal life.
30
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
My delegation wishes to underscore the importance of
enabling the Government of Bosnia to exercise its
legitimate right to self-defence. Now that the international
community is reconsidering the military embargo imposed
by resolution 713 (1991), in stages, we believe that the
issue of providing the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina with the means of defence that it was denied
as a result of the embargo should be addressed, so that the
balance of military power in the region may be restored,
and, thereby, ensure mutual deterrence, on the one hand,
and provide a practical means of building confidence
between the parties facilitated, on the other.
Right from the start, Egypt has played its part in the
international efforts in respect of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Having participated actively in the United Nations
Protection Force, we should like to take this opportunity to
praise the men of that force — including sons of my
country — for the role they have played over the past four
years, under very difficult circumstances.
In this connection, we call upon all Member States,
especially the more affluent, to contribute to the trust fund
to be established to finance the participation of troop-
contributing countries, not members of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), in the United Nations
Protection Force with a view to implementing the Peace
Agreement in a balanced fashion. Egypt, which is not a
NATO member, hopes to participate in that force in order
to strengthen and support the implementation of the Peace
Agreement concluded yesterday.
In conclusion, Egypt, proceeding from its commitment
to its international role and as a member of the contact
group of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, hopes
that the effective honest implementation of the Peace
Agreement will restore peace to the Balkans region.
The President: I thank the representative of Egypt for
his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Pakistan. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Kamal (Pakistan): Since this is the first time I am
addressing the Security Council under your presidency, Sir,
let me congratulate you on the assumption of your high
office. I am confident that, under your talented and able
guidance, the Council will be able to fulfil its
responsibilities successfully. I would also like to express
my admiration for your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria, for the excellent manner in
which he conducted the affairs of the Council.
We welcome the Peace Agreement signed between
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia. On this
occasion, we pay tribute to the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, who have remained steadfast in the face of
untold miseries and horrors inflicted on them. We hope
that this Agreement will bring stability to all the States
concerned. We also hope that it will guarantee once and
for all the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the State
of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. This
Agreement should facilitate a process for the return of
millions of refugees and displaced persons to their homes
in dignity and honour. We hope that the broader
consideration of peace will not eclipse the effective
prosecution of the war criminals. We hope that the
international community will contribute generously to the
reconstruction of the war-devastated economy of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Finally, we hope that this Agreement
will bring smiles to the faces of millions of Bosnian men,
women and children who have been victimized and
traumatized by an unjust war.
The tragedy in Bosnia and Herzegovina unfolded
before our eyes. After the Second World War and the
establishment of the United Nations, we deluded ourselves
into believing that we had seen the last of the crimes of
genocide and “ethnic cleansing”. We thought, perhaps too
complacently, that the forces of racism and xenophobia
would never strike with the same ferocity as they had
during the Second World War. Yet, in the full glare of
the media and despite constant monitoring by the
international community, the Serbian aggressors chose to
exterminate a whole nation through “ethnic cleansing”,
aggression, massive killings and the most egregious
crimes against humanity.
The holocaust in Bosnia and Herzegovina is an
object lesson for international politics and diplomacy. It
has demonstrated that the international community has to
be constantly vigilant in stemming and actively opposing
aggression. It has demonstrated that procrastination and
prevarication in the face of aggression can encourage
aggressors and pose an even greater threat to peace and
security. It has also demonstrated that the United Nations,
despite its evolution over the past five decades, does not
quite have the capacity to handle such crises with the
necessary speed, efficiency and effectiveness.
There is no doubt that the humanitarian interventions
by the United Nations in Bosnia and Herzegovina were
31
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
prompted by very noble intentions. Our actual performance,
however, was marred by delay, infighting and indecision.
While this was happening, the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina were being killed by the score every day. We
know that the United Nations was not apathetic to the
plight of the trapped Bosnians. The fact was that it was
given neither a strong mandate nor adequate resources to
enforce collective security in the former Yugoslavia, in
pursuance of the United Nations Charter.
The crisis in the former Yugoslavia has also
demonstrated that, despite our experimentation with a
democratic version of multilateral diplomacy, the major
global Powers played the most crucial and decisive part in
a meaningful progression towards the resolution of the
conflict. The Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina was
literally hamstrung by a plethora of United Nations
resolutions denying the Bosnians their right to collective
self-defence and imposing a weak sanctions regime against
Serbia-Montenegro. Only when the major Powers and the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization decided to resolve the
conflict through all means did we witness the first concrete
steps towards a mitigation of the suffering of the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Pakistan, along with many other countries, repeatedly
urged that such robust military action should have been
undertaken right at the outset. Had that been done, and had
the unjust arms embargo against Bosnia and Herzegovina
been lifted then, perhaps the Agreement of today would
have seen the light of day earlier and much pain, suffering
and shame would have been averted.
The conflict in the former Yugoslavia has driven home
another grim reality: that global Powers cannot subcontract
their responsibilities to regional actors. Countries with a
global outreach cannot afford to adopt an apolitical
approach towards conflicts threatening regional or global
peace and security. The erroneous belief that global security
can be subcontracted to regional or subregional
organizations is intrinsically flawed, as it implicitly
presupposes that members of a particular region are roughly
equal to each other in size as well as economically and
militarily. In reality this is not so. The doctrine would
benefit regional Powers, while smaller countries would be
placed at a disadvantage. Some recent events would
vindicate this view.
We feel that the United Nations will have to undertake
a massive exercise in introspection and self-criticism to
adjust to the new realities. The United Nations must find
ways and means to activate its roles of mediation and
arbitration for conflict prevention. Once a conflict has
erupted, the United Nations should make strong
interventions through the full use of peace-keeping and
the enforcement of collective security.
Pakistan has always taken a principled position on
the situation in the former Yugoslavia. The hearts of the
people of Pakistan went out to a small nation in Europe
battling against a frenzied aggression launched by the
Serbs. It was a question of morality, of international law
and of the very concept of peaceful coexistence. Outraged
at the unbridled aggression, Pakistan extended unqualified
moral and political support to the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Pakistan consistently demanded the lifting
of the arms embargo against Bosnia and Herzegovina to
enable it to exercise collective self-defence in accordance
with Article 51 of the United Nations Charter. When the
time came for facilitating peace, we offered our troops for
peace-keeping in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We believe
that no nation should be victimized because of its small
size. We feel that no peoples should be brutalized because
of their ethnic origin. We believe that no nation should be
denied its right to self-determination and its right to wage
a legitimate struggle for its liberation.
This is a time for reconciliation now. This is a time
for healing deep scars. This is a time for forgetting
differences, and building peace for all people involved in
the conflict. Some wounds, however, can never be healed.
Some heinous crimes must not go unpunished. The
principle of international prosecution, established and
reaffirmed during the conflict in the former Yugoslavia,
should not be scuttled. Those responsible for inflicting
grievous harm to hundreds of thousands of people must
face the consequences of their crimes.
We, the people of Pakistan, will continue to stand by
our Bosnian brothers and sisters, as we have consistently
done in the past. We shall continue to contribute to the
success of peace-keeping efforts in Bosnia. We shall
stand in support of the international community as the
firm guarantor of the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The crisis in
Bosnia and Herzegovina was a test for our civilization.
Our reaction was perfunctory and dilatory. Now that our
hopes have been raised, we shall all be closely watching
the actual process of implementation of the accords in
order to sustain the momentum for peace. Let us also
hope that we and our civilization will not be put to such
tests again in future.
32
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
The President: I thank the representative of Pakistan
for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Japan. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Owada (Japan): At the outset, I should like to
express, on behalf of the Government of Japan, my
gratitude for the opportunity given to me to address the
Security Council on this historic occasion. I wish also to
take this occasion to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of November.
The appreciation of my delegation goes also to your
predecessor during the past month, the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria, for the excellent manner in
which he carried out his responsibilities.
After four years of conflict, which has claimed the
lives of 250,000 people and forced more than three million
people from their homes, the groundwork has now been
laid for a lasting peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Having
repeatedly stressed that peace can only be achieved through
negotiations, the Government of Japan finds it most
gratifying that an Agreement has now been reached by the
representatives of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the Republic of Croatia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to bring the conflict to an end.
Japan pays high tribute to all those who have been
engaged in intensive negotiations, with patience and
perseverance and in a spirit of compromise, to achieve this
historic and long-awaited Agreement. I wish in particular to
applaud the untiring efforts of the United States in bringing
the parties concerned to the negotiating table and in
organizing the proximity talks. Members of the Contact
Group and other countries concerned, various international
organizations, as well as the United Nations
Secretary-General and the Security Council, have all played
their indispensable roles in fostering the negotiating
process, for which they deserve our sincere appreciation.
Hard as the negotiating process has been, the
implementation of the Peace Agreement that lies ahead of
us will be even more difficult. Indeed, the Agreement
reached yesterday in Dayton, Ohio, is nothing more than
the first step — albeit a crucial one — on the long and
arduous road to the consolidation of peace. The restoration
of peace and the future development of the region that was
formerly Yugoslavia will depend directly on the full
implementation of this comprehensive Peace Agreement.
The parties to the conflict must faithfully implement
it. They must strive to build a new order which will foster
the process of reconciliation among various ethnic groups
and the repatriation and resettlement of refugees and
displaced persons. Moreover, they must cooperate fully
with the efforts of the international community towards
the implementation of the Agreement. We look forward
to the formal signing of the Peace Agreement which is
expected to take place shortly, and then to the meeting in
London where the concrete implementation scheme will
be worked out. This will be an extremely complex and
delicate process. In particular, the successful
implementation of the agreement will depend in no small
part on the smooth deployment of the implementation
force (IFOR). This is a task which the Security Council
will have to supervise with utmost care.
As international efforts towards the reconstruction
and rehabilitation of the region are undertaken, it is of
vital importance that the respective roles of the various
organizations involved be clarified, and that all civilian
activities be coordinated. Furthermore, coordination
between the implementation force and the organizations
engaged in civilian activities, such as the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), is also essential.
Speaking at the General Assembly this past
September, the Foreign Minister of Japan affirmed
Japan’s intention to cooperate, together with other
countries concerned and relevant international
organizations, in the rehabilitation of the region once the
conflict is brought to an end. In his message yesterday to
congratulate the parties on the successful achievement of
the comprehensive Peace Agreement, the Foreign Minister
reiterated the intention of the Government of Japan to
take an active part in the international assistance efforts
for the region of the former Yugoslavia.
With regard to the resolutions which the Security
Council has just adopted, Japan welcomes the resolution
to suspend sanctions against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia indefinitely. It is an expression of the
acknowledgement by the international community of the
cooperative spirit demonstrated by that country.
As to the resolution to terminate the arms embargo,
Japan, while endorsing the lifting of the embargo, is of
the view that an unbridled inflow of arms into the region
33
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
might run the risk of jeopardizing the durable stability of
the region. For this reason, we might consider the
possibility of establishing a system for the control of arms
in the region.
In adopting these resolutions, the Security Council has
demonstrated its desire to foster a consensual Agreement
among the parties concerned. It has also challenged the
parties concerned to remain committed to the peace process.
I wish to conclude my brief intervention by expressing
the sincere hope of Japan that the leaders of the three
countries will work steadfastly for the implementation of
the Agreement, and will not be deterred from their task of
ensuring that their people can look forward to living in
peace, secure within their national borders. I wish to assure
them that their efforts will have the full support and
assistance of the entire international community, including
my own country.
The President: I thank the representative of Japan for
his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Morocco. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Snoussi (Morocco) (interpretation from French):
I have the honour to address the Security Council on behalf
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, of which my
country holds the presidency, on the question of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
First of all, Sir, I should like to extend to you my
sincere and fraternal congratulations on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
also pay tribute to your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria, for his commendable efforts last
month when exercising that function.
The tragedy of Bosnia and Herzegovina broke out at
the end of the cold war and with the emergence of the
beginnings of a new world order which we were all hoping
would be just, equitable and tranquil and in which all States
would be working finally towards progress and the
prosperity of their peoples in understanding and harmony.
This almost unprecedented tragedy in history has left
the country devastated and brutalized by four years of war,
in which 400,000 people have been killed, 2 million people
have lost their possessions, 100,000 women have been
raped, and hundreds of thousands of people have endured
inhuman suffering, torture, concentration camps — all
because they professed a different religion.
We express our deepest sympathy to all the victims
and their families. We want them to know that their
tragedy will forever be a blot on the history of mankind
because it constitutes an outrage to our collective
conscience.
We are recalling these grim facts because we want
to reaffirm the Islamic community’s commitment to the
principles of tolerance and peaceful coexistence in mutual
respect for cultural, moral and religious particularities.
The intrinsic value of the human being, whatever his
origin, prohibits us from taking the path of exclusivity or
indifference, and still less that of exclusion and rejection.
The Islamic community throughout the world has
followed the tragedy of Bosnia and Herzegovina with
compassion and solidarity — sometimes even with
repugnance — at the international community’s
helplessness and powerlessness in the face of the
massacre and genocide of a people deprived of the means
of defending itself.
There are those who deemed the efforts of the
United Nations to restore peace to this region and its
humanitarian assistance to refugees as timorous gestures,
lacking the firm resolve to put an end to the suffering of
the Bosnian people and the impunity of the Serb
aggressors.
Because of our profound desire to see this conflict
peacefully resolved, we, like all other observers, were
hanging on every word of the news bulletins about the
negotiations at Dayton, which we followed with a mixture
of hope and concern. And so the announcement of the
initialling of the Dayton Agreement last Tuesday put our
fears to rest and strengthened our optimism, because this
Agreement undeniably constitutes a perceptible
breakthrough and a decisive step forward which gives us
grounds for hope that peace in this region is finally within
our grasp.
The Islamic community takes particular pleasure in
this Agreement because it is designed to bring about an
honourable peace which will guarantee to Bosnia and
Herzegovina its independence and its territorial integrity
and make Sarajevo its unified capital, while instituting the
necessary proceedings against the Serb war criminals and
ensuring their appearance before the International
Criminal Tribunal on the former Yugoslavia.
34
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
The tireless efforts of President Clinton and his
Administration to keep these negotiations moving at a
satisfactory pace are admirable. Without his persistence and
unshakeable determination, this Agreement, which the most
optimistic among us did not expect for months, would
never have been concluded. We must also emphasize the
contribution of France, the United Kingdom, Germany and
the Russian Federation and express our gratitude to them.
I ask all those who were the architects and who
crafted this peace, particularly the United States, to accept
this expression of our gratitude and thanks, as well as the
gratitude and thanks of all peace-loving men and women.
Indeed, the arrangements provided for in the
Agreement, notably the multinational implementation force,
the cantonment of the forces of the parties, the withdrawal
of heavy weapons and the freeing of prisoners of war, will,
I am sure, initiate a process of irreversible peace which, we
hope, will make it possible for the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to live together again in tranquillity and
mutual respect.
We are convinced that all the conditions now exist for
thwarting the saboteurs who are still trying desperately to
challenge the application of the Peace Agreement. But we
must remain vigilant and firm if we are to prevent the
separatists from carrying out their aim of torpedoing the
process, as they have done in the past.
Forty-three months of pitiless and relentless war have
left the country morally traumatized and materially in
ruins — a country which we must all help to feel again the
pleasure of a peaceful life — pleasures which are just a
dim memory in minds still haunted by cruelty and
barbarism.
The international community must take the opportunity
of the peace conference to take place in Paris next
December to mobilize all its efforts and join forces to
consolidate this emerging peace and transform it into lasting
prosperity in order to stanch the bleeding wounds of our
Bosnian brothers and sisters.
Indeed, we must devise and put rapidly into effect an
ambitious plan for the rebuilding of infrastructures and the
restoration of public services, in order to restore confidence
to refugees, to displaced persons and to the other citizens
and, above all, to convince them that peace has truly come
to stay and is no longer a mere mirage in a desert of
despair.
Today, the Security Council was called upon to take
concrete measures to implement the Dayton Agreement,
measures relating to the economic sanctions against
Serbia and Montenegro and the Bosnian Serbs, and to the
arms embargo imposed on the Bosnians.
In this regard, we believe that the Council’s action
must be placed within a framework of vigilance and
firmness, to deter those who are nostalgic for a certain
grandeur and to encourage those who want finally to live
in peace.
Hence, the Security Council must bring to bear all
its weight and all its authority to promote peace and
stability in that part of the world by supporting the
process which has just been so fortunately initiated in
Dayton.
In conclusion, I wish to pay a warm and sincere
tribute to the courage and farsightedness of all those who
have contributed to the conclusion of this historic
Agreement, which we welcome.
The President: I thank the representative of
Morocco for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Spain. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo (Spain) (interpretation from
Spanish): May I first of all, on behalf of my delegation,
say how pleased we are to see you, Sir, presiding over the
Security Council this month and in particular over this
historic meeting of the Council.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. Bulgaria, Cyprus, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Romania and Slovakia
associate themselves with the content of this statement.
Since the beginning of the crisis in the former
Yugoslavia, the European Union has spared no effort in
the search for a lasting solution through negotiation, and
it was among the first to try to help alleviate the terrible
suffering of the civilian population.
For this reason, the European Union is particularly
pleased at the initialling in Dayton, Ohio, of the Peace
Agreements by the Presidents of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
35
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
We urge the parties to sign the Agreements at the
Paris peace conference, which will mark the end of the
negotiations and the beginning of a process of stability and
good neighbourliness for the entire region. The ratification
and fulfilment in good faith of the Peace Agreement will be
to the benefit of the peoples that have suffered the horrors
of war for almost four years.
The peace remains fragile and needs to be
consolidated. The bases for mutual recognition between the
States that have emerged in the territory of the former
Yugoslavia have been established. The two resolutions on
the suspension of sanctions and the phased lifting of the
arms embargo, just adopted by the Security Council and
supported by the European Union, will, we hope, lead to
those States’ normalizing relations with each other and with
the rest of the international community.
The implementation of the agreements’ provisions
concerning regional stability and arms control and the
holding of free and fair elections are crucial for these
efforts. In this context, the European Union gives its full
support to the request addressed to the parties concerned to
assist in locating the two French pilots missing in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and to ensure their immediate and safe
return.
The wounds must be stanched, and together we must
make peace last. The human rights and fundamental
freedoms and the rights of persons belonging to minorities
must be strictly respected throughout the former
Yugoslavia. The parties must also cooperate with the
International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.
The right of refugees and displaced persons to return
to their homes in safety and to recover their property or, in
any event, to receive fair compensation must be guaranteed.
The perpetrators of violations of human rights and of the
norms of international humanitarian law must be held
responsible for their acts. That is the only way to put an
end to the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia.
Many aspects still remain to be resolved. The
multinational force to monitor the implementation of the
agreements in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the region of
Eastern Slavonia must be deployed as soon as possible. The
civilian aspects of the peace plan will have to be
implemented and the enormous task of reconstruction
begun, particularly in the most affected areas. The
European Union hopes that the issues relating to the
succession of States in the former Yugoslavia will also be
speedily and constructively resolved.
The European Union remains steadfastly willing to
make its contribution and to participate, together with
other countries and organizations, in the work of
reconstruction. In this regard, the European Union will
give its full support for the success of the forthcoming
London conference on the implementation of the Peace
Agreement and that of the conference of donor countries
to be held in Brussels.
In any event, the parties must bear in mind that it is
up to them to consolidate peace and prevent the
resurgence of conflicts. The assistance of the international
community will be fully effective only if it can rely on
the firm political resolve and cooperation of the parties.
I would like to conclude by paying tribute to the
negotiators, who, with their dedication and enthusiasm,
made the Dayton agreements possible; to the parties, for
having finally opted for peace; and to the women and
men of the United Nations and other international
organizations who, sometimes by sacrificing their very
lives, have helped to mitigate the tragic consequences of
these conflicts and have laid the groundwork that has
made possible this moment of hope that we are
experiencing today.
The President: I thank the representative of Spain
for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Canada. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Karsgaard (Canada): On behalf of my
delegation, I would first like to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of November. We are confident that the affairs of
the Council are in capable hands. I would also like to pay
tribute to the representative of Nigeria, Ambassador
Ibrahim Gambari, for the excellent manner in which he
guided the work of the Council last month.
It is with a sense of its historical significance that
we finally use the word “peace” today when addressing
the situation in the former Yugoslavia. We sincerely hope
that yesterday, 21 November 1995, will be remembered
as the day that finally put an end to the immense human
suffering that has ravaged the former Yugoslavia for the
last four years.
Canada warmly welcomes the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
36
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
initialled yesterday in Dayton, Ohio. Together with the
other agreements signed in Dayton to resolve the status of
Eastern Slavonia in Croatia and to strengthen the Bosnian
Muslim-Croat federation, yesterday’s peace accord
establishes a strong framework for future relations between
the States of the former Yugoslavia.
Canada’s Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Honourable
Mr. André Ouellet, yesterday congratulated the parties on
their achievement and urged them to continue to work
constructively with the international community in a spirit
of cooperation and flexibility in implementing the peace
plan.
We would also like to underline Minister Ouellet’s
thanks to the American, Russian and European Union
negotiators, who did an outstanding job in balancing the
aspirations of the parties on a wide range of constitutional
and territorial issues, and, in particular, we would like to
register our appreciation for the unique and determined
leadership of President Clinton and the Secretary of State
of the United States, Warren Christopher, in facilitating this
peace process. We would also like to pay tribute to the
untiring and dedicated efforts over a long period of time of
the United Nations negotiators, who helped bring the parties
closer together.
We now need to look at the next steps necessary to
consolidate this historic Agreement and to ensure its full
implementation. The London, Paris and Bonn conferences
will be key in this regard, and Canada looks forward to
participating in their deliberations.
The success in Dayton has demonstrated that sanctions
can have an important effect. We support the suspension
and lifting of sanctions within the context of the Peace
Agreement.
Re-establishing peace and stability in the region
remains a major Canadian objective. We welcome the
agreement of the parties to establish a regional arms control
regime with the assistance of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We urge the
international community to exercise restraint in arms
transfers and to ensure full transparency. We encourage the
States of the former Yugoslavia to contribute data annually
to the United Nations arms Register.
The Peace Agreement marks the end of the war in the
former Yugoslavia, but it also marks the beginning of a
long process of reconstruction and rehabilitation that will
require our concerted efforts as well as the unflagging
commitment of all the parties so as to ensure a lasting
peace in the former Yugoslavia.
The President: I thank the representative of Canada
for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Norway. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Biørn Lian (Norway): Allow me first of all to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
November, and to thank your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria, Ambassador Ibrahim Gambari,
for the excellent manner in which he discharged his duties
last month.
After almost four years of bitter warfare, the people
in Bosnia and Herzegovina may at last be able to enjoy
peace. Norway welcomes the fact that the parties to the
conflict have finally decided on a negotiated settlement.
We sincerely hope that this will bring an end to the
tremendous hardship that the civilian population in the
region has suffered, the thousands of deaths and the
millions of refugees and displaced persons.
The Peace Agreement initialled by the three
Presidents at Dayton yesterday is a historic breakthrough
after more than three years of intensive international
mediation efforts. The United States Government deserves
great praise for seizing the initiative and pursuing the
negotiations with determination to a successful
conclusion. Norway would also like to stress the key roles
played by the European Union, by Russia and by the
United Nations with its mediator, Thorvald Stoltenberg,
in achieving this result.
We now have peace on paper. The challenge will be
to put it into practice. The common task of the
international community is now to secure and strengthen
the fragile peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Norway
therefore supports the three draft resolutions submitted to
the Security Council today. The Basic Agreement on
Eastern Slavonia, the suspension of sanctions, and the
gradual lifting of the arms embargo in the context of the
Agreement on Regional Stabilization and arms control are
important steps in the process towards normalization of
relations between the States in the region and the
international community.
37
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
Norway will continue to play a significant part in the
international efforts to ensure the return of peace and
normalcy. Since the beginning of the war, Norway has been
one of the largest contributors to the United Nations
operations in the former Yugoslavia. Today, we participate
with close to 1,000 personnel on the ground, three quarters
of which are serving in the Nordic peace-keeping battalion
in Tuzla. Several Norwegian non-governmental
organizations have engaged in considerable efforts. We are
contributing a major portion of the drivers and trucks
carrying humanitarian aid to the civilian population in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We have so far provided a total
of $160 million in humanitarian assistance and plan to
provide another $70 million for 1996. We intend to
contribute about 1,000 Norwegian troops as part of the
multinational force, led by the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), which will be deployed to monitor
implementation of the Peace Agreement. And we will
contribute to the enormous and urgent reconstruction work
which lies ahead.
But the main responsibility for achieving peace and
stability lies with the parties themselves. Ordinary citizens
in the area are longing for a return to normalcy. The
responsibility lies largely with their political and military
leaders. We therefore strongly urge the parties to
demonstrate their willingness to contribute to the process by
implementing the Agreement in good faith. This means,
among other things, that the parties must ensure respect for
fundamental human rights and rights of minorities, they
must allow refugees and displaced persons to return to their
homes, and they must cooperate with the International
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.
Finally, I would like to pay a tribute to the negotiators,
peace-keepers, aid workers and all the other women and
men who have sacrificed so much, in some cases their
lives, to make possible the return of peace to the former
Yugoslavia.
The President: I thank the representative of Norway
for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Slovenia. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Türk (Slovenia): I wish to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
November. Let me assure you that we believe that the
Council will be successful under your wise and competent
guidance.
We would also like to pay a tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Gambari of Nigeria, for the
excellent manner in which he conducted the work of the
Council last month.
Slovenia wholeheartedly welcomes the conclusion,
at Dayton, of the Peace Agreement between Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro). We commend the
United States for its crucial role in the efforts to resolve
the crisis in the Balkans, and for the decisive contribution
to the peace process which has resulted in the initialling
of the Agreement for peace. We urge the parties to sign
the Peace Agreement and thus open the way to the
establishment of peace and stability.
In a statement made earlier today, the Foreign
Minister of Slovenia, Mr. Zoran Thaler, emphasized the
following:
“We hope that the Dayton Agreement will be
brought to life and will, as soon as possible, produce
practical effects which will put an end to four years
of bloodshed and devastation and will bring peace to
the crisis areas.
“Slovenia continues to insist that Bosnia and
Herzegovina must be preserved as a single State and
that its territorial integrity be respected.
“Slovenia wishes the situation in its vicinity to
stabilize and the life of people to be brought back to
normal in conditions of respect for territorial
integrity, internationally recognized borders and
human rights. Slovenia is also prepared to
contribute, to the best of its abilities, to the
stabilization of political, social and economic life in
the crisis areas.”
Efforts now should be devoted to the establishment
of durable and real peace. Peace is not merely the
absence of war. It requires that the right steps be taken
throughout the process so that normal life is restored and
that justice prevails.
Two important measures among the series of steps
towards peace were adopted by the Security Council
today: first, the suspension of sanctions and, secondly, the
lifting of the arms embargo imposed by Security Council
38
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
resolution 713 (1991) more than four years ago. We are
confident that we shall have the opportunity in the Council
to address various issues related to the establishment of
peace, at the appropriate stages. On this occasion, we would
like to make a few comments on the resolutions the
Council has adopted.
Let me first address the resolution on the suspension
of sanctions (resolution 1022 (1995)).
In the ninth preambular paragraph of that resolution,
the Security Council reiterates that
“the State formerly known as the Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia ... has ceased to exist”.
This is an important element of the resolution. It states
a basic fact and a basic principle, upon which practical
solutions can be sought with success.
The dissolution and extinction of the former Socialist
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has affected the disposition
of the assets of that former State, as is accurately
mentioned in the ninth preambular paragraph of the
resolution.
Obviously, with the suspension of sanctions, we are
about to enter an important stage in this matter. It is crucial
that this suspension does not apply to those frozen assets
that are the common property of the former State. These
assets are subject to succession by all successor States and
should accordingly be divided among them. Therefore, all
necessary measures should be taken to prevent the
unfreezing of these assets and their use to the benefit of
any single one of the successor States. This issue is
addressed more specifically in operative paragraphs 5 and
6 of the resolution on the suspension of sanctions.
Slovenia officially requests that the respective
authorities of all States Members of the United Nations
consider, first, all assets of the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro), including
any of its subdivisions, as well as those of its agencies,
including the National Bank of Yugoslavia; and secondly,
the assets of the entities owned or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by the Government or any governmental agency
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and
Montenegro), as assets on which the Republic of Slovenia,
as one of the successor States to the former Yugoslavia, has
a legal and legitimate claim.
In this context, we wish to stress that we agree with
the interpretation of paragraph 5 of the resolution
provided in the explanation of vote of the representative
of the United States.
We urge all States to consider these assets frozen, in
accordance with operative paragraph 5 of the resolution,
until a final resolution regarding the distribution of these
assets and liabilities is reached by the successor States.
Any unilateral disposal of the relevant funds will force
the Republic of Slovenia to take appropriate legal steps to
have any such transactions declared null and void.
Finally, I wish to stress that we disagree with, and
shall oppose, any interpretation that would limit the
meaning of the term “claims” — used in operative
paragraph 5 of the resolution — only to claims raised in
current legal proceedings. Such a limited interpretation
would harm those who are negotiating the issues of State
succession in good faith and could indeed have a very
negative impact on negotiations on the issue of State
succession in the future.
The second resolution addresses the issue of the
termination of the arms embargo imposed by Security
Council resolution 713 (1991) four years ago.
That embargo has been one of the least fortunate
measures taken by the Security Council. It was originally
imposed on the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
which was then still in existence and a Member of the
United Nations. It was maintained after the dissolution of
that former State, without any consideration for the
specific situation of each of the successor States. It has
been an example of a measure that produces harmful
effects because of its indiscriminate and across-the-board
character. The time has now come for a radical change.
Slovenia welcomes the resolution on the termination
of the arms embargo. It is focused on the situation of
those successor States of the former Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia that are parties to the conflict and
signatories of the Peace Agreement. This is a wise
approach, and the concept of gradualness is correct in this
context. The link between the final lifting of the arms
embargo with respect to the signatories of the Peace
Agreement and the implementation of their arms control
agreement contained in Annex 1B to the Peace
Agreement, is justified. We hope that these measures will
contribute to peace and stability and will strengthen
confidence among the parties to the Peace Agreement
reached at Dayton.
39
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
On this occasion I wish to reiterate that, as far as
Slovenia is concerned, the arms embargo imposed by
resolution 713 (1991) has been unjustified throughout.
Slovenia, an independent, sovereign State and a Member of
the United Nations, is at peace. We are at peace with
ourselves and with our neighbours. Slovenia has not been,
and is not, a party to any military conflict and has never
had a peace-keeping mission established on its territory.
Furthermore, Slovenia considers that the arms embargo
in question is rendered utterly obsolete in view of the
development of cooperation on security matters in Europe,
in which my country participates as a responsible partner.
Slovenia has participated in the Partnership for Peace from
the beginning and has developed an extensive network of
cooperation with most European and many other countries.
In these circumstances, the application of the arms embargo
represents an impediment to our international cooperation
and a totally unjustified limitation of our sovereignty.
Let me therefore, in conclusion, state the following
formally and on the record: Slovenia is satisfied that the
Security Council today adopted a resolution that is
terminating the arms embargo imposed by resolution
713 (1991), and we expect the immediate termination of the
arms embargo as far as Slovenia is concerned.
The President: I thank the representative of Slovenia
for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Malesky (the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia): Allow me, Sir, to congratulate you on your
election as President of the Security Council for the month
of November and to share with you and the members of the
Council our joy and deep relief that the Balkan war is over.
The Government of the Republic of Macedonia
welcomes the success in Dayton, Ohio. The signing of the
Peace Agreement between the leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia puts an end to nearly four years of
bloodshed that took many lives and caused vast destruction.
My Government commends the Government of the
United States of America, which demonstrated in practice
that when the leading Power gathers the will to lead, the
others will follow. We wish also to commend the efforts of
all the members of the Contact Group.
But even after the end of this war, fought in the
name of “ethnic purity”, the Balkans remain an ethnically
mixed region where State borders do not follow ethnic
lines but cut across them. That is why today, celebrating
the end of yet another Balkan war, we are confronted
with the same old dilemma: how to live in peace with our
neighbours and with the minorities inside our States. Once
again, the question of security in the Balkans becomes a
question of democracy, tolerance, pluralism and
cooperation inside and between States.
The alternative continues to be the most brutal and
senseless military conflict humanity is experiencing
today — ethnic wars. It is up to the peoples of the
Balkans to make the choice — and this time the
Bosnians, the Croats and the Serbs have made the right
choice in Dayton.
The President: I thank the representative of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia for the kind
words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of the
Republic of Korea. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): At the outset, my
delegation would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of November. I have no doubt that
under your eminent leadership, the Security Council will
discharge its responsibilities in a most successful manner.
My delegation welcomes wholeheartedly the success
of the Dayton conference, which will pave the way for
the widespread conflict in the Balkans, unleashed nearly
four years ago, to come to an end. With the landmark
agreement reached yesterday, my delegation believes that
a definitive step has been taken — away from the
bloodshed and suffering that have plagued this region and
towards the beginning of a foundation for peace.
It is due to the exceptional diplomatic initiative and
steadfast resolve of the United States and the other
members of the Contact Group, as well as the forward-
looking attitude of the three parties concerned, that this
feat which, in the darkest hours seemed like a pure
impossibility, has been achieved. The Republic of Korea
joins the international community in expressing its solemn
appreciation to these parties for their efforts in reaching
the comprehensive settlement.
40
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
My delegation also takes this occasion to pay a tribute
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations and its
peace-keepers, both military and civilian, whose
immeasurable contributions to the peace efforts in the
former Yugoslavia have helped fulfil the goal of restoring
peace and security.
My delegation is fully aware that the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, initialled yesterday in Dayton, Ohio, is the
first, important phase on the long road to peace in the
former Yugoslavia. We hope that the spirit of compromise,
reconciliation and tolerance which first brought about the
Agreement will continue to flourish so that it may be
faithfully implemented after being formalized in Paris next
month.
In this regard, my delegation sincerely hopes that the
Agreement will open up a new era for consolidating the
prospect of peace and stability in the Balkans through the
full cooperation of the parties concerned. Moreover, my
delegation believes that the prompt action of the Security
Council to suspend the economic sanctions imposed on the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and to lift the arms
embargo on the former Yugoslavia is indeed timely and
appropriate. The role of the Security Council in the
implementation of the Dayton Agreement is indeed
paramount in the consolidation of peace in that region.
Despite the geographical remoteness of the former
Yugoslavia, the Republic of Korea firmly believes that it is
an area with far-reaching implications for the peace and
stability of the world. The international community bears
the moral obligation to extend its fully-fledged support to
help bring the conflict to an end by turning peace on paper
into a genuine peace in deed.
Furthermore, the four-year conflict has taken a severe
toll on human lives. With a quarter of a million lives lost
and many more people uprooted from their homelands, the
community of nations must cooperate to provide urgently
needed humanitarian assistance and prevent further
violations of human rights. The multitude of people who
have been forced to leave their homes should be allowed to
return to their place of origin in safety.
My delegation believes that one important aspect of
the Agreement is that of the provisions which ensure that
war criminals will not be allowed to hold any elected
offices. This should serve as a stern lesson to would-be
perpetrators of crimes against humanity and peace. It is
incumbent upon the international community to guarantee
that crimes, such as “ethnic cleansing”, do not go
unpunished.
My delegation also believes that for all its
weaknesses and shortcomings, the Agreement is the
product of real compromise and mutual concession by all
the parties concerned and, therefore, it is crucial that the
international community should encourage the parties to
the conflict to implement the agreement in a most faithful
manner.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to reassure
the Council that the Republic of Korea, a nation which
itself suffered a devastating war a half-century ago, will
do its share in contributing to the implementation of the
Dayton Agreement as a responsible member of the
international community.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Republic of Korea for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Colombia.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Londoño-Paredes (Colombia) (interpretation
from Spanish): I have the honour to address the Security
Council on behalf of my Government, in its capacity as
President of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
May I, first of all, congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of this important organ
for the month of November.
The Presidency of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries welcomed with satisfaction the announcement
of the Agreement concluded in Dayton, Ohio, which
makes it possible to achieve the long-awaited peace in the
Balkan region. The attainment of peace has been one of
the Movement's most serious concerns. Furthermore,
many of its members have worked actively and in
different ways to achieve it. It is now our hope that the
Agreements reached will be completed and, in particular,
that they will be implemented properly so that peace may
at last be restored where bloodshed and barbarity have
prevailed. The Presidency of the Non-Aligned Movement
wishes to pay a tribute to all of those who gave their lives
for the attainment of peace and to the countries of the
Contact Group. In particular, we express appreciation for
the efforts made by the Government of the United States
to achieve this success, which is also that of the entire
international community. We will be vigilant and attentive
to ensure that the aim and goal of the Agreement — the
41
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
attainment of a lasting and stable peace in the region —
may become a reality.
The President: I thank the representative of Colombia
for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Brazil. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Valle (Brazil): I wish to begin, Sir, by expressing
the satisfaction of the delegation of Brazil at taking part in
this debate under your able presidency. Your diplomatic
and personal qualities have earned our respect and deserve
recognition. Let me also congratulate Ambassador Gambari
for his outstanding work as President for the month of
October.
We wish to add our voice to that of the rest of the
international community at this moment of renewed hope
for peace in the war-torn Balkans. The successful outcome
of the negotiations creates the conditions for the opening of
a new chapter in the relations among all peoples in the
region after almost four years of violence and destruction.
As hundreds of thousands lost their lives and millions
were displaced, successive diplomatic attempts to bridge
differences through peaceful means met with intransigence
and defiance. An outraged world looked on with dismay at
the atrocities, while its faith in the capacity for dialogue
and understanding among nations was eroded, precisely
when conditions seemed most favourable for the
establishment of a new partnership world wide.
As we welcome this important occasion, my first
thoughts go to the innocent civilians and the brave peace-
keepers who got caught in the crossfire, as well as to all the
victims of the massive human rights violations associated
with this heinous conflict. The initialling of the Peace
Agreement in Dayton, Ohio, would not have been possible,
however, without the leadership provided by the United
States Government in bringing the parties together. Special
acknowledgment is due in this context to the role played by
President Clinton and Secretary of State Christopher. Their
whole team is to be congratulated on their sense of purpose
and their perseverance.
Many others also deserve credit for their untiring
efforts in the search for solutions to a complex and
unprecedented situation for which existing diplomatic
instruments seemed insufficient and conventional wisdom
inadequate. I must take this opportunity to express the deep
appreciation of the Brazilian Government for the crucial
role played by the United Nations, and in particular by
the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros-Ghali, in handling the
gravest of the crises of the post-cold-war era.
The challenges faced by the Organization in the
former Yugoslavia have been enormous and the
frustrations bred by the involuntary involvement of a
peace-keeping operation in armed combat have been
many. It is undeniable that without the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR) and its successors the
humanitarian catastrophe in the region would have
reached even greater proportions and the conflict might
have spread even further.
Throughout the conflict, Brazil remained firmly
committed to the achievement of peace in the Balkans
and stood behind efforts directed at avoiding escalation
and at promoting an agreed settlement, including through
participation in UNPROFOR. Our belief in the possibility
of harmonious and democratic coexistence between
peoples of different ethnic and religious backgrounds is
firmly rooted in our own experience. We continue to
show readiness to contribute to the strengthening of the
peace process in the Balkans along the steep road that
must still be climbed if the promises of Dayton are to be
translated into a better life for all in the region.
The President: I thank the representative of Brazil
for the kind words he addressed to me.
42
Security Council 3595th meeting
Fiftieth year 22 November 1995
There are no further speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of
the item on the agenda. The Security Council will remain
seized of the matter.
The meeting rose at 8.35 p.m.
43
