United Nations S/PV.3535
95-85447 (E) This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Section,
room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fiftieth Year
3535th Meeting
Friday, 12 May 1995, 3.15 p.m.
New York
President: Mr. Mérimée . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (France)
Members: Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Cárdenas
Botswana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Legwaila
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wang Xuexian
Czech Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Kovanda
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Henze
Honduras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Martínez Blanco
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wisnumurti
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ferrarin
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Gambari
Oman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Al-Khussaiby
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Bakuramutsa
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . Sir David Hannay
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Inderfurth
Agenda
The situation in Georgia
Report of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia (S/1995/342)
Security Council 3535th meeting
Fiftieth year 12 May 1995
The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Georgia
Report of the Secretary-General concerning the
situation in Abkhazia, Georgia (S/1995/342)
The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Georgia in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Chikvaidze
(Georgia) took a place at the Council table.
The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General in Abkhazia, Georgia, document
S/1995/342.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1995/384, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council’s prior
consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Security Council to the following revision to be made
to the text of the draft resolution contained in document
S/1995/384 in its provisional form.
Operative paragraph 6 should read as follows:
“Reiterates its call to the Abkhaz side to
accelerate significantly the process of the voluntary
return of refugees and displaced persons by
accepting a timetable on the basis of that proposed
by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, and to guarantee the
safety of spontaneous returnees already in the area
and regularize their status in accordance with the
Quadripartite Agreement;”.
The first speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Georgia, His Excellency, Mr. Alexander Chikvaidze.
On behalf of the Security Council, I welcome him and
invite him to make his statement.
Mr. Chikvaidze (Georgia): Allow me at the outset,
Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of the
functions of President of the Security Council for this
month. We believe that under your skilful guidance the
Security Council will successfully continue its difficult
work.
On behalf of the Head of State, Mr. Eduard
Shevardnadze, and the people of the Republic of Georgia,
I should like to extend my warmest words of appreciation
to the United Nations and its Security Council and,
personally, to the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros
Boutros-Ghali, as well as to his Special Envoy,
Ambassador Brunner, for the attention and goodwill they
have accorded the dramatic processes in Georgia.
I should like to express my gratitude to the
members of the group of countries known as “Friends of
Georgia” and the Russian Federation as facilitator for
their tireless efforts to bring about a comprehensive
political settlement of the protracted conflict in my
country.
Allow me also to commend the joint activities being
carried out by the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia (UNOMIG) and the peace-keeping forces of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) for
monitoring the cease-fire.
During my visit to New York I have had the
opportunity to meet with representatives of the States
members of the Security Council and wish to thank all of
them for their sincere concern and understanding of our
problems.
In its efforts to achieve political and economic
reforms, Georgia faces a multitude of problems. While
public opinion on how our society and different political
leaders should handle them may vary, there is clear
2
Security Council 3535th meeting
Fiftieth year 12 May 1995
unanimity and resolve when it comes to threats to the
territorial integrity of the country and the continuing
anguish and ordeal of the thousands of people expelled
from their homeland. Indeed, nothing can change our
resolve to achieve the unconditional and timely return of
the refugees to their homes, to reach a fair, negotiated
settlement of the conflict in Abkhazia and thereby define its
political status within the borders of a unified Georgia as
recognized by the international community.
The Abkhaz leadership, however, constantly seeks to
evade, ignore and negotiate away its obligations, Security
Council resolutions calling for the unconditional return of
refugees notwithstanding. Unfortunately, that is a
characteristic trait of the phenomenon known as “aggressive
separatism”, which emerged from the debris of the
communist system and is being nurtured by its die-hard
followers. It does not consider compromise a moral
category, and tends to ignore fundamental principles of
international law.
Obsessed with that ideology, the Abkhaz leadership
has blatantly violated all the peace agreements that were
expected to bring about a cease-fire and a constructive
dialogue between parties. Despite the bitter experience of
treachery, the Georgian Government has always remained
committed to a peaceful resolution of the conflict based on
the self-respect and honour of all parties involved. We have
never turned our backs on the peace process, nor have we
attempted to resort to military force. However, it is not easy
to carry on peaceful negotiations with a party that resorts to
“ethnic cleansing” and genocide as a means of
consolidating its ill-gotten gains.
As members are aware, about 300,000 refugees and
displaced persons are now scattered throughout Georgia,
further draining its devastated economy and posing a
serious threat to nascent market reforms. In light of this
situation, it was sheer cynicism on the part of Ardzinba to
write a letter to the High Commissioner for Refugees
requesting financial support for the return of just 200
refugees per week. If we proceed according to his
timetable, instead of an unconditional and orderly return the
refugees would have to queue up for decades in
humiliation, ignorant of their own fates.
Ardzinba’s regime has always sought to thwart the
peace process. His no-compromise policy is bringing our
peaceful efforts to naught and could ultimately damage the
peace talks beyond repair. However, past experience would
suggest that by acting irresponsibly he is seeking to gain
time. The question of the settlement of the conflict in
Abkhazia has undoubtedly reached a crucial point as a
result of the new turn of events. From the outset,
Ardzinba has demanded that the political status of
Abkhazia should be defined, as a precondition for the
return of the refugees. Now, when we have finally
worked out a document reflecting the political status of
the autonomous republic and obtained concurrence on it
from the representatives of the United Nations and the
Russian Federation; now, when the prospect of a
federative arrangement for Georgia has taken on a
practical dimension; and now, when the Abkhaz
representatives have been invited to work with us to draft
a new constitution — Ardzinba comes up with a new
proposal.
Contrary to the resolutions of the Security Council,
which reaffirms Georgia’s territorial integrity, while
formally agreeing to a federative order for our State, he
offers to sign an agreement between two subjects of
international law, thereby dragging out the negotiations
and threatening not only Georgia’s integrity, but also
setting a pattern for the endless fragmentation of States.
We strongly believe that the Security Council should
voice its concern on this matter and clearly condemn the
attempts by the Abkhaz side to reach their secessionist
goals through sophistries and the rape of international
law. My people have always counted on the help of the
United Nations, and have repeatedly expressed their
confidence in the Organization and in the international
community as a whole. Regrettably, with the passage of
time, that attitude is showing signs of changing. There is
a reason for that tendency: the Security Council has
already adopted 12 resolutions and 6 presidential
statements on Abkhazia; while those documents gave
moral support, they were less effective in terms of
yielding tangible, practical results.
The 300,000 people displaced by the conflict have
become refugees in their own homeland. The Secretary-
General and the Permanent Representative of the United
States to the United Nations have had the opportunity to
see their plight first hand. For the world today, caught up
in the flames of numerous ethnic conflicts, 300,000 may
not be a large number. However, the hardships of the
refugees are shared by all Georgians, who see the
refugees’ repatriation as the foremost objective. In other
words, we have 300,000 refugees who have the
wholehearted support of 5 million Georgians. When they
witness the helplessness of the international community’s
peace efforts, people’s confidence in the effectiveness of
3
Security Council 3535th meeting
Fiftieth year 12 May 1995
international mechanisms is eroded and this could
precipitate a disastrous outbreak of uncontrollable actions.
I am accompanied here by Mr. Tamaz Nadareishvili,
Chairman of the Supreme Council of Abkhazia. No one is
in a better position to relate what has happened in Gagra
and Sukhumi, what is going on in Gali and in Abkhazia as
a whole.
The present situation compels me to repeat myself:
people’s patience is wearing thin. They are ready to cross
the Inguri river in large groups, with or without the consent
of the Abkhaz side. Though they are unarmed, it is not hard
to imagine the welcome they will be given by the
separatists. In January, we managed to prevent a dangerous
sortie by several hundred armed people who had set out for
Abkhazia. In future, the number of such actions may well
increase and turn into a nationwide, uncontrollable march
to Abkhazia. The Head of State of Georgia, Mr.
Shevardnadze, is doing everything in his power to defuse
the intensity of popular dissatisfaction and keep
uncontrollable emotions in check. But believe me, as time
goes on, it is becoming more and more difficult.
We realize that individual Member States, as well as
the United Nations, are constrained in their actions, but, if
combined, their joint efforts may yield positive results. We
strongly believe that the Security Council must be more
outspoken and clear on this matter. Taking into account the
present realities, namely the intransigence of the Abkhaz
authorities over the organized repatriation of refugees and
displaced persons to Abkhazia, the Government of the
Republic of Georgia deems that the following actions need
to be taken.
The foremost issue is the repatriation of refugees. If
this problem is not solved, it will put the whole peace
process in jeopardy. The return of the refugees must start
from the Gali region under a strict timetable and continue
in stages to other regions of Abkhazia.
The present turn of events undoubtedly puts the
question of the expansion of the mandates of both
UNOMIG and the CIS peace-keeping forces back on the
agenda, for we can no longer afford for them merely to be
extended.
In the light of the forthcoming CIS summit in Minsk,
which will, inter alia, consider the extension of the mandate
of the CIS peace-keeping forces and the means to improve
their effectiveness, we would welcome the Security
Council’s broadening of the UNOMIG mandate.
In order to step up the process of repatriation,
observers must be charged with additional responsibilities,
especially in monitoring and recording human rights
violations. This step will carry both practical and
psychological implications. The returnees must know that
when they are back home they are going to be taken care
of.
We believe that the impartial recording of violations
and repression may serve as a deterrent to potential
perpetrators. This will also provide the international
community with first-hand, reliable information and will
offer means to prevent unlawful actions.
The 1994 CSCE summit in Budapest expressed its
deep concern over “ethnic cleansing” and the massive
expulsion of people, predominantly Georgians, from the
areas where they lived. In this regard, we commend the
Security Council for noting these findings of the CSCE
final Document.
The world community strongly condemns the
practice of genocide and “ethnic cleansing” and seeks to
find effective measures for their prevention. As the
Secretary-General has said, genocide is plotted and
carried out by cynical leaders who think that their crimes
will go unpunished; moreover, they believe that their
deeds will prevail.
We possess more than enough evidence to prove that
similar atrocities have been perpetrated by the Abkhaz
separatists. Governments, as well as non-governmental
organizations, are welcome to dispatch their
representatives to Georgia for an impartial and fair
examination of materials at our disposal.
Aggressive separatism, which routinely entails these
atrocities, is proving to be one of the most severe
challenges on the eve of the twenty-first century. There is
hardly a country today that does not have the potential for
a conflict similar to the one in Georgia. Indeed, many
Member States are currently embroiled in a struggle with
their own secessionist movements. The particular
relevance of the Georgian case for the rest of the world
lies in the danger of the Abkhazian separatists’
consolidating and legalizing their ill-gotten gains. This
would set a most unwanted precedent for all Member
States, a precedent of “victorious separatism” that would
serve as an inspiration for every separatist movement
worldwide.
4
Security Council 3535th meeting
Fiftieth year 12 May 1995
This is hardly the signal the United Nations wants to
send on the eve of its fiftieth anniversary. All available
means at the disposal of the United Nations should be
brought to bear to resolve this problem so that it can enter
its second half-century with a landmark achievement.
Future political adventurers must know that their deeds
will not go unpunished, that any attempt to infringe on the
territorial integrity of States or threaten the lives of
innocent people will be severely prosecuted and the
perpetrators brought to justice. In this context, we would
welcome the establishment of an international criminal
court, a permanent juridical body capable of addressing the
most serious crimes posing a threat to the international
community. We look forward to concluding a convention
on the establishment of this critically needed body in the
near future and are ready to cooperate closely with other
Governments on this important issue.
In closing, allow me to welcome the Security
Council’s intention to extend the mandate of UNOMIG, for
we believe that the United Nations presence in the region
is essential to its stability and to the peace process as a
whole.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Georgia for his kind
words addressed to me.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
vote on the draft resolution before it, as orally amended, in
its provisional form. If I hear no objection I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Ferrarin (Italy): My delegation will vote in
favour of the draft resolution to renew the mandate of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG).
The negotiations are still beset by difficulties. The
conditions set by resolution 971 (1995) for an extended
presence of UNOMIG in Georgia have been only partially
met. Nevertheless, we believe that a strong commitment to
a political settlement of the crisis should be confirmed at
two different levels. First, there should be support for the
negotiations, under the auspices of the United Nations and
with the contribution of the Russian Federation as a
facilitator and of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which should participate
in every stage of the negotiations and of the reconciliation
process. Secondly, there should be an active UNOMIG
presence in the field and constructive collaboration
between the United Nations Observer Mission and the
Commonwealth of Independent States peace-keeping
force. UNOMIG’s presence will foster complete
compliance with the cease-fire, respect for the
disarmament measures provided for by the Agreement on
a Cease-fire and Separation of Forces, signed almost
exactly one year ago in Moscow, and the creation of the
conditions needed to guarantee the safe return of refugees,
particularly to the Gali region.
We continue to be concerned by the attitude taken
mainly by one of the parties towards the institutional
negotiations. This attitude may not be totally compatible
with the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity
that have been reaffirmed in all the Council’s resolutions
and presidential statements on this matter and reflected in
the OSCE’s Paris Charter.
The above-mentioned difficulties also seem to lead
to a cycle in which the dim prospect of a political
settlement is compounded by the failure of the
Quadripartite Commission on refugees to meet for three
months. This encourages retaliation and violence by
militias against the refugees who have already returned.
In the Secretary-General’s recent report, a different level
of responsibility seems to emerge from the episodes of
violence recorded. Serious concerns are raised by the
many murders, arrests and episodes of torture. These
incidents can, in fact, be considered a continuation of the
“ethnic cleansing” that raised concerns in the decisions of
the Budapest summit of the CSCE.
My delegation believes that significant aspects of the
process that must lead to a political settlement of the
crisis are defined more clearly in today’s draft resolution
than in texts previously adopted by the Council. I refer,
in particular, to the following elements: mention of the
new constitution on which the Government of the
Republic of Georgia is actively working; the priority
given to the return of all refugees to their places of
origin, starting with the Gali region; inclusion of the
principles of the decision on Georgia taken at the CSCE’s
Budapest summit; and emphasis of the UNOMIG
operation’s need to contribute, realistically and within the
framework of its current mandate, to full respect for
human rights.
5
Security Council 3535th meeting
Fiftieth year 12 May 1995
In our opinion these contents send a clear signal that
the Council has a well-defined orientation to the course of
the crisis and show that recourse to violence does not pay.
Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): At the outset, I should
like to extend my delegation’s congratulations to you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I should like also to express my
delegation’s deep appreciation to Ambassador Kovanda for
the excellent manner in which he guided the Council last
month.
Further, allow me to express my delegation’s gratitude
to those who formulated the draft resolution before us
concerning the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG).
I wish to take this opportunity also to welcome in our
midst Mr. Chikvaidze, the Foreign Minister of Georgia.
My delegation has closely followed the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia. In this regard, we have come to learn
that apparent breakthroughs in the political negotiations
have, not infrequently, been followed by developments that
have the effect of negating the apparent initial gains.
Consequently, progress in the political negotiations has at
best been mixed.
However, this is certainly not due to a lack of effort
on the part of the international community. The United
Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and the Russian Federation have all been
untiring in their combined efforts to find a comprehensive
settlement, despite the often less than exemplary
cooperation of the parties concerned. Indeed, these
combined international and regional efforts are a true
reflection of the call contained in the Charter for
cooperation between our Organization and regional
arrangements.
In this regard, it would be remiss of me if I were to
fail to commend the achievements of UNOMIG and the
peace-keeping force of the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS) in preventing a further escalation of violence.
Furthermore, we recognize the valuable contribution of the
United Nations and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, as well as of the Russian Federation
in its capacity as facilitator, to the search for a peaceful
political settlement through negotiations between the
conflicting parties in Georgia.
My delegation is none the less fully cognizant of the
fact that challenges still abound. We share the concern
felt by the international community regarding the
frustratingly slow progress in resolving the issue of
refugees and displaced persons. We note the continued
lack of a secure environment, particularly in the Gali
region, and the observation contained in the Secretary-
General’s report about the failure of the Government of
Georgia, as well as of the Abkhaz authorities, to
guarantee the safety of the displaced persons and
repatriants as agreed upon in the Quadripartite Agreement
on the voluntary return of refugees and displaced persons
of 4 April 1994. It is of the utmost importance to come
to an acceptable arrangement on this matter, and we urge
the parties to abide by the principles of international
humanitarian law.
In addition, we deem it imperative that the Abkhaz
side significantly accelerate the process of the return of
refugees and displaced persons, in accordance with the
proposals of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR). It would indeed be difficult to
overemphasize the valuable role of the UNHCR in
alleviating the plight of refugees and internally displaced
persons. It is therefore with a deep sense of concern that
my delegation notes the financial difficulties that are
currently being faced by the UNHCR, thereby threatening
the continuation of its valuable presence in Georgia.
However, without in any way minimizing the plight
of the refugees and displaced persons, it is worth noting
that the humanitarian situation is merely a symptom of a
more fundamental problem — that of the impasse in the
political negotiations. We are concerned, for example, that
the Secretary-General has reported that there was a
renewed escalation of violence, in mid-March and early
in April, in the Gali region, thereby impeding the
convening of further rounds of negotiations.
We welcome the recent initiative of the Russian
Federation in drafting a text which seeks to develop in
greater detail the elements of a federal solution that could
provide the basis for a comprehensive political settlement.
The cooperation of all the parties in this effort is indeed
essential. Genuine negotiations always require a spirit of
conciliation, mutual concessions and a commensurate
political will to achieve a peaceful and just solution.
In this regard, the Indonesian delegation would like
to reiterate its strong support for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Georgia within its
internationally recognized borders. It further reiterates its
6
Security Council 3535th meeting
Fiftieth year 12 May 1995
deep concern about the renewed hostilities and, therefore,
encourages the efforts of the United Nations, the OSCE and
the Russian Federation.
Indonesia’s contribution to UNOMIG, albeit modest,
is a reflection of our commitment to assist in the
international community’s effort to find a political
settlement to the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia. We too
share the Secretary-General’s observation that an untimely
withdrawal of UNOMIG would lead to open confrontation
and the resumption of conflict.
In the light of these considerations, we are in full
support of the extension of UNOMIG’s mandate, and we
shall therefore vote in favour of the draft resolution.
Mr. Martínez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from
Spanish): My delegation welcomes the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Georgia and his joining in the work of the
Security Council today.
My delegation is obliged to the Secretary-General for
the submission of his report on the situation in Abkhazia,
Georgia, in compliance with resolution 971 (1995) dated 12
January. In that report we are told that, by and large, there
has been no progress in the political negotiations between
Georgia and Abkhazia and that the current situation reflects
a stalemate, which, in our judgement, might, were it to
persist, lead to an open clash between the parties to the
conflict.
According to the report, the opposing positions
involve, on one hand, a solution on the basis of a federal
State within the borders of Georgia and, on the other hand,
the solution favoured by the Abkhazians — one based on
a union between two equal States. As a result, the
repatriation of refugees and displaced persons is paralysed,
because the parties continue to apply different criteria as to
the way repatriation is to take place or the numbers it is to
involve. These differences are preventing compliance with
the stipulations of the Quadripartite Agreement signed in
Moscow in 1994 as to the voluntary return of refugees and
displaced persons — an Agreement designed to guarantee
the safety and security of those individuals. This, in turn,
ties the hands of the Quadripartite Commission, which, as
the Secretary-General’s report tells us, has not met since 16
February of this year.
We urgently appeal to the parties to resume political
dialogue to prevent the situation from deteriorating further.
As the Secretary-General rightly says in paragraph 44 of his
report,
“tense political stalemates in which neither peace nor
war prevail do not allow the creation of the stability
and public confidence essential for economic
assistance, reconstruction and a return to normality
for the people concerned.” (S/1995/342, para. 44)
We therefore feel that it is necessary for the démarches
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
vis-à-vis the Government of Georgia and the Abkhazian
authorities to be continued, with the assistance of the
Russian Federation as facilitator and the involvement of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
One element contributing to the exacerbation of
difficulties is the situation of insecurity spawned by
offences committed in the Gali region and the kind of
weaponry in the hands of the local residents, which, in
turn, makes possible the violation of the provisions of the
Agreement on a cease-fire and the separation of forces,
signed in May 1994 in Moscow.
Another difficulty is to be found in the restrictions
being imposed by the Government of Georgia and the
Abkhaz authorities on the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) military observers, which
are keeping them from doing their job of supervising
weapons stockpiles and patrolling. So long as the parties
do not show themselves determined to improve the
situation in those zones and to cooperate extensively with
UNOMIG, we believe it will be difficult to create
favourable conditions for the voluntary return of the
refugees.
However, we are pleased that the cooperation
between UNOMIG and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the peace-keeping force
of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) is continuing to develop
satisfactorily.
In conclusion, we take the view that the international
community in general and the Council in particular must
continue to pay close attention to the negotiating process
in order to ensure that the parties comply fully with their
political commitments and, especially, to ensure that they
guarantee full respect for international humanitarian law,
particularly as it relates to protection for refugees and
displaced persons.
My delegation has taken due note of the report of
the Secretary-General and endorses his recommendation
7
Security Council 3535th meeting
Fiftieth year 12 May 1995
to extend the mandate of UNOMIG for another six months,
bearing in mind that the States members of the
Commonwealth of Independent States seem ready to extend
the mandate of the peace-keeping force with a view to
preventing open confrontation and any resumption of the
conflict.
Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): Mr. President, permit me
first of all to express my delegation’s sincere
congratulations to you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. Under your
guidance which, as in the past, has been characterized by so
much grace, great skill and confidence, the business of the
Council is in very good hands indeed.
I should also like to express appreciation to
Ambassador Kovanda for the especially able manner in
which he guided the Council’s work during the month of
April.
May I also, on behalf of my delegation, welcome to
our midst the Foreign Minister of Georgia, His Excellency
Dr. Alexander Chikvaidze.
The latest report of the Secretary-General concerning
the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia, dated 1 May 1995
(S/1995/342), indicates, regrettably, that progress in the
peace process has continued to be difficult despite the
important efforts of the United Nations Observer Mission
in Georgia (UNOMIG), the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS) and others concerned to mediate peace in the
region. At the political level, the occasional outbursts of
violence, such as occurred in the Ghali region in mid-
March and early April, have critically undermined the
climate of confidence that is necessary for continuing
negotiations between the parties to the conflict. Moreover,
the political talks about the status of Abkhazia which takes
due account of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Georgia have not made the desired progress. In the words
of the Secretary-General,
“The organized repatriation of refugees and displaced
persons to Abkhazia, remains at a standstill”
(S/1995/342, para. 13)
partly because of the objection of
“The Abkhaz side to the … speedy return of refugees
and displaced persons.” (ibid.)
Nigeria associates itself fully with the ongoing efforts
of the Secretary-General, with the assistance of the Russian
Federation and the support of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), aimed at
achieving a comprehensive political settlement of the
Georgian-Abkhaz conflict. In this connection, we
underline the need, as reflected in the current draft
resolution, for the parties to achieve substantive progress
in the negotiations under the auspices of the United
Nations and to refrain from any unilateral action that
could complicate or hinder an early and comprehensive
settlement.
My delegation believes that the issue of the return of
the refugees and displaced persons is crucial to the
settlement of the Georgian-Abkhaz conflict. The current
situation, in which both the Government of Georgia and
the Abkhaz authorities are unable to guarantee the safety
of the displaced persons and the protection of the
repatriated under the quadripartite agreement of 4 April
1994, is unfortunate and should be reversed. To this end,
it is essential not only that suitable political and security
conditions should be established to encourage the return
of the refugees, but also that, as is reiterated in paragraph
6 of the draft resolution before us, all parties should come
to a quick acceptance of the timetable proposed by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees for voluntary returns.
The cooperation between the United Nations, the
CIS and the OSCE in the Georgian-Abkhaz conflict
augurs well for peacemaking and conflict resolution in the
post-cold-war era and therefore deserves the support of
the international community, which it needs if the desired
goal is to be achieved. Against the background of
Nigeria’s own participation in similar subregional United
Nations peace efforts in West Africa, my delegation
understands very well the vital necessity for additional
contributions to be elicited from as many States as
possible in order to support the peace process, for
otherwise that process could be unduly protracted and
difficult to resolve. We call also on the parties to
demonstrate increased flexibility and to negotiate in good
faith as well as to improve their overall cooperation with
UNOMIG and the CIS peace-keeping force.
Finally, my delegation will gladly vote in favour of
the current draft resolution, which extends UNOMIG’s
mandate for an additional period of six months, in the
conviction that UNOMIG has a continuing, vital role to
play in the search for peace in Georgia.
8
Security Council 3535th meeting
Fiftieth year 12 May 1995
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Nigeria for the kind words he
addressed to me.
Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): It gives me great pleasure
indeed to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of May.
We are confident that the Council will successfully
discharge its duties during your stewardship of its business
this month. I also wish to pay a special tribute to
Ambassador Kovanda of the Czech Republic for the
excellent manner in which he conducted the work of the
Council during the busy month of April. He is the best
slave-driver we have in the Council.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/1995/342) on the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia.
Unfortunately, what emerges from the report is not
encouraging. It is disappointing to learn that more than
300,000 men, women and children are still languishing in
the refugee camps waiting anxiously and in anguish to
return to their homes. It is most unfortunate, to say the
least, that all these innocent people had to flee their homes
in fear of their lives for no other reason but that they
happened to belong to an ethnic group wrongly considered
to be inimical to the interests of the ethnic separatists and
purists of Abkhazia. We are witnessing here a consciously
crafted policy of “ethnic cleansing”, so rightly characterized
as such by the Budapest summit of the Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE).
It is sad indeed that ethnic intolerance has uprooted a
whole people from the comfort of their homes and
subjected them to live in cramped and squalid conditions in
refugee camps. These are people who remain away from
their birthplaces against their will, and so they shall remain
for as long as the Abkhaz authorities maintain their present
separatist, ethnocentric policies.
The few people of Georgian origin who have been
brave enough to return have been tortured and murdered in
cold blood. The harsh and inhuman treatment meted out to
the few returnees is meant to frighten the refugees into
leaving Abkhazia permanently.
This state of affairs cannot go on indefinitely. History
teaches that no people can be for ever deprived of their
national birthright or forced into eternal submission. It
would not come as a surprise if in the next few weeks or
months these people decided to march en masse back to
their homes, and the consequences of such a move, given
the present mood of the Abkhaz authorities, are too ghastly
to contemplate. There is no doubt that any attempt by the
refugees to return to their homes in large numbers would
cause panic in Sukhumi and this could result in the mass
murder of the returnees by the Abkhaz militia. Yet we are
told that, in their frustration, this is what the refugees
intend to do. The international community should do
everything possible to avert this potential disaster. The
poor and deteriorating security situation in the Gali region
does not augur well for the return and resettlement of
refugees. It must be improved as a matter of urgency, and
pressure must be brought to bear on the Abkhaz
authorities to allow the return of refugees in conditions of
safety and security.
My delegation is also disappointed by the lack of
progress in the political talks. Over a year has passed
since the Council adopted resolution 881 (1993) but the
parties’ positions remain polarized. There is however a
ray of hope. The cease-fire is still holding for one thing,
and the parties have started talking again, for another.
Unfortunately, the parties continue to take two
fundamentally different approaches to the nature of the
new Constitution and the form the State should take.
The draft resolution we are about to adopt reaffirms
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Georgia with Abkhazia as an integral part thereof. It is
our hope that the talks currently taking place between the
two parties in Moscow will usher in an era of peace and
national reconciliation in a fully integrated Georgia.
My delegation supports an extension of the mandate
of UNOMIG for an additional period of eight months. We
have taken note of the Secretary-General’s concern that
an untimely withdrawal could lead to the resumption of
hostilities. At the same time, we hope that the parties to
the conflict will guarantee that this extension is used
profitably to further a peaceful settlement of the conflict,
and not to maintain or entrench the status quo. Lastly, we
are at least encouraged that there is a satisfactory level of
respect for the United Nations and its forces in Georgia,
unlike in other parts of the world where the authority of
the United Nations and its peace-keeping personnel is
defied with reckless abandon. Let me end by paying
homage to the brave men and women of UNOMIG and
the CIS peace-keeping forces for the sacrifices they are
making in Georgia to help the people of that troubled
country make peace with one another.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Botswana for the kind words he
addressed to me.
9
Security Council 3535th meeting
Fiftieth year 12 May 1995
Mr. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, my delegation would like to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of May. You can count
on my delegation’s cooperation as you discharge your
responsibilities. I should also like to congratulate His
Excellency Ambassador Kovanda, the Permanent
Representative of the Czech Republic, on the wisdom and
skill he displayed in guiding the work of the Security
Council during the month of April.
My delegation extends a cordial welcome to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Georgia and wishes him to
know that we understand better than anyone the situation in
his country because of the similarities between our two
countries. My delegation commends the Secretary-General
for his report on Georgia dated 1 May 1995. It also notes
with satisfaction the ongoing consultations aimed at
introducing a new Constitution with a view to a
comprehensive political settlement.
My delegation is however concerned at the insecurity
in the region and the violations of international
humanitarian law through the premeditated policy of
systematic elimination on the part of one party to the
conflict, with the aim of taking control of a territory by
terrorizing and massacring innocent civilians. Unfortunately,
this policy is being pursued in the name of misplaced
nationalism, ancient grievances and an avid thirst for
vengeance.
My delegation is concerned at the objection of the
Abkhaz side to facilitating the speedy return of displaced
persons and refugees. It seems to us that the most recent
proposal by the Abkhaz to repatriate a mere 200 individuals
a week is, in a sense, motivated by a policy of exploitation
that seeks to take advantage of the situation facing refugees
and displaced persons to attain other goals. For this reason,
my delegation recommends that the observers’ mandate be
strengthened so that human rights violations may be
detected. It suggests that individuals with competence and
experience be sent to Georgia, as opposed to the neophytes
that were sent to my country.
As you are aware, genocide and ethnic cleansing are
not the problem of the society or individual country
concerned; they are a universal problem. In this context, the
United Nations adopted an international convention to
which most countries have acceded. My delegation is
astonished at the failure of the countries of the region to
take action to support and save the victims of this inhuman
behaviour.
My delegation supports the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
(UNOMIG) until 12 January 1996. It also firmly supports
the proposal to establish an international tribunal to bring
the persons guilty of human rights violations to justice.
This tribunal should not be a mere clone of existing
tribunals but should be adapted to the situation prevailing
in the region and respond to the specific problems facing
the population there. My delegation also supports the idea
of establishing a federation as the key to resolving the
Georgia-Abkhaz conflict.
At a time when preparations are in full swing at the
United Nations for the commemoration of its 50th
anniversary, a few Member States are falling victim to
genocide and ethnic cleansing. The basic principles which
underpin this Organization are being flouted. The cry of
“never again” which rang out almost 50 years ago
remains a dead letter because certain Members of the
Organization are disregarding it or encouraging those who
are doing so, while others still, through their silence, are
accomplices. We do not see how the Organization will be
able to face the community of nations with its head held
high if these fundamental principles which are the very
raison d’être of the Organization are not respected.
As the wise men of the President’s country have put
it, it is never too late to do good. That is why my
delegation calls for appropriate action, by which we mean
effective action, to salvage what can be salvaged. In this
context, my delegation will cast a vote for this draft
resolution.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Rwanda for the kind words he
addressed to me.
Mr. Wang Xuexian (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): First of all, Mr. President, allow me to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency for
this month. I believe that with your vast diplomatic
experience, wisdom and talent you will guide the work of
the Security Council efficiently and guarantee constructive
results. I should also like to take this opportunity to thank
your predecessor, the Ambassador of the Czech Republic,
for his contribution to the work of the Council in the
month of April.
The Chinese delegation would like to take this
opportunity to welcome the delegation of the Republic of
Georgia and its participation in this meeting of the
10
Security Council 3535th meeting
Fiftieth year 12 May 1995
Security Council and to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Georgia for his important statement.
The Chinese delegation has always been keenly
interested in the development of the situation in Georgia.
The Chinese delegation is deeply concerned at the
insufficient progress achieved towards a comprehensive
political settlement of the question of Georgia and at the
obstruction of the return of refugees and displaced persons
in the Abkhaz region. We also believe that in seeking a
settlement of the question of Georgia the international
community must respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Georgia. In the meantime, the
rights of the peoples of all the ethnic communities in the
Abkhaz region must also be guaranteed. A sound solution
to all conflicts and contradictions should be sought through
peaceful means and negotiations.
In our view, a genuine solution to the situation in
Georgia depends on the political will of all parties
concerned. The United Nations efforts can play only a
complementary role. In this connection we would express
our appreciation for the new efforts being made by the
Government of Georgia. We express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for the
tremendous efforts they have made to achieve a political
settlement of the situation in Georgia and hope that all
parties concerned will cooperate with them in seeking
substantive progress at an early date towards a
comprehensive settlement of the question.
We note the positive role played by the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) with
respect to a political settlement and the return of refugees.
UNOMIG has also maintained good relations of cooperation
with the peace-keeping force of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS). We therefore support the proposal
of the Secretary-General to extend the mandate of
UNOMIG and we shall vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us. We hope that the draft resolution can
give new and powerful impetus to the peace process in the
Republic of Georgia.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of China for the kind words he addressed
to me.
I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/1995/384 as orally revised in its
provisional form.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Botswana, China, Czech Republic,
France, Germany, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy,
Nigeria, Oman, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
The President (interpretation from French): There
were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution as orally
revised in its provisional form has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 993 (1995).
I shall now call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements following the voting.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation
from Russian): Firstly, Mr. President, allow me to join in
congratulating you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for the month of May and to express our
delegation’s readiness to do its utmost to support you in
your work. We should also like to express our
appreciation to the Ambassador of the Czech Republic for
his excellent leadership last month.
I should also like to welcome to this meeting of the
Council the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Georgia, Alexander Chikvaidze. We listened very
carefully to his statement, and we agree with his basic
assessment of the situation.
The Russian Federation has always assumed that a
comprehensive settlement of the Georgian-Abkhaz
conflict is possible only on the basis of respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia and for the
rights of the multi-ethnic people of that country. The
resolution just adopted, in addition to the regular
extension of the mandate of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG), contains some weighty
political provisions. Its adoption is confirmation of the
international community’s commitment to ensuring a
political settlement of the conflict in Abkhazia — with
the understanding, of course, that the main responsibility
for finding ways to resolve the crisis lies with the parties
to the conflict.
The Russian Federation is seriously concerned at the
minimal progress made in the negotiations, including
those on the political status of Abkhazia. We find very
timely the Security Council’s reaffirmation of its call for
substantive progress in the Georgian-Abkhaz talks, under
United Nations auspices, which are being conducted with
the assistance of the Russian Federation as facilitator and
11
Security Council 3535th meeting
Fiftieth year 12 May 1995
with the participation of representatives of the Organization
of Security and Cooperation in Europe. The Russian side is
actively working in this direction.
During the consultations in Moscow between 18 April
and 6 May with representatives of the Government of the
Republic of Georgia and the Abkhaz leaders, it proved
possible to come up with a number of agreements in
principle. The parties reaffirmed their commitments not to
allow the resumption of armed confrontations and agreed
that they must and will live in a single State. At the same
time, however, serious differences of views remained in
their approaches to how that State should be organized. On
11 May, the consultations resumed.
I think it important that the Security Council has
welcomed and supported the continuing consultations on the
question of a new constitution for Georgia, based on
federative principles, within the context of a comprehensive
political settlement. We also appreciate the support
expressed by the Council for the Russian Federation’s
efforts as facilitator in intensifying the quest for a peaceful
settlement to the conflict. As facilitator, we attach the
greatest importance to coordinating our efforts in close
cooperation with the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for
Georgia, Ambassador Edward Brunner.
We are seriously disturbed at the unacceptably slow
rate of return of refugees, which is the fault of the Abkhaz
side. Ensuring a safe return en masse of the refugees is a
key issue whose solution will to a large extent determine
the progress made on the other problems involved in
settling the conflict. We hope that the strong position taken
by the Security Council will finally be heeded by the
Abkhaz side and have an impact on it.
We attach fundamental importance to the resolution’s
renewed call on States to contribute to the voluntary fund
in support of the implementation of the Agreement on a
Cease-fire and Separation of Forces, including demining.
We note also that the resolution expresses great
appreciation for the contribution of UNOMIG and the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) peace-keeping
force in stabilizing the situation in the zone of conflict and
satisfaction at the close cooperation between them. We
note also that it welcomed the additional measures both
have taken to improve conditions for a safe and orderly
return of refugees. We believe that those measures will help
to improve the effectiveness of both missions in Abkhazia.
We are grateful to the leadership and, indeed, to all
the personnel of UNOMIG for the extremely difficult work
they have been doing. We are pleased at the spirit of
mutual confidence and comradeship that has been
demonstrated in the day-to-day contacts between
UNOMIG and the CIS peace-keeping force.
As representative of the country presiding over the
CIS, I should like to reaffirm our readiness to develop
this cooperation further in the interests of ensuring the
optimal conditions for a political settlement. We expect
that the resolution we have just adopted will also help
achieve such a settlement.
Mr. Inderfurth (United States of America):At this
our first opportunity during the month of May, may I
extend the congratulations of my delegation to you on the
assumption of the Council presidency. Clearly, this is the
month for new French presidents. I wish to assure you of
our cooperation and support.
May I also take this opportunity to express my
delegation’s appreciation and admiration to Ambassador
Kovanda and his delegation for the Czech Republic’s
excellent stewardship of the Council during the month of
April. And, finally, may I extend my delegation’s
welcome to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Georgia
for his presence here today and through him we would
like also to extend our greetings and best wishes to
President Shevardnadze.
The Council members who informally constitute the
"Friends of Georgia" and the other members of the
Council have approached this extension of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) with an
unusually high degree of consensus. This is prompted by
developments, some positive, some negative. Like other
members of the Council, we are encouraged by the fact
that the cease-fire has, by and large, been observed by
both parties. At the same time, we share with other
members the concern over the increasing number of
violent incidents directed against innocent civilians and
against members of UNOMIG and the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) peace-keeping force, in large
part, by armed elements that the parties claim are outside
their control. Both parties to the conflict must take steps
to rein in these elements. UNOMIG will remain only as
long as the Council is satisfied that the parties are doing
their utmost to protect UNOMIG personnel.
We also join other members of the Council in noting
with encouragement the positive role UNOMIG and the
CIS peace-keeping force are playing and the effective
coordination of these two separate missions. At the same
time, however, we are profoundly disappointed at the lack
12
Security Council 3535th meeting
Fiftieth year 12 May 1995
of progress on the return of refugees and displaced persons
and on negotiations toward a political settlement of the
conflict. The parties must understand that the willingness of
the Council to continue its support of these processes
through the presence of UNOMIG depends on real progress
in these matters. The Abkhaz party must cease its
obstruction of refugee return, and both parties must work
seriously and genuinely with the Secretary-General’s
Special Envoy and with the active facilitation of the
Russian Federation toward a political settlement.
Let me clarify my Government’s support for extending
UNOMIG for approximately eight months, a longer period
than we have previously supported for UNOMIG. Our
position does not mean greater satisfaction with the
situation on the ground or with the negotiation process. Nor
does it predict infinite willingness to extend UNOMIG if its
presence is not contributing to progress toward a settlement.
Rather, we believe that, assuming the CIS Heads of States’
approval of an extension of the CIS peace-keeping
operation until 31 December 1995, the Council will be in
a better position in mid-January of 1996 to make a decision
on UNOMIG’s future, knowing the disposition of the CIS
operation.
I would also like to share a few thoughts on what my
Government sees as the vital task of enhancing UNOMIG’s
overall capabilities. While we support the important
contribution UNOMIG has made on the ground, we believe
it could be made even more effective. We would welcome
a review by the Secretary-General of UNOMIG’s budget
and operations in light of the need to contain costs
wherever possible. We are also interested in steps that
could enhance the security of UNOMIG personnel. It is
also important that UNOMIG’s mandate be completely
fulfilled, especially the directive to maintain close contacts
with both parties to the conflict and, by its presence in the
area, to contribute to conditions conducive to the safe and
orderly return of refugees and displaced persons. UNOMIG
should make better use of public information to promote
the image of the United Nations as a helpful, neutral player.
Finally, we are concerned that the UNOMIG
operations be recognized as fully supportive of Georgia’s
territorial integrity, which the Council has repeatedly
affirmed. While the Abkhaz may have de facto control over
a part of the Republic of Georgia, they do not have the
rights of a sovereign State. UNOMIG’s ability must be
consistent with the position of the Council that it does not
and will not accept Abkhaz independence.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United States for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Henze (Germany): First of all, I wish to join
other delegations in congratulating you upon assuming the
presidency of the Council. Having the privilege of
working under your guidance as President of the
European Union, it is a double pleasure for me to benefit
from your great experience and diplomatic skills. I also
would like to thank Ambassador Kovanda for his work as
President of the Council during the past month. I refuse
to join another delegate who qualified you as an able
slave-holder. It is true we worked hard under your
presidency but we did it always with pleasure.
I also would like to welcome His Excellency Mr.
Chikraidze to the Security Council. We have listened very
carefully to his statement and we share his view that
progress in the efforts to reach a political settlement is
urgently needed.
As a member of the group of "Friends of Georgia",
Germany was actively involved in the drafting of the
resolution just adopted by the Council. My delegation is
pleased that the Council was able to reach agreement
without difficulty. Today’s resolution reflects a unity of
purpose, which we hope will have a positive effect on the
parties.
On behalf of my Government, which was one of the
contributors of personnel to the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG), I would like to express
our gratitude to the Chief Military Observer, General
Hvidegaard, and to the members of UNOMIG for the
excellent work that the mission has been doing.
In this context, I would like to emphasize that we
attach great importance to the increased presence and
visibility of UNOMIG in the Gali region. The more active
role of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)
peace-keeping force is equally welcome. We hope that
UNOMIG and the CIS troops will sustain this new modus
operandi.
At the same time, the security situation in the Gali
region remains a cause for concern. The parties need to
improve their cooperation with UNOMIG and the CIS
peace-keeping force. They must fully honour their
obligations under the cease-fire agreement, particularly as
regards restrictions on weapons in the security zone. They
must ensure the safety and security of all UNOMIG and
CIS personnel as well as their freedom of movement.
13
Security Council 3535th meeting
Fiftieth year 12 May 1995
Once again, my delegation would like to express its
thanks for the briefings offered by our Russian colleagues
on the operation of the CIS peace-keeping force. We would
be grateful if this information could be made available
more frequently.
We share the great concern about the fate of the
refugees. This is a problem which has to be solved as soon
as possible. A secure environment is a prerequisite for a
large-scale return of refugees and displaced persons. In this
regard, there has been no improvement whatsoever since
the Council passed resolution 971 (1995) four months ago.
In fact, we have witnessed brutal attacks on the civilian
population. In addition to improving security, the Abkhaz
side must finally agree to a timetable for return. It must
also make good on its offer to regularize the status of those
returnees already in the Gali region, in accordance with the
Quadripartite Agreement.
Regarding the negotiations on a political settlement,
we fully support the efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Brunner. We also
appreciate the increasing amount of work that is being done
by representatives of the Russian Federation. The resolution
stresses the need for substantial progress towards a political
settlement. It also makes clear that joint effort and close
coordination among all involved is needed in order to
achieve results that meet the requirements set out by this
Council.
In this context, I would like to repeat something my
delegation has said on previous occasions. We accept that
the Abkhaz side too has legitimate concerns. Abkhazia,
with its multi-ethnic population, must be granted an
appropriate degree of regional autonomy. However, any
settlement must be in keeping with the principles set out in
the Council’s resolutions. In particular, it must respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Georgia. We are encouraged that the Georgian Government
and parliament, for their part, are ready to move towards
federal structures.
Finally, I would like to underline that my Government
regards the extension of UNOMIG’s mandate for eight
months as an exceptional measure in order to synchronize
the duration of UNOMIG’s mandate with that of the CIS
peace-keeping force. In the future, we would prefer to
return to a standard six-month period.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Germany for the kind words he
addressed to me.
Mr. Cárdenas (Argentina) (interpretation from
Spanish): I wish at the outset to express the my
delegation’s pleasure at seeing you, Sir, the representative
of France, presiding over the work of the Security
Council for this month. I take this opportunity also to
congratulate Ambassador Kovanda and the other members
of the delegation of the Czech Republic on their
outstanding work last month.
My delegation warmly welcomes the Foreign
Minister of the Republic of Georgia, who is with us this
afternoon.
My delegation thanks the Secretary-General for
having prepared the report on which we have based our
extension of the mandate of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG). In the course of our
consideration of that report, we have already stated our
concern on two points: the lack of substantive progress
towards settlement of the conflict; and the serious
situation of the human rights of refugees and displaced
persons.
Here, as in other peace-keeping operations mandated
by the Security Council, we are also concerned for full
respect for the freedom of movement of the contingents
sent to carry out these tasks, which is a key factor in
ensuring their safety and security and their very ability to
fulfil their mandate. It is, among other things, the attitude
of the parties towards peace-keeping operations that
reflects the degree of their commitment to settling the
conflict that divides them.
Moreover, we consider that, taken as a whole, the
efforts of the Government of Georgia to define and
implement a federal constitutional solution to the conflict
in the region of Abkhazia deserve sincere
acknowledgement from the Security Council and the
entire international community. In our view, full respect
for the principle of territorial integrity serves not only the
specific interests of one State but also those of the
international community as a whole.
All peace-keeping operations are different, for they
reflect the specific elements of the issues they are
intended to resolve. They all possess their own
idiosyncrasies, and because the conflicts they are designed
to deal with can change in various ways, they must be
able to adapt to these changes. We consider therefore that
Council mandates for peace-keeping operations cannot be
conceived in rigid, static terms. On the contrary, each
case demands the versatility needed to adapt the
14
Security Council 3535th meeting
Fiftieth year 12 May 1995
functioning of the operation to the specific needs of a given
conflict at each phase of its development.
Hence, given that this conflict includes elements
relating to respect for humanitarian law and for human
rights, the Council should in our view begin considering
these elements. We have learned that the presence of
civilian observer missions is often very useful in verifying
the degree of respect for these fundamental rights, as
indicated by recent experience in other regions. It would
therefore be wise to begin now to give specific
consideration to such a possibility should circumstances in
the field demand it.
In conclusion, we hope that our extension of the
mandate of UNOMIG will constitute a genuine contribution
to peace in Georgia, for that is the motivation we all share.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Argentina for the kind words he
addressed to me.
Mr. Kovanda (Czech Republic): My delegation
congratulates you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency for the month of May. Your energy and
diligence have already left a splendid imprint on the
Council’s work.
It is furthermore a great pleasure to welcome in our
midst Foreign Minister Chikvaidze and his colleagues. We
recall an equally welcome visit just about a year ago from
President Shevardnadze, from whom the Minister has
brought us greetings.
Before turning to the matter at hand, let me further
thank all those previous speakers who had words of
appreciation for my delegation’s work in April, work in
which we enjoyed the true and unstinting assistance of
every single delegation around this table — for which we
are very grateful.
The situation in Abkhazia and its fallout on the rest of
Georgia can be characterized in one sentence: Nothing
much has changed, and this is, on balance, bad. My
delegation, for one, is alarmed by this state of affairs, and
feels that several points are worth making in elaborating
upon that one sentence.
First point: The key to resolving the situation is the
return of those who have fled Abkhazia to their former
homes. Whatever political understanding might eventually
be reached by politicians of the opposing parties, it would
be intolerable if that understanding were based on
demographic changes that have been brought about by
military means. There are some 200,000 refugees and
displaced persons, and only the tiniest trickle of them is
returning under the voluntary repatriation programme. My
delegation is pleased that we are invoking the timetable
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) for the return of displaced
persons. The main obstacle to their return is still the
continuing intransigent position of Abkhaz authorities.
Second point: The most problematic region is Gali.
This is where most displaced people are from; this is
where most of them therefore want to return to; yet this
is where lawlessness is most rampant. The return of the
original population to Gali should be the cornerstone of
the whole repatriation programme. But in order for this to
succeed, their basic human rights have to be respected, a
task for which the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia (UNOMIG) does not have a mandate, let alone
the wherewithal. Today, therefore, we request the
Secretary-General to look into possibilities that might be
available for improving the observance of human rights in
the region in general.
Third point: What has been doing on in Abkhazia is
“ethnic cleansing”. Resolution 993 (1995), which we have
just adopted, recognizes this fact but couches it in
impenetrable language. Instead of calling a spade a spade,
our resolution refers to a garden, assuming that the reader
will grasp that there is a tool shed in the garden and a
spade in the tool shed. This language should be decoded,
of course, if only for the record.
We thus want to underscore here the fact that the
eighth preambular paragraph, which recalls the 1994
Budapest summit declaration of the Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe, is intended to refer
especially to the following sentence of that document:
“[The participating States] expressed their deep
concern over ethnic cleansing', the massive
expulsion of people, predominantly Georgian, from
their living areas and the deaths of large numbers of
innocent civilians.” (S/1994/1435, p. 20)
Fourth point: While we are anxious for any political
solution to the crisis that would be agreeable to both the
Government of Georgia and the Abkhaz leaders, we
welcome their understanding that such a solution is to be
based on Georgia’s territorial integrity. A federal
arrangement for the country would be very appropriate,
15
Security Council 3535th meeting
Fiftieth year 12 May 1995
with as much autonomy as feasible devolving to its
constituent parts. But we do not see much merit in a
confederation, which in practice would amount to a break-
up of the country, or in any “federation of independent
entities”, which in practice would amount to a
confederation and thus again to the break-up of the country.
This is why the resolution welcomes and encourages
consultations regarding a new constitution for the country
based precisely on federal principles.
In this context, we reiterate our full confidence in
Ambassador Brunner’s efforts in this regard, undertaken on
behalf of the Secretary-General. We also appreciate the
assistance provided by the Russian Federation as facilitator
and by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe in searching for a comprehensive political
settlement. Coordination between these several organisms
is, of course, an absolute must.
My fifth and final point, on the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) and the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) forces: We
are heartened and encouraged by their cooperation. At this
moment, they constitute a stabilizing factor rather than
one that is resolving the problem. Without their presence,
though, another flare-up of uncontrollable hostilities
would be extremely likely. This is why we are in favour
of extending the UNOMIG mandate and welcome the fact
that the CIS forces apparently intend to stay until the end
of 1995. Like other delegations, we are grateful for
information that the Russian delegation provides on the
CIS operation, and would be even more grateful if it were
more frequent and in writing.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of the Czech Republic for his kind
words addressed to me.
There are no further speakers for this meeting. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of
its consideration of the item on the agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.
16
