United Nations S/PV.3489
95-85022 (E) This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Section,
room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fiftieth Year
3489th Meeting
Friday, 13 January 1995, 12 noon
New York
President: Mr. Cárdenas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Argentina)
Members: Botswana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Legwaila
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wang Xuexian
Czech Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Rovensky
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mérimée
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Graf Zu Rantzau
Honduras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Martínez Blanco
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wisnumurti
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fulci
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ayewah
Oman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Al-Khussaiby
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Bakuramutsa
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . Sir David Hannay
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Inderfurth
Agenda
The situation in Liberia
Eighth progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL)
(S/1995/9)
1
Security Council 3489th meeting
Fiftieth year 13 January 1995
The meeting was called to order at 12.35 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Liberia
Eighth progress report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia
(UNOMIL) (S/1995/9)
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Liberia in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bull (Liberia),
took a place at the Council table.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the eighth
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Observer Mission in Liberia, document S/1995/9.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1995/22, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council’s prior
consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/1995/7, which contains the text
of a letter dated 5 January 1995 from the Permanent
Representative of Ghana to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council, and the attached
agreements.
The first speaker is the representative of Liberia, on
whom I now call.
Mr. Bull (Liberia): At the outset, Sir, I would like
to congratulate you upon your ascendancy to the
presidency of the Security Council for January 1995. The
record of your distinguished career shows us that the
deliberations of the Council will achieve every measure
of success.
I should also like to thank the Ambassador of
Rwanda for his stewardship of the Council last month,
which yielded positive results.
My delegation expresses its profound gratitude to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for his
unrelenting concern with and involvement in the Liberian
crisis. In particular we appreciate his eighth progress
report on the activities of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) and on the current status
of peace initiatives being pursued by the Chairman of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), His Excellency President Jerry Rawlings of
Ghana, and other ECOWAS leaders, in concert with the
Liberian National Transitional Government, faction
leaders, and others concerned with the conflict in
Liberia — initiatives aimed at finding an acceptable and
durable resolution of the Liberian civil war.
The useful recommendations which have been
advanced by the high-level mission led by Mr. Lansana
Kouyate, Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
and which the Secretary-General endorses in his report,
capture quite vividly the various dimensions of the
Liberian problem. My delegation shares the optimism that
if those proposals are translated into action it will not be
long before lasting peace is achieved in Liberia and the
subregion as a whole.
While it is a source of considerable regret and
disappointment to note that talks in Accra among the
faction leaders which should have culminated in the
establishment of a new Council of State appear to have
ended in a stalemate, we are hopeful that this is only a
temporary setback.
We the overwhelming majority of Liberians have
publicly declared our desire for peace. It is only in an
atmosphere of peace and stability that our national
aspirations and ambitions can be achieved. The faction
leaders must show courage and flexibility in order to
reach political accommodation and begin the process of
2
Security Council 3489th meeting
Fiftieth year 13 January 1995
national reconciliation.We therefore fervently appeal to their
sense of brotherhood and patriotism and ask them to
empathize with the unnecessary, long suffering of their
compatriots.
While we recognize that it is up to Liberians to end
the war and that the international community, particularly
States members of the Economic Community of West
African States, has expended large resources on peace-
keeping and peacemaking in Liberia, their continuing
engagement in Liberia is needed.
Even though we welcome the Secretary-General’s
recommendation for the extension of the mandate of
UNOMIL, my delegation would have preferred a longer
extension in view of UNOMIL’s direct responsibilities in
the implementation of the agreed schedule for the cease-fire
now in effect and the disarmament and demobilization of
the combatants, as well as in the holding of democratic
elections on 14 November this year.
The Secretary-General’s report emphasized the urgent
need for full compliance with the Council’s arms embargo
on Liberia. The truth of the matter is that as long as arms
are provided to the factions this will continue to result in
the use of force.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s request that an
ECOWAS summit be convened to address these and other
concerns. However, the Security Council must take
appropriate steps to ensure compliance with its own
embargo, to which I have just referred. In successive
reports to the Council, the Secretary-General has requested
the contribution of Member States to the Trust Fund for
Liberia. As the Fund is used to help provide assistance to
the troop-contributing countries, my delegation joins in the
Secretary-General’s appeal for increased contributions to it.
In this connection, we thank those countries which have
responded to the appeal and also the troop-contributing
countries.
The grave humanitarian crisis in Liberia, which the
Secretary-General highlighted in his report, continues to
deserve the international community’s sympathy and
support. We welcome the Council’s appeal for increased
humanitarian assistance as set forth in the draft resolution.
When the Liberian crisis is finally resolved, it will
herald a significant milestone in what can be attained
through regional peace-keeping buttressed by firm action
from the international community through the Security
Council. We therefore appeal for the Council’s steadfast
cooperation and support until peace is achieved in Liberia.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of Liberia for the kind words he
addressed to me.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. If I
hear no objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the
vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Wang Xuexian (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): The Liberian peace process is now at a crucial
juncture. We are pleased to note that the parties in Liberia
signed the Accra Agreement on 21 December 1994 and
thereafter entered into a comprehensive cease-fire. By no
means an easy achievement, this has laid a solid
foundation for the advancement of the peace process in
Liberia.
The reality in Liberia has once again demonstrated
that peace cannot be achieved by military means.
Persistent, patient and sincere negotiation and dialogue are
the only ways to a political solution acceptable to all the
parties to a conflict. What is important in this regard is
the political will of the parties to commit themselves to a
peaceful settlement. A conflict in a country must, in the
final analysis, be settled by its own people. The
international community, including the United Nations,
can play only a supplementary and promotive role in this
respect. We hope and believe that the Liberian parties,
acting in their national interests, will strictly implement
the provisions and the timetable set forth in the Accra
Agreement and abide by the cease-fire agreement so as to
create the conditions for the restoration of peace in
Liberia.
The Chinese delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative and the
United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL)
for their unremitting efforts to promote a political
settlement in Liberia. We are also highly appreciative of
the contributions made to the Liberian peace process by
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), and particularly by its current Chairman,
His Excellency President Rawlings of Ghana, and by the
3
Security Council 3489th meeting
Fiftieth year 13 January 1995
Military Observer Group. They have set an example for
joint efforts by the United Nations and regional
organizations in settling conflicts.
The Chinese delegation is deeply concerned at the
continued massive flow of arms into Liberia, which could
undermine the cease-fire agreement reached by the Liberian
parties and hamper the successful implementation of the
Accra Agreement. The Chinese delegation hopes that the
provisions related to the arms embargo will be strictly
observed.
The Chinese delegation has all along supported the
peace process in Liberia and the efforts by the international
community and the relevant regional organizations to bring
lasting peace to that country. It is based on this position
that we will vote in favour of the draft resolution before us.
Mr. Ayewah (Nigeria): For over four years now the
Liberian people have been at the mercy of factional leaders
and parties whose desire for power, as well as the allure of
high office, would appear to have blinded them to the need
for a negotiated settlement to their political differences. The
months immediately preceding December last year marked
such a deterioration in the political and security situation in
Liberia that the number of military observers of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) had to be
drastically reduced, the humanitarian situation worsened,
and the area controlled by the Military Observer Group of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOMOG) effectively became limited to no more than 15
per cent of the country.
Against that background, my Government and other
member States of ECOWAS welcome the recent agreement
brokered in Accra by the current Chairman of ECOWAS,
which builds upon the Yamoussoukro, Cotonou and
Akosombo agreements and includes a timetable for the
implementation of a programme leading to a cease-fire and
to elections.
Taking into account the chain of broken promises and
the bad faith so far exhibited by the parties and factions in
Liberia in relation to previous commitments, one would be
justified in being pessimistic about, if not outright
dismissive of, the possibilities and prospects of this latest
agreement. As if to justify this pessimism, we have since
learned that the latest attempt in Accra to agree on the
composition of a transitional Council for Liberia has
aborted. We regret this outcome and hope that the great
expectations that were only beginning to gain momentum
are not permanently lost.
However, because the ultimate solution to the
Liberian conflict must rest with the Liberians, one cannot
but hope that the parties will seize the opportunity of the
moment, however sad it might seem to be, in the
realization that it is futile to continue along the
destructive path of a fratricidal war whose main victims
are innocent civilians, particularly women and children.
The draft resolution before us attests to the
continuing interest of the international community in
helping the Liberians solve their own problems. My
delegation would have favoured an extension of
UNOMIL’s mandate for a six-month period, to allow
sufficient time for the initial and critical stage of the
military aspects of the Accra Agreement to commence
and be observed before the Secretary-General presented
his report to the Council. Because of the three-month
duration of the present mandate, such a report by the
Secretary-General would, of necessity, be tentative and
could give the wrong impression of the prospects for
implementing the relevant aspects of the Agreement.
My delegation has always underlined — and this has
also been recently highlighted by the Secretary-General in
his “Supplement to an Agenda for Peace” — that
ECOMOG’s operation in Liberia presents a classical
example of cooperation between a regional organization
and the United Nations in peacemaking and peace-
keeping. In this connection, the international community
has a responsibility to continue to assist the process.
Otherwise, the burden on ECOWAS countries, which is
already a matter of great concern to most Governments of
the subregion, will become even more unbearable for
their fragile economies. We look forward with particular
interest to the Secretary-General’s forthcoming report —
referred to in operative paragraph 5 of the draft resolution
before us — on the assistance needed by ECOWAS
member States in order to maintain their troops in
ECOMOG.
A very important element in the current draft
resolution relates to the continuing flow of weapons into
Liberia in violation of the arms embargo imposed by
resolution 788 (1992). This proliferation of weapons not
only complicates the prospects for disarmament but also
compounds the problems of security and jeopardizes the
safety of ECOMOG and UNOMIL personnel in the
country. It is important, as the current draft resolution
reminds us, that all Member States abide by and comply
with the embargo on deliveries of weapons and military
equipment to Liberia.
4
Security Council 3489th meeting
Fiftieth year 13 January 1995
The Nigerian Government and people continue to
expend enormous human and financial resources on the
ECOMOG operations aimed at restoring peace to the war-
torn country. We are doing so because we are convinced
that Liberia and Liberians should not be left to their own
devices in their moment of travail. What is more, the crisis
in Liberia has implications not only for that country but
also for the stability of the entire subregion of West Africa.
We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
continuing interest and involvement in the search for a
solution to the crisis in Liberia. We also thank those
Member States and organizations that have provided
financial, logistic and other forms of support to the peace-
keeping operation. We appeal to all Member States for
additional support so that Liberians may soon be able to
resume normal lives and pursue their economic
development and well-being.
Mr. Fulci (Italy): Italy will vote in favour of the draft
resolution. We now view the extension of the mandate of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL)
for three months as being of considerable advantage.
On one hand, three months is long enough to allow
verification of whether or not the Liberian factions are
complying with the Accra Agreement, signed on 21
December 1994 — in particular, the provisions relating to
the cease-fire and the establishment of the Council of State.
Unfortunately, as has been mentioned by other members of
the Council, the parties were unable last night to reach
agreement on the composition of the Council of State,
which has therefore not been installed. Thus, the schedule
agreed upon in Accra has been delayed.
On the other hand, the extension is short enough to
issue a clear warning, a clear signal, to the parties that the
time has come for them to demonstrate — and to
demonstrate by deeds, not by words only — their
willingness to ensure peace in their country. Too many
times they have failed to abide by agreements they signed.
Too often the factions have resumed fighting, making it
impossible for the international relief organizations to
deliver much-needed humanitarian assistance, prolonging
the suffering of the civilian population and plunging its
country into an ever-worsening humanitarian and economic
crisis. The parties should therefore, without delay, resume
their negotiations.
Today’s draft resolution also calls for tightening of the
application of the arms embargo. In this sense, let a clear
message go out to the countries concerned: no peace will be
reached until the arms flow across the Liberian borders is
interrupted.
The case of Liberia seems emblematic of the
collaboration that there should be between the United
Nations and the regional organizations in the area of
conflict prevention and the maintenance of peace. Africa’s
regional organizations recently showed their willingness
to play a concrete role in the maintenance of peace and
security in their respective geopolitical areas and are
equipping themselves with mechanisms for conflict
prevention and management and the settlement of
disputes.
Italy, but not only Italy, understands and welcomes
the growing aspiration of the African countries to play a
more effective role, despite the fact that there are still
some inadequacies in the structure that is available to
them — a structure that we hope will soon be reinforced.
The draft resolution that is before the Council today
also acknowledges the crucial role played by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), particularly by the Community’s current
Chairman, President Rawlings of Ghana, whose
diplomatic efforts in the negotiation process that led to
the recent developments in Liberia deserve full
recognition. We strongly hope that these efforts, including
a summit of the ECOWAS States, will continue, thus
improving the prospects for a lasting solution to the
conflict.
We ask the Ambassador of Liberia, who is sitting at
the Security Council table today, to transmit this message
of hope and encouragement to his country and his people.
Let me conclude by reiterating my country’s
willingness to support the African countries’ bid for a
more direct role in conflict prevention and management
on their continent and to strive for more effective
coordination between them and the United Nations. Italy
hopes very much that the conflict in Liberia will very
soon come to an end and that peace and prosperity will
be restored in that country.
Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): My delegation is
gratified that the Security Council agrees that it is
necessary to extend the mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia by three months — although
some of us would have preferred a longer extension.
5
Security Council 3489th meeting
Fiftieth year 13 January 1995
The report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Liberia is informative. My delegation is pleased with it and
would like to thank the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative for their tireless efforts in the search for
peace in Liberia. We should also like to thank and
congratulate States members of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) — particularly its
Chairman, President Jerry Rawlings of Ghana — in respect
of the current breakthrough in the peace process in Liberia,
as envisaged in the Accra Agreement.
The Accra Agreement offers perhaps the brightest ray
of hope for the people of Liberia. It has brought about a
cease-fire, which took effect on 28 December 1994. It also
contains a clear programme of action for the peace process.
Granted, Liberia has in the past seen the signing of cease-
fire agreements that were never respected. It is our fervent
hope, however, that this time the leaders of the parties to
the Accra Agreement will not renege on their commitment
to a peaceful solution to the Liberian crisis.
It would be disheartening and disappointing for my
delegation if any of the Liberian parties were to dishonour
their commitment to yet another cease-fire. Unfortunately,
we are already disheartened and disappointed by the
suspension of the talks in Accra. But by their own
agreement the Liberian parties are obliged fully to
implement and honour the Accra Agreement. It is their
bounden duty to uphold the cease-fire, ensure the
installation of the Council of State and commit themselves
to the demobilization, encampment and disarming of their
militias. They should see to it that humanitarian assistance
reaches its intended target groups by ensuring the security
of organizations involved in distributing relief supplies to
displaced persons.
The crucial role that has been and continues to be
played by the countries contributing troops to the ECOWAS
Military Observer Group (ECOMOG) cannot be
overemphasized. In his report the Secretary-General has
highlighted the need for assistance to be given to these
Member States. We appeal to the international community
to render all the necessary assistance to ECOMOG so that
it can continue its work without interruptions caused by
financial, logistical and other problems. They are doing a
difficult and very important job on behalf of all of us, and
they deserve the support of the international community.
By resolution 788 (1992), the Security Council
imposed an embargo on all deliveries of weapons and
military equipment to Liberia. The continued proliferation
of weapons into Liberia not only violates the provisions of
that resolution, but also has a destabilizing effect on both
the peace process in Liberia and stability in the subregion
at large. It is important that the enforcement of that
embargo should continue to be tightened. In addition, my
delegation believes that the idea of a summit meeting for
ECOWAS member States is a brilliant one which should
be brought to fruition in the near future in order to bring
about, among other things, the harmonization and
consolidation of a subregional approach to the Liberian
question at this important juncture in the peace process.
Let me conclude by repeating that durable peace can
come to Liberia only if the Liberians themselves are
ready — sincerely and seriously ready — to work for it.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I now
put to the vote the draft resolution contained in document
S/1995/22.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Argentina, Botswana, China, Czech
Republic, France, Germany, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy,
Nigeria, Oman, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
The President (interpretation from Spanish): There
were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 972 (1995).
I shall now call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements following the voting.
Mr. Mérimée (France) (interpretation from French):
France has followed with interest the latest developments
in the situation in Liberia. It is pleased at the conclusion
of the Accra Agreement, which at long last provides a
glimmer of hope for peace for Liberia. France pays
tribute to the Chairman of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) for his efforts to
reconcile the factions. It hopes that the commitments
undertaken by all the Liberian parties will this time be
respected. It deeply regrets that the Accra talks on the
setting up of the Council of State have failed, and it calls
upon the parties to set up without delay this organ that is
so essential for the transition.
My delegation voted in favour of this resolution,
which extends the mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) for three months,
to enable the parties to provide concrete proof of their
6
Security Council 3489th meeting
Fiftieth year 13 January 1995
good will and spirit of responsibility. It is once again being
made clear that the international community and the United
Nations cannot take the place of the Liberians; they alone
are responsible for their country’s fate. The French
Government urges the Liberian factions to respect the
cease-fire concluded on 28 December last and calls for
strict implementation of the arms embargo. My Government
supports the Secretary-General’s recommendation for the
holding of a summit of the Heads of State of the region to
harmonize their policies towards Liberia and promote the
implementation of the Accra Agreement. The continuation
of the conflict in Liberia is truly a threat to the stability of
the region.
The humanitarian situation, which, as the Secretary-
General stresses, has left the population in extreme distress,
is of deep concern to my country. France is providing
humanitarian assistance, particularly within the framework
of the European Union. The United Nations and the
non-governmental organizations are doing all they can to
come to the aid of the civilian population. It is absolutely
shocking that material and other supplies intended to assist
people are plundered and that the life and freedom of
movement of the personnel of these organizations are
threatened. My delegation therefore calls upon the parties
to respect their commitments and to ensure that the military
commanders in the field allow assistance to reach its
destination.
At the end of the three-month period, which will serve
as a test of the good will of the Liberian factions, my
country will be ready to consider possible recommendations
by the Secretary-General for augmenting UNOMIL’s
resources and functions.
Sir David Hannay (United Kingdom): My delegation
welcomes the signing of the Accra Agreement as a positive
step towards the solution of the Liberian conflict. It is right
that, in the light of this development and, in particular, the
implementation of a cease-fire, the United Nations should
maintain its involvement in the peace process in Liberia,
and it is for this reason that my delegation was pleased to
vote for the resolution just adopted.
The successful conclusion of the Accra Agreement is
due in very large part to the efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and, in
particular, its current Chairman, President Rawlings of
Ghana, who has shown admirable persistence and
commitment in bringing all the factions together to hammer
out a solution. We commend his efforts and those of the
ECOWAS Military Observer Group (ECOMOG), which has
been playing a valuable peace-keeping role in the country.
The efforts of ECOWAS, ECOMOG, the United Nations
and its Member States represent an enormous
commitment on the part of the international community to
reaching a settlement to the conflict in Liberia. We urge
the Liberian factions now to demonstrate similar
commitment and to uphold the cease-fire and implement
the other provisions of the Accra Agreement in
accordance with the agreed timetable, including the
prompt installation of the Council of State.
One of the very important issues covered in the
resolution we have just adopted is that of reminding all
Member States of their obligation strictly to abide by, and
comply with, the arms embargo. The damaging effect of
the brutal conflict in Liberia, not only on the people of
that country but also on Liberia’s neighbours, is a matter
of great concern to my delegation. The conflict is
sustained by arms traffic across and within Liberia’s
borders, which can only increase the risk of regional
destabilization. My Government attaches great importance
to the effective implementation of this arms embargo by
all.
Finally, let me say that, as the Council adopts this
resolution today, my delegation has to admit to the feeling
that we have been here before. Throughout the Liberian
conflict we have seen a number of agreements signed,
each one seeming to offer a way out of the impasse
reached. Each time, the Security Council has expressed its
support for the peace process and underlined its
willingness to work with the factions and with ECOMOG
to help bring about a solution to the conflict which is
having such a devastating impact on the lives of the
people of Liberia. It is our sincere hope that this time the
agreement into which the mediators have put such
commendable effort will be translated into deeds and that
by the time we review the mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) again in April
we will have seen concrete evidence of the commitment
of the Liberian factions to the peace their country
desperately needs.
The news we have heard this morning, alas, of the
failure of the Accra talks so far to reach a decision on the
installation of the Council of State is discouraging indeed,
and it hardly augurs well for that review or for the hopes
for peace in Liberia.
Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): My delegation, at the
outset, would like to register its sincere appreciation for
the succinct and useful report of the Secretary-General
7
Security Council 3489th meeting
Fiftieth year 13 January 1995
contained in document S/1995/9 of 6 January 1995, the
eighth in the series of progress reports on the United
Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL).
We also commend and express appreciation to the
Secretary-General and his former Special Representative,
Mr. Trevor Gordon-Somers, for the untiring efforts to bring
about peace in Liberia. We welcome the appointment of
Mr. Anthony Nyakyi as the Secretary-General’s new
Special Representative for Liberia; we hope that he will
enjoy success in carrying out his new duties.
We pay tribute to the members of the high-level
mission dispatched to the Member States of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in order to
find ways for reviving the peace process and achieving
reconciliation among the Liberian factions. The mission, led
by Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs Mr.
Lansana Kouyaté, carried out extensive consultations
throughout West Africa to facilitate a new political
accommodation among Liberians, an accommodation which
would be possible only if it was supported by a common
policy of the neighbouring States directly involved with
Liberia.
My delegation is pleased to note that all the Liberian
parties succeeded in signing an agreement on 21 December
1994 in Accra. Since this Accra Agreement has been signed
by all the factions currently involved in the conflict, we
think it appropriate to extend our appreciation to the
Chairman of ECOWAS, President Jerry Rawlings of Ghana,
for his success in carrying out the principal negotiations
among the parties concerned. His initiatives substantially
helped in overcoming the parties’ differences; this
subsequently led to the signing of the Agreement. In this
regard, we also commend the positive role played by the
Foreign Ministers of the ECOWAS Committee of Nine on
Liberia.
As pointed out by the Secretary-General in his report,
the Liberian parties have signed many peace agreements but
have failed to implement them. Hence, we hope that all
Liberian parties will now begin to adhere to the Accra
Agreement and substantially demonstrate their readiness to
implement it fully. We believe that the observance of a
cease-fire as of 28 December 1994 could lead to the
holding of the free and fair elections which are now
scheduled for 14 November 1995, and also to the
installation of the elected government on 1 January 1996.
We are also in a position to support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation for the convening of a summit of
ECOWAS leaders to coordinate and harmonize their
policies on Liberia and promote implementation of the
Accra Agreement.
The political future of Liberia depends on the
Liberians. Therefore, they must strive to demonstrate
further their political will and sustained commitment to
peace and stability in their country. This would entail
their actively facilitating the safe delivery of international
humanitarian assistance throughout the country. In this
regard, my delegation calls upon all Liberians to
cooperate fully with the activities undertaken by the
ECOWAS Military Observer Group (ECOMOG) and the
United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL).
Since the peace process in Liberia is now entering a
crucial moment, by voting for the resolution the Council
has just adopted my delegation has indicated its support
for UNOMIL’s continued presence in Liberia.
The resolution that has just been adopted by the
Council extends the mandate of UNOMIL for another
three months beginning on 13 January 1995. This reflects
the unanimous determination of the international
community and the commitment it has undertaken in
favour of an early and peaceful solution to the conflict on
the basis of the Accra Agreement, including its timetable
for implementation of its provisions — and this process
has already dragged on for far too long.
We hope that the talks on the composition of the
Council of State, as referred to in the Accra Agreement,
can be resumed immediately and that agreement can be
reached as soon as possible.
The extension of the mandate ought to be seen as an
opportunity for the parties to the conflict to respect the
cease-fire and implement all the relevant agreements. It is
our hope that within this period the Liberian parties will
be afforded a significant opportunity to demonstrate their
willingness to solve their own problems and to respect the
role of international, regional and subregional
organizations.
Mr. Inderfurth (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to support extension of the
mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia (UNOMIL) for another three months. This follows
the agreement of 21 December among the Liberian parties
on a cease-fire and a political process for ending their
five-year civil war. We commend President Jerry
Rawlings of Ghana, Chairman of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), for his
8
Security Council 3489th meeting
Fiftieth year 13 January 1995
success in facilitating the peace agreement. We also
commend Trevor Gordon-Somers, who was then the Special
Representative of the United Nations Secretary General, the
Organization of African Unity, the ECOWAS Committee of
Nine, and Nigeria, the major contributor to ECOMOG, for
their supportive roles in this achievement. It is now up to
the Liberian people themselves to demonstrate their
commitment to peace by doing all in their power to
implement fully the provisions of the peace agreement.
In this regard, we are concerned by the inability of the
Liberian parties to agree on the composition of the new
Council of State at the recent meetings in Accra, and urge
the parties to overcome the obstacles encountered in their
deliberations on this matter.
UNOMIL, in conjunction with ECOMOG, has a
critical role to play. It is already engaged in monitoring the
28 December cease-fire and, providing the cease-fire holds,
will soon begin monitoring the disarmament process,
supervising demobilization of combatants and reintegrating
them into peaceful society, and assisting ECOMOG in
overseeing overall implementation of the peace agreement.
If implementation of the peace agreement proceeds and the
cease-fire is maintained, UNOMIL should be returned to
the level authorized by resolution 866 (1993).
The United States strongly supports humanitarian
efforts to alleviate the suffering of the hundreds of
thousands of persons displaced by the conflict. We urge all
members of the international community to help further the
peace process in Liberia and to support international and
regional efforts to aid implementation of the Accra
Agreement. The United States hopes that other States
Members of the United Nations will contribute generously
to the United Nations Trust Fund for Liberia, as the United
States has already done, because the Fund is a tangible
expression of support for the Liberian people’s desire for
peace. We hope that peace will return to Liberia in 1995.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian): In Russia we are greatly concerned by the
complex military, political and humanitarian situation in
which Liberia finds itself. We share the assessment and
recommendations set out in the Secretary-General‘s report
of 6 January 1995, which in our view adequately reflects
the situation in Liberia.
The draft resolution that the Council has adopted today
provides for the optimum period for which in present
conditions the mandate of the United Observer Mission in
Liberia (UNOMIL) can be extended. It sends all the
Liberian sides a clear signal that they must strictly
implement all the provisions of the peace agreement
relating to the timetable for their implementation. To
judge by the latest information from Accra, the sides have
not yet fully realized the importance of consistent actions
in that specific direction. We therefore call upon them, as
a first step and without delay, to set up the Council of
State and to resume negotiations to that end.
In this context, and taking into account the
experience of the past few years, we consider appropriate
the linkage in the resolution of the establishment of the
former level of UNOMIL personnel with the existence,
first and foremost, of a stable cease-fire in Liberia.
Russia has always considered that the active
participation of African countries in the achievement of a
settlement in Liberia is important in principle for that
country‘s return to the path of peaceful, democratic
development. We wish to single out the constructive role
of the current Chairman of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), Mr. Rawlings, President
of Ghana. We consider that the countries that are
participating in ECOWAS and in the ECOWAS Military
Observer Group (ECOMOG) are playing a key role in
preventing Liberia from sliding into complete military and
political anarchy and in preventing the breakup of the
country — which, without any doubt, would have serious
negative consequences for the entire region.
For that reason we view as most important the
provisions in the resolution for strengthening the potential
of ECOMOG, including through the help of the
international community, and the provisions on convening
a summit of the leaders of the ECOWAS States with a
view to harmonizing their policies on Liberia and
promoting the implementation of the Accra Agreement,
through, among other things, tightening the embargo on
the supply of arms to Liberia. If this agreement is carried
out, then the crisis in Liberia can be overcome, and this,
in our opinion, can serve as an example of the successful
settlement of a conflict situation on the African continent
by forces of the Africans themselves and as an example
of the effective interaction of the international community,
as represented by the United Nations, and regional
peacemaking mechanisms.
Mr. Biontino (Germany): Germany views the
signing of the Accra Agreement by all the Liberian
parties concerned as an encouraging step towards peace
in Liberia. The Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), under the current leadership of
9
Security Council 3489th meeting
Fiftieth year 13 January 1995
President Rawlings of Ghana, has played a most important
role in securing this Agreement. We hope that, together
with the Akosombo Agreement and the underlying Cotonou
Agreement, it will prove to be the basis for a more dynamic
peace process in Liberia.
We voted in favour of extending the mandate of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) for
three months. During this extension the Liberian parties will
have to prove their commitment to the peace process. In
this respect, we are deeply concerned about the failure of
the Liberian parties to reach agreement on the composition
of the Council of State as stipulated in the Accra
Agreement. It is crucial that the cease-fire, the agreed
timetable towards a peaceful settlement of the conflict, and
the other relevant aspects of the Accra Agreement be
respected meticulously. Otherwise the Council will not be
able to examine UNOMIL’s mandate more thoroughly.
While it is important to be cautious today, this does
not mean that we should hesitate to assist the peace process
in Liberia. In this respect, I should like to point out the
important role which the Cease-fire Monitoring Group of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOMOG), together with UNOMIL, is playing in securing
such a process. This shows how regional and subregional
organizations can assist the United Nations in maintaining
international peace and security. We know that the African
countries contributing to ECOMOG are shouldering a heavy
burden and we think that they should be assisted. I am glad
to recall that my Government has offered ECOMOG 35
trucks to help it carry out its mandate.
The Security Council and the international community
can assist the peace process. But the various Liberian
parties are ultimately responsible for the future of their
country. It is up to them to advance the process of national
reconciliation and thus to lay the foundations for a lasting
peace. We call on them truly to respect the Accra
Agreement as well as the Akosombo and Cotonou
Agreements, to which they have committed themselves. The
international community can assist the Liberians, but only
they can achieve true peace.
Mr. Bakarumutsa (Rwanda) (interpretation from
French): Since this is the first time that I have personally
spoken in the Council, permit me to congratulate you, Sir,
on your accession to the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. Rwanda is confident that with your
experience and competence you will lead the work of the
Council successfully. We can assure you of our
cooperation.
It is an honour for the delegation of Rwanda to
welcome the new members of the Security Council and to
assure them of our full and fruitful cooperation this year.
My delegation wishes to pay a wholehearted tribute
to the Secretary-General for his report dated 6 January
1995 (S/1995/9) on the United Nations Observer Mission
in Liberia (UNOMIL). We wish also to extend deep
thanks to the current Chairman of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
President of Ghana; to all the States members of
ECOWAS; to the personnel of the ECOWAS Cease-fire
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG); and to the international
community for their invaluable support for the peace
process in Liberia.
In regard to the Liberian conflict and its disastrous
effects on neighbouring countries, the delegation of
Rwanda deplores the deterioration of the situation in
Liberia caused by the non-compliance with the letter of
the Cotonou and Accra agreements signed in 1993 and
1994.
At this time when the peace process in Liberia is
proceeding in fits and starts and therefore dampening the
international community’s optimism, the delegation of
Rwanda believes the Accra Agreement to be an oasis of
hope in a desert almost totally devoid of peace.
My delegation nevertheless deplores a widespread
attitude in the Security Council vis-à-vis the resolution of
African conflicts. It became clear in 1994 alone that in
some cases the withdrawal of troops led to massacres. In
the case of another African country, the decision by the
United Nations to disengage its forces was not the best
solution for the people of that country who were victims
of warlords.
In the case of Liberia, the decision to extend the
presence of UNOMIL’s peace forces by three months has
not been taken for the good of the population but is,
instead, a solution based on a strategy of threatening the
parties to the conflicts.
Africa is going through a period of crisis and its
effects are not felt by just one country. At the same time,
Africa is at a stage of advanced marginalization in many
spheres as compared to the rest of the world.
The search for solutions to conflicts like the one in
Liberia should not be limited to a three-month period.
Only a process, a slow path, can lead to consensus by all
10
Security Council 3489th meeting
Fiftieth year 13 January 1995
parties concerned. This is evidenced by the fact that in
other regions of the world the Council has acted differently.
As a gesture of solidarity and cooperation, my
delegation voted in favour of the extension of UNOMIL’s
mandate until 13 April 1995, but we promise the Council
that we will return to this matter at an appropriate
moment.
Meanwhile, my delegation encourages and supports
all efforts undertaken by the countries of the subregion to
assist in speeding up the implementation of the provisions
of the various peace agreements in Liberia.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of Liberia for his kinds words
addressed to me.
There are no other names on the list of speakers.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.
11
