United Nations S/PV.3660
96-85597 (E) This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fifty-first Year
3660th Meeting
Friday, 26 April 1996, 4 p.m.
New York
President: Mr. Somavía . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Chile)
Members: Botswana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Nkgowe
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Qin Huasun
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Elaraby
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dejammet
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Henze
Guinea-Bissau . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Queta
Honduras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Martínez Blanco
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wibisono
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ferrarin
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Matuszewski
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Park
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Sir John Weston
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Gnehm
Agenda
Letter dated 9 January 1996 from the Permanent Representative of Ethiopia to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council concerning the extradition of the suspects wanted in the assassination attempt on
the life of the President of the Arab Republic of Egypt in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, on 26 June 1995 (S/1996/10)
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council resolution 1044 (1996) (S/1996/179)
Security Council 3660th meeting
Fifty-first year 26 April 1996
The meeting was called to order at 4.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 9 January 1996 from the Permanent
Representative of Ethiopia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning the extradition of the suspects wanted in the
assassination attempt on the life of the President of the
Arab Republic of Egypt in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, on
26 June 1995 (S/1996/10)
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1044 (1996)
(S/1996/179)
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Ethiopia, Sudan and Uganda, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Eteffa
(Ethiopia) and Mr. Yassin (Sudan) took seats at the
Council table; Mr. Mukasa-Ssali (Uganda) took the
seat reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 1044 (1996),
document S/1996/179.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1996/293, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Botswana, Chile, Egypt, Guinea-
Bissau and Honduras.
I should like to draw the attention of the members to
a technical correction in the English text of the draft
resolution. In the second line of subparagraph 1 (a) of the
operative part, insert the word “of” after the word
“prosecution”.
Furthermore, I wish to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to the following other
documents: S/1996/197, S/1996/201, letters dated 14 and
15 March 1996, respectively, from the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General; S/1996/226,
S/1996/246, S/1996/255 and S/1996/311, letters dated
28 March, 4 April, 8 April and 22 April 1996,
respectively, from the Permanent Representative of the
Sudan to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council; S/1996/271, letter dated 11 April
1996 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of the Sudan to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General; S/1996/254 and S/1996/264, letters
dated 8 April and 11 April 1996, respectively, from the
Permanent Representative of Ethiopia to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council; S/1996/288, letter dated 15 April 1996 from the
Permanent Representative of Uganda to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council; and S/1996/294, letter dated 12 April 1996 from
the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the
Central African Republic to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
The first speaker is the representative of the Sudan,
on whom I now call.
Mr. Yassin (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic): I
should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month. We are
fully confident in your ability to lead the work of the
Council to the desired success and to permit transparency
in its work. We would also like to express our
appreciation to your predecessor, Mr. Legwaila of
Botswana, for his presidency of the Council last month.
When Security Council resolution 1044 (1996) was
adopted, the pretexts used by the Council were the claims
that Sudan had not complied with the requests of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) as contained in its
statements issued on 11 September 1995 and
19 December 1995. Regardless of the validity of these
claims, the objective of Security Council resolution
1044 (1996), as was reaffirmed by most of the members
of the Council at that time, was to reaffirm the strong will
2
Security Council 3660th meeting
Fifty-first year 26 April 1996
of the international community to combat terrorism, to
pursue terrorists and to support the efforts of the
Organization of African Unity to arrive at a solution to the
problem.
It is abundantly clear from the consultations that were
held prior to the adoption of Security Council resolution
1044 (1996) and the language used by the Council in its
provisions that the emphasis is placed on the particular
importance of the United Nations providing the necessary
support for the OAU Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution so that it can arrive at an
appropriate formula to resolve that question.
It is true that the provisions of Chapter VIII of the
Charter establish the legal framework for cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
including the OAU. Yet we find that the States parties to
the current dispute have resorted directly to the United
Nations in order for it to adopt measures to condemn and
punish Sudan. The OAU Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution was established
originally to play that role. It should have been given the
opportunity it needed to prove its ability in this regard and
should be enabled to intervene appropriately in the initial
stages of any dispute in order for those disputes to be
settled at the regional level. That organization’s familiarity
with the conditions obtaining in the region makes it more
capable of using preventive diplomacy to contain disputes
and minimize their negative effects. This is one of the most
important reasons that inspired the Council to adopt the
aforementioned resolution, thus providing the necessary
flexibility for complementarity between the responsibilities
of the United Nations and those of the Organization of
African Unity.
The OAU has spared no effort in its search for a
solution to that dispute, and it is continuing its activities in
that regard. The matter is expected to be discussed at the
summit on the conflict-settlement Mechanism next month.
We would like to recall that the Secretary-General of
the OAU, in speaking to the President of the Council for
last month, affirmed that the OAU was continuing its
efforts to resolve the question. He also reaffirmed Sudan’s
seriousness and its willingness to cooperate with the
Organization in order to arrive at that objective, despite the
fact Security Council resolution 1044 (1996) contradicts
that of the conflict-settlement Mechanism.
Despite the fact that the report (S/1996/179) of the
Secretary-General submitted pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1044 (1996) expresses the intention of the
Secretary-General to remain in close contact with all
parties concerned and with the Secretary-General of the
OAU with regard to all aspects of the resolution, we find
today that the Security Council is meeting in order to
adopt coercive measures against the Sudan. Thus, we
wonder about the value of Security Council resolution
1044 (1996), which is aimed primarily at giving the OAU
the opportunity it needs to do its work. What has the
Security Council done to assist that Organization? Has the
OAU officially informed the Security Council of the steps
it has taken in that regard? What has the OAU said about
Sudan’s cooperation with it? Has the conflict-settlement
Mechanism reached a dead end, making it impossible for
it to solve the question, and therefore making it
incumbent on the Security Council to discharge its
responsibility under the Charter?
The draft resolution the Council intends to adopt
today falls within the framework of the measures
provided for in Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter. We must pause here for a second to recall the
following.
Security Council resolution 1044 (1996), for the
reasons mentioned above, contains no condemnation of
Sudan: it only calls on Sudan to comply with the
resolutions of the OAU, under Chapter VI of the Charter.
Furthermore, the Security Council resolution did not take
the form of a warning to be followed by sanctions
because that was not the main objective of its adoption,
especially considering that the Security Council did not
consider the substance of the dispute and considered what
the OAU had done to be sufficient in that regard.
After the adoption of the resolution, both the United
Nations and the OAU took a number of steps to find a
way out of the current crisis. In implementation of
paragraph 7 of the resolution, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations travelled to the
region, covering Ethiopia, Eritrea, Uganda, Sudan, Egypt
and Tunisia. He prepared a report of bizarre content and
form, in which he referred to some of what had been said
by the States neighbouring Sudan, two of which are
parties to the current dispute — and one of those two did
not state that Sudan was trying to create instability — and
two of which are antagonistic to Sudan and support
separatist rebels along its borders with Sudan. As for the
fifth State, many people do not understand why it was
covered in the Secretary-General’s mission, not being a
neighbouring State of Sudan.
3
Security Council 3660th meeting
Fifty-first year 26 April 1996
As is well known, Sudan has 10 neighbouring States.
The Secretary-General’s selection of only those four
neighbouring States displays a premeditated intention to
collect accusations and fabrications in order to tarnish
Sudan’s reputation at any price. Why did the Special
Envoy’s trip not cover the other six neighbouring States?
The claim in the Secretary-General’s report that all the
neighbours of Sudan visited by his Special Envoy accused
it of supporting its terrorist activities within their territories
reaffirms the validity of what we have said.
I would like to ask the Council to pause with us here
to wonder how the Secretary-General came to formulate the
mission of his Special Envoy in that way? That is to say,
why did he limit the scope of that trip to only those States
that were visited? Limiting the Special Envoy’s trip to those
States meant that he was going only to come back with the
same fabrications that were repeated by some States before
this Council. Indeed, it was a strange mission.
The claim by the Secretary-General and his Special
Envoy is a mere fabrication based on no facts and with no
connection to reality. On the very day on which the Council
met to adopt resolution 1044 (1996), the President of Sudan
was participating in the tripartite summit held in Bangui on
31 January and 1 February and attended by the Presidents
of Sudan, the Central African Republic and Chad. In their
final communiqué, the Presidents reaffirmed the need to
make the triangle of Sudan, the Central African Republic
and Chad a model of regional cooperation and integration
on all levels. The meetings demonstrated the Sudan’s keen
interest in developing good-neighbourly relations with its
neighbours and their appreciation of the Sudan’s role and
potential.
Convinced of the Sudan’s earnestness in achieving that
cooperation and of its good-neighbourly intentions, the
President of the Central African Republic, Mr. Ange-Félix
Patassé, sent a letter to the President of the Security
Council (S/1996/294) in which he referred to the tripartite
summit, aimed at maintaining peace and security, which are
essential conditions for lasting development. The letter
appealed to the Security Council to search for a peaceful
solution precluding punitive measures against the Sudan,
which might compromise regional initiatives and set back
progress towards cooperation and development. Such
measures would be in contravention of the Charter and its
lofty principles.
As a reaffirmation of its commitment to those
principles, the Sudan participated in the summit meetings
of the Inter-Governmental Authority on Drought and
Development (IGADD) held in Nairobi on 21 March. In
his statement at that summit, the President of the Sudan
reaffirmed the Sudan’s commitment to the policies of
good-neighbourliness and the development of regional and
bilateral cooperation with all its neighbours. He referred
to the potential and capacities of the States of the region
to set aside their temporary differences and to concentrate
on the development of their peoples. The final statement
of that summit stresses that the Presidents reaffirmed their
full commitment to improving regional and bilateral
relations between them and to the peaceful settlement of
the current disputes. The statement emphasized their focus
on the need for peace as an essential condition for
development.
It is worth noting that the Sudan supported the
Eritrean candidacy for the post of Executive Secretary in
order to achieve the necessary consensus. IGADD will
hold a ministerial meeting this month in Djibouti to
implement the summit’s decisions.
In response to Malawi’s initiative to normalize
relations between the Sudan and Uganda, as well as to the
invitation of that country’s Government, the delegation of
the Sudan in the multilateral monitoring group travelled
to Malawi in mid-January to attend a meeting aimed at
pursuing those efforts, but the Ugandan delegation was
unable to attend.
At the domestic level, the President of the Republic
made an important statement at the inaugural session of
the new Parliament in which he said that the Sudan, as an
expression of its free will and not of fear, wished to
improve relations in all forms with all its neighbours, in
particular sisterly Egypt. This is how the Sudan views its
relations with its neighbours, which the Secretary-General
should not have ignored in his report.
Furthermore, observers had hoped that the visit of
the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy would achieve
some positive results as regards narrowing differences and
helping the parties to open channels of communication in
order to exchange information and to clarify the facts.
The Special Envoy did not even meet those accused of
the assassination attempt, who are being held by Ethiopia
and on whose confessions it is to be assumed that
Ethiopia is basing its accusations and claims against the
Sudan. It is regrettable that such a meeting did not occur.
The Secretary-General’s Special Envoy had
preconceptions of the Sudan as a State that supports
terrorism and does not respect good-neighbourly relations.
4
Security Council 3660th meeting
Fifty-first year 26 April 1996
His mission was to collect all information that might
support such claims from the States neighbours of that
country and even from some that are at a great distance
from it. During his visit to the Sudan, the Special Envoy
discovered the reality of developments in the Sudan, in
particular the efforts being made by the Government to
comply with the resolutions of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution and of the Security Council.
All this has occurred despite the inadequacy of the
information requested. This was a great effort in view of
the weak technical support available in the country.
The Secretary-General’s claim that the Sudan has not
complied with paragraph 4 of resolution 1044 (1996) is
indeed amazing. Paragraph 4 (a) of that resolution calls
upon the Government of the Sudan to comply with the
requests of the Organization of African Unity by
immediately extraditing to Ethiopia for prosecution the
three suspects. We wish particularly to stress here that the
Council has, in a dubious and suspicious manner, ignored
the text of the OAU Mechanism of 12 December 1995, in
which it called on all the parties to the dispute to cooperate
and to provide all the necessary data and information that
could help the Government of the Sudan to search for and
locate the suspects and extradite them to the Ethiopian
authorities.
Instead, it should be noted that the Security Council
not only ignored this particular paragraph of the OAU
resolution, but asserted in paragraph 4 (a) that the suspects
are sheltering in the Sudan. It should also be noted that the
resolution deliberately avoided any reference to the fact that
the suspects are Egyptian citizens. Moreover, the
international community has followed the circumstances
related to the resolution, foremost among which is that the
Council failed to consider the substance of these claims and
has not decided upon them. It has merely confined itself to
urging the Sudan to cooperate with the OAU.
As to the extradition of the suspects, the Government
has declared its full readiness to apprehend them once it
knows their location and subsequently to extradite them to
Ethiopia. The Government has informed the Secretary-
General’s Special Envoy of all the steps it has taken in this
regard. It has given him a full dossier, contained in
document S/1996/197, outlining all the details of the
Government’s efforts to search for the suspects and
apprehend them. It has called upon Egypt and Ethiopia to
cooperate and exchange information in order to clarify the
situation with regard to the suspects and to discover their
whereabouts.
Would it be fair to describe all these efforts of the
Sudan as constituting non-compliance with resolution
1044 (1996)? None of these efforts is referred to
anywhere in the draft resolution before the Council today.
When one reads the Secretary-General’s report, it is not
very difficult to perceive all the signs of injustice it
contains. It does not reflect the truth and is biased against
the Sudan.
The move by some States to persuade the Council to
adopt a resolution imposing sanctions against the Sudan
under Chapter VII of the Charter, under the pretext that
it has not responded to the demands of paragraph 4 (a) of
resolution 1044 (1996), will lead to a dead end.
The Council’s demand that Sudan extradite the
suspects to Ethiopia will make resolution 1044 (1996) and
all subsequent resolutions a whirlwind from which there
is no escape, especially since many States are convinced
that there is no evidence that the suspects are in Sudan’s
territory. There are reports in the international media
about their presence in the territory of other States; since
the adoption of resolution 1044 (1996) there have been
many reports of some of those suspects being outside the
Sudan. On 27 February 1996, the Islamic group to which
all the participants in the incident at Addis Ababa belong
issued a long statement in which it clarified all the
circumstances of the incident and declared that Sudan had
played no role in the attempt. It also affirmed the fact that
none of them was in the Sudan before, during or after the
incident.
On 14 April 1996, the “Orient” radio station, which
broadcasts from Paris in both Arabic and French, stated
that a previously unknown person named Abu Hazim,
speaking in an Egyptian dialect, had contacted its office
in Beshawr and faxed a statement reaffirming that those
who had participated in the attempt on the life of
President Mubarak in Addis Ababa were outside the
Sudan, and that there were only two of them, not three as
the Ethiopian authorities claimed. The speaker said that he
was one of the participants in the attempt, which was
carried out by the Egyptian Islamic group with Egyptian
planning, and his presence in Kabul is evidence that the
suspects in that attempt are not in the Sudan. He denied
that his group had any relations with the Government of
Sudan.
On 21 April 1996, the Arabic newspaper Al Hayat,
issued in New York and London, published an interview
with a person called Mustafa Hamza in the Afghan
province of Konor. He revealed that he was the first
5
Security Council 3660th meeting
Fifty-first year 26 April 1996
suspect in the failed assassination attempt on the Egyptian
President in Addis Ababa. He also revealed that he had
been in Afghanistan for eight months. He said that the
Sudan did not shelter the suspects, that the Islamic group
had carried out the fateful failed attempt, and that they had
no connections with any State or organization in carrying
out that attempt.
How did the parties deal with this information? First,
the Sudan referred the contents of the interview to the
President of the Security Council, asking that it be
distributed as an official document of the Council. It has
been circulated in document S/1996/311. The Sudan also
addressed a letter to the President of the Council drawing
his attention to this new information. It made it clear that
if the information is true it fully supports what the Sudan
has always said — that the suspects are not in its territory,
and that the Sudan has absolutely no connection with that
incident. The letter called upon the President of the Council
to confirm the information in the newspaper interview
through a fact-finding mission conducted on the basis of
previous similar practices of the Council.
Secondly, Egypt did not deny the fact that this suspect
was in Afghanistan. It turned a blind eye to the importance
of the confessions of the suspect, Mustafa Hamza, in order
to incriminate Sudan without any evidence. We had hoped
that for the sake of truth the suspect’s statements would be
evaluated objectively so as to arrive at a productive
resolution of the matter supporting the cooperation called
for by the Sudan to combat terrorism in all its
manifestations. There are reports that certain diplomatic
sources have said that information exists confirming that
Mustafa Hamza entered the Sudan after the failed attempt.
It was also reported that Egyptian sources continued to say
that the Government of Sudan was still under suspicion and
accusation and that it must provide evidence of its
innocence. The declaration made by the Sudanese Foreign
Minister was actually altered. When speaking in Cairo, he
specifically mentioned the source of his information, which
was the “Orient” broadcast in Paris. I was standing next to
him at the time. He spoke about the source of the news, not
the news item itself. He said: “There are some reports about
the presence of the person named Mustafa Hamza in
Afghanistan”, and mentioned the content of the “Orient”
broadcast in Paris, which was based on the suspect’s
telephone and fax contact. Anyone who claims otherwise is
trying to distort reality.
The Egyptian reaction to what the suspect told the
newspaper, to the effect that the Sudan continued to be
guilty until proved innocent, is a contravention of the
established norms of all legal systems. We had thought
that the accused was always innocent until proved guilty.
The statement that the suspect, Mustafa Hamza, entered
the Sudan after the incident took place contradicts the
account contained in the Ethiopian account, to the effect
that he was in the Sudan for two years planning that
fateful operation.
The suspect also said that only two, not three, people
participated in that operation and managed to leave Addis
Ababa. That was confirmed by the weak information that
Sudan received from Ethiopia about what it called the
third suspect, which arrived without a photograph of that
suspect, which was not the case with the other wanted
suspects. Whoever examines this matter will find a great
many contradictions between Ethiopia’s complaint to the
Council and the interview of the first suspect. Information
relating to the suspects’ entry into Ethiopia, their
departure from the country, the fact that they received
passports and the States that they came from or passed
through, all raises serious doubts about the Ethiopian
complaints as a whole, especially as Ethiopia insisted on
trying its suspects in secret and refused to accept the
request of some Egyptian lawyers to defend them. It even
refused to give those lawyers a visa to go to Addis
Ababa. That newspaper interview contains important
information that the Council should not ignore. If it does
so it will have denied all the principles of justice and
equity.
I heard the statements made by all the speakers
when the question of Lebanon was discussed in the
Council. Most of them — there were only a few
exceptions — condemned the conduct of the Security
Council, accusing it of double standards and bias. If that
is how the Council behaves, will Sudan find redress and
justice here? The statement made by the first suspect has
much greater value in proving the facts than the claims of
the Ethiopians.
If the Council sincerely wants, for once in its recent
history, to arrive at the truth and, in particular, to arrive
at the realities of the bizarre question before it, it is high
time for it to evaluate the Ethiopian claims and their
sources in the light of what the first suspect revealed.
Paragraph 4 (b) of resolution 1044 (1996) is even
worse. Its demand for the Sudan to desist from supporting
terrorism is a condemnation of the innocent by delivering
a verdict and punishing the innocent without any
convincing proof. This, too, is a contravention of all legal
systems. Resolution 1044 (1996) has failed to clarify the
6
Security Council 3660th meeting
Fifty-first year 26 April 1996
nature of these acts and their sources. It has also failed to
clarify the measures that the Sudan should have taken in
order to comply with that paragraph. As a result, the
Sudanese Government is bewildered. As a measure of
goodwill in implementing the resolution it issued an
invitation to the United Nations to send a fact-finding
mission to obtain the facts regarding Sudan’s alleged
support for terrorism or giving shelter to terrorists, and it
called on the representative of the Secretary-General to
carry out the investigation himself if he deemed it
appropriate. But these calls have fallen on deaf ears. The
credibility of the intentions of the Sudan cannot be tested
without responding to its calls or by putting forward other
proposals. But that, too, has not occurred.
The claim by the Secretary-General in his report to the
Council that the Sudan has not complied with paragraph
4 (b) of resolution 1044 (1996) since all the neighbouring
countries visited by his Special Envoy have accused it of
supporting terrorist activities within their territories, gives
cause for suspicion and distrust and casts much doubt on
the organs of the United Nations.
The claim that all the neighbours of the Sudan that
were visited by the Special Envoy is a misleading
generalization. It runs counter to what was contained in the
report itself, since one of the four States did not say that
the Sudan was attempting to destabilize its territories.
Therefore, the use of terms such as “all” is a falsification
of the facts and dishonest.
The same report states that the Sudan was described
to the Special Envoy as a country that is subject to
destabilizing activities which are supported and encouraged
by its neighbours. Sudanese officials reminded the Special
Envoy of letters sent by the Sudan to the President of the
Security Council complaining about the active aggression
perpetrated against it by some of those States, letters
contained in documents S/1995/522, S/1995/616 and
S/1996/29.
One can only wonder how the Secretary-General can
justify his claim regarding Sudan’s non-compliance with
paragraph 4 (b) of resolution 1044 (1996) on the basis of
some of the statements his Special Envoy heard in some of
the States he visited, while totally ignoring the Sudan’s
accusations concerning those States that shelter terrorists —
for example, Uganda — even if we assume that both types
of statement have equal weight as evidence.
Sudan has repeatedly declared its full readiness to
cooperate with international and regional organizations to
solve this dispute since the adoption of resolution
1044 (1996). It has expressed its full commitment to all
the resolutions adopted by the OAU and the Security
Council. At the same time, the Sudan has called upon all
the parties to the current dispute to provide it with all the
information and data available to them that would
facilitate a quick end to this dispute.
The Sudan would like here to repeat that it has not
yet received any additional information about the
suspects, information that might help the Sudanese
authorities to determine their location. On the contrary,
the Sudan is daily surprised by the emergence of so-called
new information in the corridors here, presented by the
States concerned. Let us look at this new information.
First, Egypt has distributed two documents, the first
of which claims to be a transcript of the interrogation of
some of the suspects in the attempt who are currently
held in Ethiopia. This document does not reveal who
interrogated those mentioned in it. This is of extreme
importance in evaluating the value of such documents as
evidence.
Secondly, the interrogation was based on the
assumption that Sudan and its security organs were
involved in the matter. That is an assumption that has no
connection with what the suspects said.
Thirdly, the document goes on to mention names,
claiming that they are the names of Sudanese citizens, as
proof of Sudan’s involvement in the incident. What was
given was only the first name of four persons, without
referring to their jobs or their connections with the State
and its organs.
Fourthly, in very general terms, the document claims
that the Sudan smuggles arms in order to prove that the
Sudan was involved in the incident. The interrogation did
not refer to the method or the persons or the organ that
carried out this smuggling operation.
Fifthly, as a general State policy of the Sudan, the
entry and exit of foreigners, in particular Arabs, without
a visa was a very easy matter at the time. The insinuation
that the facilities’ being made available was proof of
Sudan’s support for the suspects has no basis in fact, as
the document itself reveals, those suspects have received
greater facilities from Ethiopia. Why should that not be
used as proof of Ethiopia’s involvement? The mere claim
that there is evidence that one of the suspects, or all of
them, entered the Sudan is not in and of itself evidence
7
Security Council 3660th meeting
Fifty-first year 26 April 1996
that they actually did so and with the knowledge of the
Sudanese authorities. It is well known that Sudan, with its
vast territory, finds its open borders very difficult to
monitor or protect.
Sixthly, why did Egypt provide this document now?
Why did it not provide the Sudan with the information
contained therein? Although we find this information
unfruitful and unproductive as evidence, why was it not
given to the Sudan before the adoption of the resolution of
the Council, particularly since Egypt is obliged, under the
provisions of the 1973 New York Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against
Internationally Protected Persons, including Diplomatic
Agents, to provide other States parties to that Convention
with the information available to it about the suspects, and
especially since the Sudan is a party to that Convention,
which was mentioned in the third preambular paragraph of
resolution 1044 (1996)?
Egypt also distributed another document, a photocopy
of a local Sudanese newspaper, Heart of the street, which
reported last March that the three suspects would be
holding a press conference in some State, when they would
dispel all the accusations of Sudan’s involvement in the
attempt on the Egyptian President’s life. The intent behind
distributing that newspaper was to prove that the Sudan at
least knew where the suspects were located. This newspaper
is privately owned; it is independent, and has no connection
with the Government. Therefore, it does not speak on
behalf of the State, and the State should not be questioned
about news reports in it.
Nevertheless, the Government has responded to that
news item with the necessary seriousness. It questioned the
editor of that newspaper, who refused to reveal the sources
of the information he published, claiming that the laws of
the country give journalists immunity from having to reveal
the sources of their information. The Government had no
choice but to release him.
It is obvious that the State is not supposed to respond
to sensationalist news in the media, either by confirming it
or by denying it. This is true of all States of the world. It
is worth noting that journalists in the Sudan are in close
contact with the press and journalists in Egypt. Egypt was
and continues to be a source of culture in the Sudan.
The second allegation employed in order to convince
the members of the Security Council to impose coercive
measures against the Sudan is the claim by the United
States of America that the Sudan was a party to a
conspiracy against facilities and persons in its territory in
1993. In escalation of these hostile claims, the United
States requested that a Sudanese diplomat of the
Permanent Mission of the Sudan to the United Nations
leave its territory, in contravention of the provisions of
article IV of the Headquarters Agreement of 1947, which
governs the presence of the Permanent Missions in New
York, and in contravention of the resolutions of the
General Assembly in that regard.
The Sudan has rejected strongly this conduct by the
host country. It has denied completely that the Sudan or
its representatives have any connection with any terrorist
acts, in any State or in any form. The Sudan called on the
host country to provide it with evidence proving its
claims.
Many delegations and Member States know the
diplomat who was expelled, on both an official and a
personal level. This is testimony enough to his innocence.
This action by the host country came at a time when
many observers were asking why it had chosen to remain
silent ever since 1993, and why it had not levelled any
charges against that diplomat? The answer to these
questions is very clear: these actions represent a political
mobilization to influence negatively the atmosphere of
discussions on the draft resolution currently before the
Security Council. All this is aimed at strategic and
political objectives that cannot be hidden from anyone.
The United States, through some of its
representatives, has spoken to the press in a manner that
is offensive to the Sudan and that is not usual in the
Security Council or in the corridors of the United
Nations. For our part, we will continue to act with
courtesy and decency. We are a people who show
patience in the face of adversity, and if we are offended
we also know how to forgive.
The third allegation is by the State that has put the
complaint before the Council and on whose territory the
crime took place. Ethiopia finds it sufficient to say that it
is in possession of evidence that cannot be revealed
currently for security reasons, but that indicates that the
Sudanese Government is aware of the location of the
suspects. It also says that it will consider the question of
providing additional information, if it proves necessary, to
expedite the legal steps necessary for extradition and that
it has started to try in secret those held in its prisons.
8
Security Council 3660th meeting
Fifty-first year 26 April 1996
The conduct of the Ethiopian authorities in dealing
with this important and serious matter to a large extent
raises doubts and suspicions regarding its good will and its
real intentions and casts more shadows on the whole
question. This action would result in putting further
obstacles in the way of any efforts carried out by the
Sudanese authorities in their search for the suspects.
Anyone who has followed the development of the
events would not be blamed if he or she doubted the
credibility of those States, their seriousness and their
readiness to cooperate with the Sudan to provide it with
information in order to assist it in apprehending the
suspects. All this is done in order to incriminate the Sudan
and to tarnish its image with the charge of supporting and
being involved in terrorism.
We believe that such statements are clear proof that
the States parties to that dispute are bent on perpetuating it
by claiming that they have materials and evidence that
many doubt even exist. How could the Security Council
bear the historical responsibility of condemning the Sudan
and punishing it on the basis of such unclear and flimsy
statements?
The draft resolution before the Council today is
gravely inconsistent with the principles of justice and
equality on which this Organization was founded. This draft
resolution would be another blemish on the record of this
Council, which is replete with injustice, and will lead
ultimately to nothing but greater doubt in the credibility of
this Organization in its application of the concepts of
international peace and security.
When the United Nations Charter gave the Security
Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security and provided that the
Council would represent all the other States in discharging
its responsibility, it also stated that the Council should
discharge this responsibility in accordance with the
principles and objectives of the United Nations. Among
these is the resort to peaceful means, in accordance with the
principles of justice and international law, to resolve
disputes and to achieve international cooperation to that
end.
It is indeed regrettable that these principles are being
exploited as a pretext for punishing States and peoples that
are not well liked by some members of the Council, while,
at the same time, the Council turns a blind eye to the
practices of other States that perpetrate great atrocities that
would be punishable under Chapter VII of the Charter. All
this is done by using double standards and immense
selectivity, thus shaking the credibility of the Security
Council and belief in its true representation of
international opinion. Such behaviour was even accepted
by the members of the Council in its meeting to consider
the acts of aggression against Lebanon.
The draft resolution before the Council ignores
completely the positive developments that have taken
place in the Sudan during the last three months vis-à-vis
the first free presidential and parliamentary elections in
the history of the Sudan. From many quarters — in
particular the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and
the League of Arab States — the international community
has testified as to the freedom and fairness of these
elections and the lack of violence in connection with
them.
Among these positive developments is also the
establishment of the rules of democracy, the establishment
of a federal system in the country and the signing of
peace treaties with the rebels in the south in order to put
an end to bloody internal conflicts and to stop the civil
war between the sons of the country.
We would like to recall here the contents of the
letter contained in document S/1996/271, which proves
the good intentions of the Sudanese Government to
establish comprehensive peace in the country, to introduce
the concept of rights and duties on the basis of citizenship
and to promote and protect the human rights of the
Sudanese citizens by all means possible.
The adoption by the Council of any measures against
the Sudan under Chapter VII of the Charter will be an
obstacle to these achievements instead of helping the
Sudan to continue along that path, as if this were the
Council’s reward to the Sudan for its great achievements.
The imposition of any measures by the Council
against the Sudan, whatever their political nature and
however limited they may be, will have a far-reaching
effect on the stability of the Sudan and on the unity of its
territory, and therefore will have a grave effect on the
stability of the region as a whole. They will also have
grave humanitarian repercussions throughout the region,
in particular in the States neighbouring the Sudan.
The draft resolution before the Council today ignores
completely all the efforts made by the Sudan to comply
with resolution 1044 (1996). This is a grave injustice. The
present draft resolution has renounced completely any
9
Security Council 3660th meeting
Fifty-first year 26 April 1996
search for a solution to this dispute that would satisfy all
parties through the available diplomatic channels or through
the conflict resolution Mechanism of the OAU. Therefore,
that Mechanism has been stripped of any role it could play
to resolve this dispute.
There is no doubt that the overwhelming majority of
the States Members of the United Nations agree with our
rejection of the sanctions, since they are inhuman, selective
and run counter to morality, and have destructive
consequences for peoples. In addition, the victims are
always developing countries, and thus the sanctions increase
the poverty and the suffering of their peoples. They also
create instability in the countries on which they are
imposed. They block the channels of dialogue and
communication between States. Therefore, a working group
was established to study these sanctions in the light of the
experience of the United Nations.
The Council’s return, at the instigation of some of its
members, to adopt a resolution to impose sanctions against
the Sudan, despite all those facts, raises a number of
questions as to the priority in the work of the Council, in
accordance with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. Is it to promote the principles of international
cooperation and the maintenance of international peace and
security, or is it to increase the suffering of peoples and
impose sanctions on them, one after the other? The Sudan
is the third State in one geographical region to be isolated
and to have sanctions imposed on it. Can we consider this
a coincidence, or is this a deliberate strategy against that
region, its peoples, its cultures and its faiths?
Finally, allow me to reaffirm that the Sudan, true to its
principles, which are rooted in its religion and in its
traditions, maintains its commitment, entered into earlier
and since repeated in many forums and at all levels, to
condemn, in the strongest possible terms, terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, regardless of its causes,
motivations or perpetrators. The Sudan has not allowed, and
will not allow, its territory to be used for any terrorist
action or to be a shelter for terrorists or for fugitives from
justice. The Sudan remains committed to the
implementation of all resolutions adopted by all
international organizations, including the OAU, and those
of this Council, however contrary they may be to the spirit
of justice and equality.
The Sudan will also take a keen interest in maintaining
good-neighbourly relations with all neighbouring States, in
particular Egypt, and will attempt to develop regional and
bilateral cooperation with these States. The Sudan will
continue to engage in dialogue with all the parties
concerned with this question. Our doors will continue to
be open for cooperation.
All this is due to Sudan’s strong interest in clarifying
the facts and dispelling doubts. It is not seeking sympathy
or justifying its position. It wishes only to clarify the facts
and to take a clear stance on this important matter.
I apologize for speaking at such length.
Mr. Eteffa (Ethiopia): May I first of all congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of April. I am confident
that under your wise and able leadership the Council will
continue to cope successfully with its heavy
responsibilities during the current month. May I also
extend my appreciation to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Botswana, Ambassador
Joseph Legwaila, for the outstanding manner in which he
guided the work of the Council last month. I also wish to
take this opportunity to thank the Secretary- General for
his report to the Security Council regarding the
implementation of resolution 1044 (1996).
When Ethiopia decided to bring this grave issue to
the Security Council more than three months ago, it did
so with the conviction that the Council would be so
enraged by the enormity of the crime committed by the
Sudanese authorities that the message it would send to
them would be clear, unambiguous and principled. It was
our hope that the Council would tell the authorities in the
Sudan that our world has no place for a leadership that
sponsors assassination plots against a Head of State.
In such a clear-cut case of an act of terror, in which
the Sudanese authorities were caught red-handed, Ethiopia
thought the reaction of the Council would be as forceful
as the gravity of the crime dictates, and as unambiguous
as the blatant nature of the international terrorism carried
out and sponsored by the Sudanese authorities warrants.
The draft resolution before the Council, however, has
made us wonder whether the confidence we initially had
was warranted and whether those, like the Sudanese
authorities, who engage in State-sponsored terrorism will
ever fully, and with no equivocation, be held accountable
for the crimes they have committed.
The draft resolution to be adopted now and the
events immediately preceding it have indeed caused us to
recall the painful memories of our past. We have so much
been victims of political expediency in the past that we
10
Security Council 3660th meeting
Fifty-first year 26 April 1996
feel justified in being disappointed when our call for
justice is given short shrift and when we see principles
being sacrificed on the altar of expediency and political
calculations.
There is no doubt that the facts about the involvement
of the Sudanese authorities in the assassination attempt are
as clear as day. This has been proved beyond the shadow
of a doubt, and the Sudanese authorities know that they
were caught red-handed. This was also the conviction of the
Security Council when it adopted resolution 1044 (1996),
which calls on the Sudanese authorities to hand over to
Ethiopia for prosecution the three terrorists it is sheltering
in its territory, and to desist from supporting and assisting
terrorists.
Not only have the Sudanese authorities not complied
with the demands of the Council, but they have continued
to ridicule the Council by the many antics and ploys they
have resorted to, starting from the very morrow of the
adoption of resolution 1044 (1996). The latest ploy is the
interview, or the alleged interview, by Mustafa Hamza, the
leader of the terrorist group, vindicating the Sudanese
authorities of involvement in the crime. This, for Ethiopia,
is a veritable insult to the intelligence of the members of
the Council.
The Secretary-General’s report makes it abundantly
clear that Sudan has not complied with the Council’s
demands contained in resolution 1044 (1996). Obviously,
Ethiopia had no illusion that the resolution to be adopted
would be strong enough to compel the Sudanese authorities
to respect the decision of the Council.
It was precisely for this reason that an arms embargo
would have been one of the most appropriate and proper
steps, which the Council should have taken, in order to put
the requisite pressure on the Sudanese authorities to secure
their compliance with its demands. The call was for a
comprehensive arms embargo applicable to all, and as such
all arguments put forth against such a step by the Council
are patently hollow, extremely unconvincing, and lacking in
transparency, which is so much demanded by the appalling
nature of the crime committed by the Sudanese authorities
and by the serious implications for international peace and
security. The fact that the Security Council has found it
difficult to impose an arms embargo on a leadership which
sponsors and assists, as well as supplies arms to, terrorists
and which, in any case, needs the arms to suppress parts of
its own people whom it has difficulty accepting on the basis
of equality, is indeed difficult to comprehend.
That the Council has found it impossible at this time
to ban the international flights of Sudanese Airways,
which was used and is being used by Sudanese authorities
for shuttling terrorists and for transporting weapons used
by terrorists, is equally perplexing, and no argument can
convince us that this was based on consideration either of
the dictates of justice or those of principles. Here, too,
expediency has the upper hand. And as such the major
instrument of terror in the hands of the Sudanese
authorities is allowed to be unaffected, even though the
proposal would not have affected flights into and out of
Sudan by other carriers, and the step would have hardly
affected the people of the Sudan. The Council is sending
a confusing message to the Sudanese authorities, which
will in no way help enhance its credibility on the matter.
It is the conviction of my Government that trying to
appease those who have consciously chosen terrorism as
an instrument of State policy will not work and will not
produce the desired results. The evidence for this is
abundant and needs no recitation.
The mentality of the Sudanese authorities is such
that, no matter how wrong they might be, they are bound
to view the resolution to be adopted by the Council as a
successful outcome of their ploys and prevarications.
True, we have not yet come to the end of the road on this
issue, and it might be too soon for the Sudanese
authorities to believe that they can continue to carry out
terrorism and target Heads of State for assassination with
impunity. But there is one clear victor today —
expediency. There is one clear loser — principle. The fact
that principles — and very important principles having to
do with international law and with the fight against
terrorism — have been sacrificed today on the altars of
political expediency and political calculations should be
admitted with all candour. It is our hope that we will
draw the proper lessons from the experience, one of
which might perhaps sadly be that the world is not as yet
ready to fight against State-sponsored terrorism with
determination, courage and a sense of responsibility,
justice and solidarity.
As I conclude, I wish to express Ethiopia’s sincere
appreciation to all those who chose to focus on the merit
of the case before the Council, independently of other
considerations, and who, despite all the confusion
deliberately created, decided to remain steadfast and acted
on the basis of principles and with the conviction that
State-sponsored terrorism, whether committed in Africa,
Europe or America, remains a crime which should never
be tolerated.
11
Security Council 3660th meeting
Fifty-first year 26 April 1996
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of Ethiopia for his kind words. The next
speaker is the representative of Uganda. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Mukasa-Ssali (Uganda): I should like to express
our congratulations to you, Sir, upon your assumption of
the presidency for the month of April and also to offer our
gratitude to your predecessor. I also thank you for giving
me this opportunity to participate in the present discussion,
which touches on matters of particular interest to my
Government.
Since this matter before the Council deals, to a large
extent, with the dangerous policy of the Sudanese
Government’s support for terrorism, especially in the
subregion, I would like to take time to inform the Council
of the persistent and determined efforts by the Sudanese
regime to destabilize Uganda.
In spite of our efforts to maintain a policy of good-
neighbourliness with all our neighbours, the Sudanese
regime has continued its activities of assisting, supporting,
facilitating and even giving shelter and sanctuary to two
rebel movements based on its soil, whose sole purpose is to
wreak havoc and misery on defenceless civilians in the
north and northwestern districts of Uganda.
It will be recalled that the Government of Uganda
severed diplomatic relations with the Government of Sudan
on 13 April 1995, over incidents aimed at destabilizing
Uganda and compromising its security and stability. It is
with regret that I inform the Council that, since then, rather
than improving, the situation has progressively worsened,
with frequent incursions by Kony Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA) and the West Nile Bank Front of Juma Oris into
northern and northwestern Uganda, respectively. Both rebel
movements are based well inside the territory of Sudan,
whence they make incursions into Uganda.
It is important that I give details of some of the
numerous incidents that have taken place starting last year
and up to as recently as 17 April 1996.
On 17 April 1995, two LRA brigades of Stocree and
Gilva, numbering between 250 and 300 and all dressed in
Sudanese military uniforms, entered Uganda from Parajok
in the Sudan. They invaded Adodi, north-west of Parabek,
and attacked Lukung Trading Centre on 18 April 1995,
killing 24 people, most of whom were women and children,
and abducting over 30 others.
At River Nyimur, the same rebels killed 16 wives of
soldiers of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces and two
men who happened to be around. The rest of the women
were abducted. The LRA has also been abducting
Ugandan children and taking them into Sudan in
exchange for guns. One of the markets for this evil trade
in the Sudan is in a place called Gong and Katiri.
On 20 April 1995 the LRA attacked Atiak, murdered
over 200 civilians and carried out atrocities of such wide
magnitude that they attracted international attention and
concern.
On 20 July 1995 about 500 rebels of Lords
Resistance Army, armed by the Sudan with anti-aircraft
missiles, mortars and personal weapons, and fully dressed
in Sudanese Armed Forces uniforms, crossed into Uganda
from Palutaka in Sudan and invaded Padibe in Uganda on
28 July 1995. During this attack the LRA murdered three
civilians, inflicted injuries on four others and abducted 10
more. Thereafter, the rebels carried out acts of arson —
burning homesteads and setting granaries on fire —
looted merchandise in the trading centre and vandalized
what they could not carry. Two motorcycles from a
missionary hospital were also looted.
After committing these crimes against innocent
civilians, the rebels withdrew to their safe haven in the
Sudan on 30 July 1995. The Sudanese Armed Forces
based in Palutaka sent trucks to the rebels, which picked
them up from River Amur with their booty on 31 July
1995.
On 11 August 1995 a group of 500 LRA rebels,
again heavily armed by Sudan, entered Uganda through
Lellabul and ravaged Lukung Division in Kitgum District.
It is also important to note that all the captives in all
these incidents were herded to Palutaka, where they were
forcibly put on military training.
In the north-western Ugandan districts of Arua and
Moyo, the Sudanese Government is grooming the West
Nile Bank Front, numbering between 1,000 and 1,500
men, under Colonel Juma Oris. In a similar manner as in
the case of Kony, the Sudanese Government offers
sanctuary and training facilities to these rebels in and
around Morobo, at Atende, Mahajub and Alebo.
Their operational force is in Kaya at places called
Kimba, Poki and Arabamiji near the Uganda-Sudan
border under Lieutenant Colonel Yasin Noah, and also in
Baazi, on the Sudan-Zaire border. The Sudan intends to
12
Security Council 3660th meeting
Fifty-first year 26 April 1996
use, and has in fact used these rebels, not only to
destabilize Uganda, but also to harass Sudanese refugees in
the camps in Koboko and Adraga and to provide its
territory as a safe rear base for support and logistics. These
rebels are under instructions to step up acts of insecurity,
such as laying mines and perpetrating other acts of sabotage
in Uganda.
The latest of the horrendous incursions into Uganda by
the Sudanese-assisted rebels was when over 500 LRA
rebels crossed into Uganda from Aru in the Sudan via
Mogali on 7 February this year. So far over 50 innocent
civilians have been killed, with many others abducted and
millions of dollars’ worth of personal and State property
looted or destroyed. Others, most of them women and
children, have been maimed by anti-personnel mines
planted in their farmlands by the rebels, who are all well
supplied by the Sudanese regime with these and various
other types of explosive devices.
In the north-western part of the country, rebels of the
West Nile Bank Front based in southern Sudan and led by
Colonel Juma Oris entered Uganda on 17 April this year at
a place called Kei Hill in Midigo, Arua District. The rebels,
numbering between 300 and 500, were all armed and
dressed in Sudanese military combat fatigues. They planted
anti-tank and anti-personnel mines along the route after
attacking Ikafe refugee camp and abducting nine workers
from Oxfam, whom they later released.
Our people in the north-western districts have
mobilized themselves to support our security forces to
defeat this aggression from Sudan. Armed with bows,
arrows, spears and pangas, they have assisted the Uganda
People’s Defence Forces in routing the rebels sent by their
masters in Khartoum to wreak havoc in our country.
As a result of the patriotic sacrifices of our people and
armed forces, several of these bandits have been killed and
others captured, while 70 of those remaining fled to Zaire
on 23 April this year.
Our people and security forces have played and will
continue to play their appropriate roles in defending the
country against foreign aggression, but we also need the
support of the international community, and the Security
Council in particular, to put an end to the evil designs of
the regime in Khartoum.
The Sudanese regime has not stopped at training,
arming and sending rebels into Uganda to wreak havoc but
has also, on several occasions, shelled, and its air force
bombed, our territory. The latest such acts of aggression
were perpetuated between 8 and 10 April, when Sudan,
using various types of artillery pieces, shelled Ugandan
territory between Keri and Oraba in north-western Uganda
for three consecutive days. Sudanese air force planes also
dropped bombs in the same area on 9 April.
We are preparing for presidential and parliamentary
elections to be held in our country between early May
and early June, but the activities to which I have referred
have not made it easy for our people in the affected
districts to prepare to freely exercise their democratic
rights as citizens for the first time in about 30 years, and
to elect a Government of their choice.
As a result of Sudanese activities and those of its
supported rebels, economic, social and political activities
in north and north-western Uganda have been disrupted,
and there is general panic. This situation cannot be
allowed to continue.
We have always stressed that efforts to improve and
normalize relations between Uganda and Sudan would be
helped if Sudan disbanded and disarmed the Ugandan
dissidents or rebels in the Sudan, confined them in camps,
capable of being monitored and verifiable, and confined
the leaders of these rebels — or, better still, resettled
them in a country of asylum in accordance with
international conventions on refugees.
As the evidence clearly shows, the Sudanese
Government has not heeded our advice and has, in fact,
stepped up its destabilization programme against Uganda.
Its pretext for these actions has been the alleged Ugandan
Government support for the Sudanese Peoples Liberation
Army (SPLA), a pretext which we have dismissed as
unfounded and lacking any basis in fact. The whole world
knows that the conflict in the Sudan is purely an internal
matter, and that its solution will have to be found by the
Sudanese people themselves through dialogue.
Uganda condemns in the strongest possible terms the
unprovoked acts of aggression visited on us by the
Sudanese Government and calls upon the Security
Council and the international community at large to do
the same, and to take the strongest possible measures to
halt them completely.
The matter before the Council is further evidence of
the actions of a regime that has set as its policy the
destabilization of its neighbours, using whatever means it
deems necessary. It is the duty of this Council to live up
13
Security Council 3660th meeting
Fifty-first year 26 April 1996
to its responsibilities with regard to maintaining
international peace and security by sending a clear and
strong signal to the regime in Khartoum that terrorism and
aggression will not be rewarded in today’s world, and that
those who make these an integral part of their policies will
be held accountable by all peace-loving people.
We have looked at the draft resolution before the
Council, and wish to express our disappointment that it
does not send the strong signal that we had hoped for. Our
terrorized and brutalized people are looking to this Council
and the international community for an assurance that the
Sudanese air force will no longer bomb their homes, that
the Sudanese armed forces will no longer shell their
villages, and that the Sudanese-sponsored rebels will no
longer kill, rape or maim them, rob them of their property
or abduct their children, simply because the international
community has finally prevailed on the Sudanese regime to
desist from all acts of terrorism and aggression against all
its neighbours.
We would like, therefore, to reiterate the need for the
Security Council to take any measures necessary, including
an arms embargo against the Sudan, to ensure that it desists
from engaging in activities that are not only destabilizing
Uganda but plunging the entire subregion into chaos.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): It is my
understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to the
vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless I hear any
objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian): The Russian delegation confirms with the utmost
clarity its strong, unwavering rejection of the evil of
international terrorism in all its manifestations. In the
struggle against this new and extremely dangerous threat to
global peace and security, our country is ready, at a solid
and practical level, to cooperate constructively with all
international and regional organizations and States.
The Russian Federation strongly condemned the
attempted assassination of the President of Egypt,
Mr. Mubarak, in Addis Ababa on 26 June last year. We
strongly urge that an objective investigation of this crime,
to establish the facts, be carried out fully and be completed,
and that those involved be brought to justice.
This position underlay, and still underlies, our
approach in seeking an effective and fair way for the
Security Council to take action, including taking account
of the regional context. We believe that the task can be
successfully carried out only through close cooperation
between all interested parties, including within the context
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and other
regional mechanisms, and also on a bilateral level. It is
this approach that offers a real hope for unravelling this
web of complications. It is this approach that provides a
real chance of finding the suspects and of unravelling this
web of confusion with regard to Sudan, and strengthening
stability in this rather volatile region of Africa. And it is
this approach that we have consistently advocated
throughout consideration of the matter in the Security
Council, and in making specific proposals on the draft
resolution. Unfortunately, as events of the last few months
have shown, our views were not taken duly into
consideration.
One cannot avoid feeling that the draft resolution
was used not so much to speed up the search for the
suspects as to isolate Sudan internationally. It is a pity
that such an important organization as the OAU, with
such authority, was not able to counter that trend,
basically just distancing itself from implementing its own
decisions on the matter.
Really convincing evidence about the involvement of
Khartoum in the assassination attempt and in the
whereabouts of the suspects has not been given to the
Security Council or to the Secretary-General. Incidentally,
the co-sponsors of the draft resolution were forced to
acknowledge this when they indicated that the Secretary-
General of the United Nations should be asked to
establish the facts. The situation becomes even more
complicated in view of recent reports that the suspects, or
at least one of them, are not in Sudan. Of course, the
information needs to be checked very thoroughly, but, if
it turns out to be true, other practical steps will have to be
taken.
The draft resolution before us, with all of the proper
and correct provisions it contains, basically in other parts
disregards the points which I have just made. Moreover,
the draft creates an extremely serious problem which is
totally unrelated to the situation of Sudan. I am referring
to the overall approach to the use of an instrument such
as international sanctions. The members of the Security
Council and other Members of the United Nations have
on several occasions come to realize that the arbitrary
application of sanctions is essentially flawed when there
14
Security Council 3660th meeting
Fifty-first year 26 April 1996
are no clearly formulated criteria and conditions governing
their imposition and their lifting. This is a problem which
is very relevant today, and it is specifically being
considered in the General Assembly’s Working Group on
the Supplement to the Agenda for Peace, where the
problem is being given special attention.
However, despite the growing understanding which
has now taken root in the United Nations about the need for
clear criteria on sanctions matters, in this case apart from
the understandable demand for the extradition of the three
suspects, if, of course, they are still in the Sudan —
abstract demands are being made of Khartoum along the
lines of living in friendly relations with its neighbours and
complying with the Charter of the United Nations and with
the Charter of the OAU.
I believe that all representatives, including the
co-sponsors, understand full well that objective criteria for
checking implementation of such vague demands simply do
not exist. That means that, if desired, Sudan can be kept
under sanctions indefinitely. Apparently there are some who
would be willing to do this, and then we would have a
repetition of what we are already seeing in other
situations — namely, the introduction of economic
sanctions with no time-frame, the suffering of broad sectors
of the population, an unavoidable humanitarian crisis, and
the search for ways of dealing with that crisis, including,
probably, the adoption of a resolution along the lines of
resolution 986 (1995), and then it would go on and on in
that already rather well-known vicious circle.
I believe that many colleagues in this Chamber
understand the situation. The fact that it is known in
advance that this kind of demand cannot be met, along with
the logic contained in paragraph 8 of the resolution,
predetermines in a way the inevitability of a further
escalation of sanctions against Sudan, and this could lead
the Security Council in the very near future into a
stalemate, with no simple way out.
I want to be sure that I am correctly understood. We
are absolutely in favour of involving the Security Council
in a real — I emphasize “a real” — struggle against
international terrorism, but we are against attempts to make
use of this in order to punish certain régimes or in order to
attain other political goals of one or more Member States.
Such an approach, as far as we are concerned, is
unacceptable, for it is not only destructive for the people of
the Sudan and for the peoples of the countries in the region,
but it also creates a very dangerous precedent which could
do real damage to the authority of the Security Council and
could create the impression that the Council is not able to
draw conclusions from the lessons of very recent history.
Accordingly, despite the rumours last night, the
Russian delegation cannot support the draft resolution. We
have found it possible not to prevent its adoption simply
because implementation of the measures contained therein
relating to diplomatic pressure on Sudan will depend on
the Members of the United Nations themselves. At the
same time, we trust that what we have said — which is
the position of principle of Russia — has been heard and
understood in all of its details, including what we have
said about future consideration of this matter in the
Security Council in two months’ time.
We remain convinced that the problem of bringing
the suspects to justice can and must be resolved urgently.
We hope that the Government of the Sudan, in the spirit
of the proposals and promises that it has made, will — in
cooperation with the authorities of Ethiopia and Egypt —
take additional real steps in the interest of attaining this
goal.
Mr. Ferrarin (Italy): I wish to thank the non-
aligned members of the Council for having prepared and
introduced the draft resolution. The Italian delegation has
great respect for the positions of the Non-Aligned Caucus,
particularly its African members, since they are the ones
that have worked on this very same case in the
framework of the Organization of African Unity (OAU).
The draft resolution before us meets the Security
Council’s purpose — that is, to send a clear signal in the
hope that the Sudan will comply with resolution S/1044
(1996), thereby avoiding the dangerous isolation of that
country from the international community.
The time has come for Khartoum to heed its
responsibilities to the international community and to
show its political will to fully comply with Security
Council resolutions.
My country’s relations with this region of Africa are
ancient and traditionally intense. Italy wants peace to
return to the region and also strongly believes in the need
to fight terrorism, wherever it may be, in the interests of
international peace and security.
For these reasons, Italy will vote in favour of the
draft resolution. We hope that the Sudan will be
responsive to this clear signal from the international
community and make every effort to fulfil its obligations
15
Security Council 3660th meeting
Fifty-first year 26 April 1996
and thereby return to normal relations with other countries
in the interests of the Government and people of the Sudan,
of the States in the region and of international peace and
security.
Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): My delegation considers
the assassination attempt on the life of the President of the
Arab Republic of Egypt, in Addis Ababa, in June 1995, as
requiring our most serious attention. We believe that this
act has created concern among the international community,
bearing in mind the profound interest the international
community attaches to the question of international
terrorism and to the safety and security of Heads of State
or Government.
I should also like to take this opportunity to reiterate
our steadfast position that Indonesia is firmly against
international terrorism and strongly condemns all acts of
violence. It is our view that such acts constitute the most
flagrant violation of human rights. Consequently, from the
beginning, when this matter was brought to the Council, my
delegation has made it clear that we unequivocally condemn
the assassination attempt on the life of President Hosni
Mubarak and that the perpetrators of this act of violence
should be brought swiftly to justice.
With regard to the prevailing situation, it seems that
the Government of the Sudan has not yet fully fulfilled all
its obligations with regard to the efforts undertaken by the
Organization of African Unity (OAU). We are, however,
aware of the fact that the Sudan had indeed already taken
some steps and is still continuing its efforts to fulfil its
obligations under Security Council resolution 1044 (1996).
It is pertinent to note that the Sudan had extended
invitations to the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity to visit Khartoum and had requested
Interpol’s assistance in looking for the suspects. These steps
reflect the positive attitude of the Government of the Sudan,
which needs to be acknowledged by the international
community. It is therefore incumbent upon the Government
of the Sudan to redouble its efforts with a view to fulfilling
the provisions contained in resolution 1044 (1996).
In order to ensure compliance from the Government of
the Sudan with the Security Council’s demands, the
Indonesian delegation believes that it would have been
more appropriate to deal with the situation in a gradual
manner, by way of a presidential statement, rather than a
draft resolution containing elements of sanctions. This
indeed would have been our preference. A step-by-step
approach would, in our opinion, have provided the
opportunity and the time necessary for the Government of
the Sudan to respond positively to the requests of the
Council. By responding positively and urgently to these
issues, the Sudan would be making important
contributions to confidence-building measures and would
be demonstrating its peaceful intentions towards its
neighbours.
We also believe that close cooperation between the
United Nations, the Organization of African Unity,
Ethiopia and the Sudan is of the utmost importance if the
matter is to be resolved in a peaceful manner. In this
respect, it is our fervent hope that the efforts of the
Organization of African Unity, as the regional
organization directly concerned, would, and indeed
should, make substantial contributions towards the
resolution of the issues, in the interest of all its member
States. It would also be appropriate for the Council to
consider the letter of the Permanent Representative of the
Sudan, dated 21 April 1996, contained in document
S/1996/311, pertaining to this matter. If, however, after all
avenues have been explored and all efforts exhausted, the
Council ultimately assesses that the Government of the
Sudan has still not fully complied with its requests, only
then should the Security Council consider adopting further
measures to ensure implementation of resolution 1044
(1996).
While my delegation considers the draft resolution
before us as supporting the thrust and objectives of the
statements adopted by the OAU Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution on 11 September
1995 and 19 December 1995, we cannot but express our
concern that this text goes beyond our expectations. We
are fully aware of the serious and untiring efforts exerted
by various delegations, and welcome the cooperative spirit
demonstrated by all members in their attempt to
accommodate various amendments addressing the
concerns of not only the Council members, but also the
parties involved. It is nevertheless unfortunate that it still
contains measures which constitute sanctions.
As a matter of principle, Indonesia has always
maintained the view that the imposition of sanctions as a
means to bring pressure to bear on some Governments is
a matter of the utmost seriousness. The imposition of
sanctions should be considered only after all means for
the pacific settlement of disputes under Chapter VI of the
Charter have been exhausted and thorough consideration
has been undertaken of the long-term and short-term
effects of such sanctions. Sanctions are not meant to be
punitive, but it is widely acknowledged that, irrespective
of their objectives, they do affect the innocent population.
16
Security Council 3660th meeting
Fifty-first year 26 April 1996
The adverse humanitarian impact therefore deserves our
serious consideration and must be given primary attention.
We retain our understanding that in order for a
resolution to achieve the desired results and for it to
become a truly effective tool for rectifying the situation, by
persuading the party concerned to comply with the
obligations under the resolution, it is imperative that it not
only properly address the concerns of the issue at hand, but
also maintain strict adherence to those basic principles to
which we all aspire.
In conclusion, I wish to express my delegation’s
understanding of some paragraphs contained in the draft
resolution. With regard to operative paragraph 1 (a), my
delegation is of the view that the matter of extradition is a
legal one and only involves two States. In the case before
us, the Sudan can extradite to Ethiopia only those suspects
who are in its territory.
With regard to operative paragraph 8, our
interpretation is that it does not prejudge whether further
measures will be taken by the Council. The adoption of
further measures by the Council will be determined only by
its assessment of the situation and of the conditions
prevailing after the 60 days’ re-examination period has
elapsed.
Let me conclude by stating that under these
circumstances, and in the light of the observations I have
just expressed, my delegation will vote in favour of this
draft resolution.
Mr. Nkgowe (Botswana): When the Security Council
adopted resolution 1044 (1996) on 31 January 1996, my
delegation expressed the hope that it would be the last
resolution to be adopted by the Council on the question of
the extradition to Ethiopia of the three suspects wanted in
connection with the assassination attempt on the life of the
President of the Arab Republic of Egypt in Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia, last June. We had hoped the Government of the
Sudan would comply with the demands of resolution 1044
(1996) and avoid a prolonged dispute with the Security
Council. It is not too late; the Sudan can still do what is
expected of it by Security Council resolution 1044 (1996).
The Sudan is a fellow African country, and we do not
harbour any ill intentions against its brotherly people. We
are aware that the draft resolution before us is not as
stringent on the Sudan as it could have been, or as some
would have wanted it to be, thanks to the efforts of the
co-sponsors. We are banking on the compliance of the
Government of the Sudan with the Security Council
resolutions; we trust that the Sudan will hand over the
three suspects to Ethiopia for prosecution and that it will
not be necessary for the Security Council to adopt a third
resolution on this matter.
Immediately following the adoption of resolution
1044 (1996), the Secretary-General dispatched a Special
Envoy to Africa for consultations on the implementation
of that resolution, and a report on the results of that
diplomatic effort was submitted to the Security Council.
What is most striking about the report is that all the
Sudan’s neighbours, visited by the Special Envoy, accuse
the Sudanese Government of supporting terrorist activities
in their countries. We find this most disturbing. Africa is
drowning in all manner of problems, and it can ill afford
to add more. We therefore appeal to the Sudan and its
neighbours to respect each other’s territorial integrity.
My delegation voted in favour of resolution
1044 (1996) because of its firm aversion to terrorism.
Terrorism is the scourge of world society today, and it is
incumbent upon all States, including the Sudan, to get rid
of this scourge. The extradition of the three suspects to
Ethiopia would serve as a deterrent to terrorists in the
region and beyond. Those with terrorist intentions would
know that there is no place to hide.
The draft resolution before us sends the right
message about the commitment of the international
community to effectively combat terrorism. All States
should cooperate in the efforts to rid the world of the
menace of terrorism. It is therefore our ardent hope that
the Government of the Sudan will also cooperate in this
endeavour and take concrete steps to ensure compliance
with the demands of the international community. This
would send a clear signal that the Sudan does not abet
terrorist activities and the Government of the Sudan
would have clearly dissociated itself from the terrorism
that its neighbours accuse it of encouraging.
The peoples of East Africa want peace, without
which they cannot develop their countries. Coming from
southern Africa, we are fully alive to the negative effects
that terrorism and destabilization can have on the
economies of countries. We do not wish them to be
visited upon the countries of East Africa, or any group of
States, for that matter.
Mr. Queta (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from
French): On 31 January 1996, the Security Council
17
Security Council 3660th meeting
Fifty-first year 26 April 1996
adopted resolution 1044 (1996), which, in paragraph 4,
requests the Government of the Sudan to undertake
immediate action to extradite to Ethiopia for prosecution the
three suspects sheltering in the Sudan and wanted in
connection with the assassination attempt on the life of
President Mubarak of Egypt, on the basis of the 1964
Extradition Treaty between Ethiopia and the Sudan; and to
act in its relations with its neighbours and with others in
full conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and
with the Charter of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU).
Nevertheless, my delegation regrets that the
Government of the Sudan has not yet complied with the
request of the Security Council, despite the efforts of the
Secretaries-General of the United Nations and of the OAU.
Guinea-Bissau condemns acts of international terrorism
in all their forms, and believes that the international
community should adopt practical measures to address such
heinous acts. In this context, my delegation reaffirms its
support for the 1994 United Nations Declaration on
Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism.
My delegation also reiterates its strong condemnation
of the attempted assassination of President Mubarak and its
solidarity with the Arab Republic of Egypt. It believes that
the attack affected the sovereignty, integrity and stability
not only of Ethiopia, but of all of Africa.
My delegation encourages the authorities of the Sudan
to take every necessary measure to promote all efforts
aimed at ensuring the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1044 (1996). As the draft resolution before us
does not, in our view, seem to have economic implications
that could adversely affect the civilian population of the
Sudan, my delegation will vote in favour.
Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): My Government is on
record as to the clarity of its position with respect to
international terrorism. We view international terrorism as
a major threat to international peace and security in today’s
world. We remain committed to its eradication from the
face of the globe through concerted international action, and
welcome the attention and the seriousness with which the
Security Council is facing up to the issue.
My delegation deeply regrets that the Security Council
has come to where it stands in the implementation of its
resolution 1044 (1996) of 31 January 1996. My
Government is one of those that advocate the utmost
caution and prudence in taking action under Chapter VII of
the Charter. In the case at hand, however, we see no
alternative but to resort to Chapter VII as the ultimate
means of ensuring the implementation of resolution 1044
(1996).
Sudan has been under the legal obligation to
extradite to Ethiopia for prosecution the three suspects
wanted in connection with the assassination attempt on
the life of President Mubarak, as called for in paragraph
4 (a) of resolution 1044 (1996). There has been no lack
of diplomatic efforts to seek Sudan’s compliance on the
part of either the United Nations Secretary-General or the
Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity.
Unfortunately, to date all these efforts have been to no
avail. Nor have we heard of any progress in the
implementation of paragraph 4 (b) of the resolution.
Although the draft resolution before us invokes
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, the sanctions
contemplated in operative paragraph 3 are of a symbolic
rather than a substantive nature. It should be noted that
they carefully exclude any measure that could have a
direct impact on the Sudanese population. None the less,
operative paragraph 8 of the draft resolution demonstrates
the Council’s determination to consider further measures,
in the event that the Council’s demands specified in
operative paragraph 1 are not complied with within 60
days of 10 May. This is a clear message that must be
taken seriously.
Noting that the draft resolution adequately reflects
the views of my Government and the international
community in addressing the issue of the assassination
attempt on the life of President Mubarak and the issue of
international terrorism, my delegation will vote in favour
of the draft resolution before the Council.
We sincerely hope that the Government of Sudan
will heed the decision of the Security Council by
promptly extraditing the three suspects, in full compliance
with resolution 1044 (1996).
Sudan has been suffering from a longstanding civil
war and already has more than its fair share of economic
difficulties. Any further aggravation of the plight of the
Sudanese people and any further deepening of the
isolation of Sudan are the last things my Government
wishes to see.
Lastly, may I take this occasion to express our
sincere thanks to the Non-Aligned Caucus for submitting
a balanced text.
18
Security Council 3660th meeting
Fifty-first year 26 April 1996
Mr. Henze (Germany): First of all I would like to
take this opportunity to congratulate the Egyptian delegation
and the delegation of Guinea-Bissau, as coordinator of the
non-aligned countries, on their successful efforts in drafting
and submitting the draft resolution to be put to a vote
today. This draft resolution clearly reminds all United
Nations Member States of their obligation in fighting
terrorism. Recent events once again made it abundantly
clear how important it is that we all join in this fight.
Germany can accept the draft resolution. We agree
with other delegations that the purpose of sanctions should
not be punishment, but that they should serve to achieve the
implementation of measures decided upon by the Council.
We also agree that sanctions should be used only if the
issue is so serious that coercive measures are required. This
condition is being met here. The purpose is to put those
suspected of an attempt against the life of the President of
Egypt on trial, an attempt which was strongly condemned
by all the countries represented in this Council. At the same
time, we appreciate the efforts to target the sanctions in
such a way that they do not affect the population as such,
but are limited to those who are in a position to take the
required measures. Nobody wants to see harm being
inflicted on the Sudanese civilian population, which is
already living in poor conditions.
What this draft resolution intends is to ensure
compliance by the Sudanese Government with Security
Council resolution 1044 (1996). Most importantly, Sudan
must do all it can to ensure that the three suspects who are
sheltering or did take shelter in Sudan can be prosecuted in
Ethiopia. “To ensure extradition” encompasses more than
the extradition of the suspects when they are inside Sudan’s
territory: Sudan cannot free itself from its obligations by
allowing the suspects to leave for other countries, and
Sudan, like other countries, also bears responsibility for
persons outside its borders whom it supports in one way or
another.
My delegation sees the draft resolution to be adopted
today as a clear signal to the Sudanese Government to
comply with Security Council resolution 1044 (1996). We
appeal to the Government of Sudan to use the 60-day
period ahead of us now and to take the necessary steps not
only to avoid even farther-reaching measures, but to allow
for an early lifting of the measures the Security Council is
imposing today.
We will vote in favour of the draft resolution.
Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): On the Security Council’s handling of the
question pertaining to Security Council resolution
1044 (1996), our position has been made amply clear.
First, the Chinese Government vigorously opposes
and strongly condemns all forms of terrorism. We hold
that terrorist activities not only wreak havoc on life,
property and social stability, but also threaten
international peace and security. We therefore have
expressed our strong indignation at the attempted
assassination of President Mubarak of Egypt and believe
that terrorists involved in this attempt should be brought
to justice. In this context, we fully understand the concern
of Ethiopia, Egypt and others.
Secondly, we are of the view that this act of
terrorism, like any other international question, should be
addressed by the Council in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the United Nations Charter. It is
necessary to base ourselves on facts, making sure that we
stand on legal ground, pay attention to evidence and deal
with this question in a fair, objective and serious manner.
Thirdly, in principle, we are against frequent
recourse to sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter.
No matter how complex the question may be and how
difficult it is to resolve it, we should always insist on a
peaceful solution through dialogue, consultation and
mediation. Facts have shown that sanctions are often in
the way of a settlement and, worse still, they might even
exacerbate tension, bring suffering to the countries and
peoples of the region and have serious adverse effects not
only on the target country, but also on the neighbouring
countries.
Although the draft resolution before us talks about
diplomatic sanctions only, diplomatic sanctions are still a
form of sanctions. And by invoking Chapter VII of the
Charter, the draft resolution also makes reference to
further measures to be taken by the Council, thus paving
the way for possible strengthening of the sanctions. We
are of the opinion that imposing sanctions on the Sudan
before incontrovertible evidence is in hand will set a bad
precedent for the future work of the Council. Our position
was made clear by our delegation when Security Council
resolution 1044 (1996) was adopted by the Council. I
would also like to reaffirm once again our reservation on
the part of the draft resolution that calls on the Sudan, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1044 (1996),
to refrain from engaging in activities of assisting,
19
Security Council 3660th meeting
Fifty-first year 26 April 1996
supporting and facilitating terrorist activities. Accordingly,
we will abstain in the voting on the draft resolution.
Ever since the failed attempt on the life of President
Mubarak in June last year, the United Nations, the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and others have all
made tireless efforts in trying to resolve this question as
early as possible. Egypt, Ethiopia and others have also done
a great deal of painstaking investigative work in seeking to
establish facts and track down the suspects. The
Government of the Sudan has also publicly condemned
terrorism and clearly stated its willingness to continue
cooperation with the OAU and other States concerned, in
order to have this problem properly resolved. It has also
held consultations with these countries for this purpose. We
appreciate and support all these efforts. We hope that the
parties concerned will, through dialogue and consultation,
and taking full advantage of the role of the OAU, continue
their efforts in this regard.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I shall
now put to the vote the draft resolution contained in
document S/1996/293.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Botswana, Chile, Egypt, France, Germany, Guinea-
Bissau, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy, Poland, Republic
of Korea, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Against:
None
Abstaining:
China, Russian Federation
The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
result of the vote is as follows: 13 in favour, none against
and 2 abstentions. The draft resolution has been adopted as
resolution 1054 (1996).
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I shall
now call on those members of the Council who wish to
make statements following the voting.
Mr. Thiebaud (France) (interpretation from French):
The French delegation voted in favour of the draft
resolution submitted by several members of the Caucus of
Non-Aligned States.
France supports efforts to combat international
terrorism and, in particular, to shed light on the attempted
assassination of President Mubarak on 26 June 1995.
On 31 January last, the Security Council, in
resolution 1044 (1996), made several demands of the
Sudan. In his report of 11 March, the Secretary-General
reported that the Sudan had not fully met those demands.
The resolution just adopted is aimed mainly at
requiring that State to fulfil its obligations under
resolution 1044 (1996), and in particular to work to
extradite to Ethiopia the individuals suspected of having
participated in the attack and who are within its territory.
The text of the resolution must be understood in the
light of available information that leads us to suppose that
the three suspects are in the Sudan. In order to comply
with the resolution, Sudan is required to work towards the
extradition of these individuals if they are indeed within
its territory. To ask more of it would not be in accordance
with international law on extradition, nor is the resolution
intended to do so. The Council cannot hold Sudan
responsible for what it is not.
The Council has chosen not to impose on the Sudan
sanctions that would have a noticeable economic impact
on the population, which is among the most destitute in
Africa.
In two months’ time, the Council will have to
consider, on the basis of facts established by the
Secretary-General, whether the Sudan has met the
demands made of it and, if it has not, whether it should
envisage the adoption of further measures. In this way,
the Security Council’s ability to judge the situation is
retained.
Mr. Gnehm (United States of America): My
Government supports this resolution, but it does so with
reservations. We do not believe that the sanctions outlined
in this resolution are sufficient to convince the
Government of Sudan to cease its sponsorship of
international terrorism and return to the fold of
responsible, law-abiding nations. My Government
welcomes this Council’s concern to combat terrorism.
However, in failing to impose more meaningful sanctions
against Sudan, we risk further insecurity and instability
for the people of eastern Africa, the Middle East and the
Sudan.
20
Security Council 3660th meeting
Fifty-first year 26 April 1996
I must share the concern expressed by Ambassador
Eteffa in his excellent presentation. This resolution raises
questions as to whether the world community is as prepared
as it should be to fight against State-sponsored terrorism
with determination, courage and responsibility.
In adopting resolution 1044 (1996), the Council
recognized Sudan’s complicity in supporting and sheltering
those who plotted the attempted assassination of Egyptian
President Mubarak and the Government of Sudan’s
sponsorship of terrorism as part of its foreign policy.
Resolution 1044 (1996) required two simple steps
from Sudan for it to begin to return to the good graces of
the international community: to surrender the three
remaining suspects in the Mubarak assassination attempt
and to cease its support for terrorism. The Government of
Sudan has refused to comply with these two simple
requirements, as the Secretary-General makes clear in his
report. Instead, Khartoum has focused its efforts on a
public-relations campaign and on smuggling the three
suspects out of the Sudan. We have noted press reports that
one of the suspects has now turned up in Afghanistan,
making the absolutely unbelievable claim that he has not
been in Sudan in months. His recent arrival in Afghanistan
from Sudan does not change the fact that the Government
of Sudan has the responsibility to ensure his extradition to
Ethiopia.
Let us be clear: If Sudan believes that it can escape its
responsibility simply by sending the three suspects out of
the Sudan, it is wrong. As today’s resolution makes clear,
the Government of Sudan, which sheltered these terrorists,
has broad responsibility for seeing that they are returned to
Ethiopia for trial. We will not be satisfied until Sudan has
fulfilled this responsibility.
The claims of the Government of the Sudan that it has
tried to locate the three wanted suspects have no credibility.
Sudanese authorities were aware of the location of the three
before, during and after the assassination attempt, and after
the extradition request from Ethiopia was received. Sudan
has harboured the three suspects, and officials of the
National Islamic Front have protected them.
As shocking as are Sudan’s complicity in, and efforts
to cover up, the attack on President Mubarak, they are only
part of a broader pattern of Sudanese support for terrorism,
which equally demands action by the international
community.
Under the policy of the National Islamic Front,
Sudan welcomed a long list of terrorist organizations,
providing a meeting point and training centre for their
violent activities outside of Sudan. Sudan continues to
harbour members of the Abu Nidal organization, the
Lebanese Hezbollah, the Palestine Islamic Jihad, the
Palestinian Islamic Resistance Movement — Hamas —
the Egyptian Al-Gama’a-Islamia, and the Algerian Armed
Islamic Group. These terrorist organizations threaten
Governments in Egypt, Algeria, Israel and elsewhere.
The National Islamic Front also supports Islamic and
other opposition groups from Tunisia, Kenya, Ethiopia,
Eritrea and Uganda, as we heard earlier. All of these
Governments have beseeched Sudan to cease its
sponsorship of violent opposition movements, but without
success, as we heard from the representative of Uganda
earlier in this debate. Uganda and Eritrea have been
forced to sever relations with Khartoum because of the
threat these organizations based in Sudan posed to them.
Sudan’s efforts to export terrorism have even
reached the United Nations. Two employees of the
Sudanese Mission to the United Nations were active
accomplices in the plot to assassinate President Mubarak
during a visit to New York. They were also active
accomplices in efforts to blow up the very building that
we are meeting in today. They provided information on
the President’s itinerary. These two employees also
offered to provide identification cards and parking passes
so that terrorists could plant a bomb, like the one at the
World Trade Center, in the basement of this building.
These are not just allegations — they are part of the
public, official record of a criminal trial held openly here
in the courts of the City of New York.
To support its terrorist clients, Sudan regularly
abuses the prerogatives of sovereign States by giving out
Sudanese passports, both diplomatic and regular, to help
non-Sudanese terrorists travel freely, as documented in
cases involving Ethiopia, Egypt and Tunisia. It uses
Sudan Airways to transport terrorists and their weapons,
as in the cases of Ethiopia and Tunisia; it makes financial
resources and safe refuges available to terrorists; and it
provides the very weapons terrorists use to inflict their
horror, as in the Mubarak assassination attempt in Addis
Ababa.
All Member States face the international threat of
terrorism. We have all stressed in various forums that we
will fight global terrorism wherever it appears. Our
objective, often repeated by Egypt, Ethiopia and other
21
Security Council 3660th meeting
Fifty-first year 26 April 1996
neighbours of Sudan, is to bring about an end to Sudan’s
support of terrorist groups. If we are serious about our
commitment to combat terrorism, we must put our words
and our intentions into meaningful action.
Today’s resolution is another step toward true action.
On the positive side, the Council has finally determined that
Sudan’s actions in supporting the cowardly terrorist attack
on President Mubarak, and continuing to foster terrorism
around the globe, are indeed a threat to international peace
and security. By imposing initial sanctions, the Council is
telling the Government of Sudan that we will not be content
with mere words.
We favour the steps the Council is taking today, but
we must say again that they are not big enough. We believe
that firmer measures should be taken, not against the people
of Sudan, but against their unresponsive Government.
The Government of Sudan, however, should take no
comfort from the fact that today’s measures are not as
strong as they might be. For the Council has promised that
if the Government of Sudan fails to meet our requirements
in the next 60 days, we will seek more meaningful
sanctions. We hope that the Government of Sudan gets the
message, turns over the suspects and stops supporting other
terrorists. If not, we will be back here in two months to do
whatever is necessary to compel Sudan to abide by the
rules of a civilized nation.
Mr. Martínez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from
Spanish): Honduras condemns all acts, methods and
practices of terrorism, wherever they may occur, and
whoever commits them, and reiterates its support for all the
efforts being made under international law to end the threat
of international terrorism to international peace and
security.
The attempted assassination of the President of the
Arab Republic of Egypt in Addis Ababa on 26 June 1995
was a reprehensible act, and an example of a practice which
the international community cannot tolerate. It affected the
sovereignty and stability not only of Ethiopia, but of the
African region as a whole, and should not be treated with
impunity, as the Organization of African Unity (OAU) has
recognized.
My delegation therefore supported the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1044 (1996), and deplores the
fact that it has not yet been complied with. My delegation
regrets the fact that the Government of Sudan has not
complied with the requirements of paragraph 4 of resolution
1044 (1996) or with the demands in the statements of the
Central Organ of the OAU Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution of 11 September
1995 and 19 December 1995 for the extradition of those
suspected of the attempt on the life of President Mubarak.
My delegation believes that in the struggle against
the scourge of international terrorism, States should be
aware of their responsibility for adopting measures
intended to combat and eliminate terrorism, as well as
their obligation to refrain from instigating, inciting or
promoting terrorist acts and from allowing their
preparation in their territory. It is also the duty of States
to refuse to receive or protect those who commit such
acts.
My delegation voted in favour of the resolution the
Council has just adopted, in the hope that the measures it
contains will prompt the Government of Sudan to meet,
without further delay, the requirements contained in
resolution 1044 (1996) and to act in conformity with the
principles of the United Nations Charter. Furthermore, we
believe that this resolution has been carefully worded so
as not to include economic measures that could adversely
affect the civilian population of Sudan.
Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
In January the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 1044 (1996) to send a clear, unambiguous
message to the Government of the Sudan that the
international community, as represented in the Security
Council, was taking a firm stand against the phenomenon
of international terrorism, and to deter those
contemplating supporting terrorism, including countries
involved in such criminal acts.
In this respect, we should recall that the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) considered the
assassination attempt against the life of President Hosni
Mubarak of Egypt to be an attack on the whole of Africa,
threatening regional stability and international peace and
security.
The report of the Secretary-General on the efforts of
his Special Envoy pursuant to resolution 1044 (1996),
drew two firm conclusions: first, that Sudan has not yet
complied with the Security Council’s demand to extradite
the three suspects to Ethiopia; and, secondly, that all the
neighbouring countries of Sudan visited by the Secretary-
General’s Special Envoy, accused it, in one way or
another, of supporting terrorist activities within their
territories.
22
Security Council 3660th meeting
Fifty-first year 26 April 1996
The Council gave the Government of Sudan more than
two months to comply with resolution 1044 (1996) before
meeting today to adopt the measures which must be taken
by the international community to force the Sudanese
Government to deal with this dangerous issue with due
seriousness. However, those in power in Sudan have,
regrettably, continued their policy of disregarding the will
of the international community. They have continued to
grant shelter to terrorists, and have helped them to evade
prosecution. Such prosecution would have revealed who
had provided them with shelter, assistance, weapons and
security cover.
I listened very carefully to the statement of the
Permanent Representative of the Sudan, and would like to
correct his claim — on page 16 of his text — that Egypt
circulated a document that included a record of an
investigation of some of the suspects currently in Ethiopian
jails. I would like to make it clear that Egypt has not
circulated this document, and I wish that he would be more
precise in such matters.
I would also like to say that I do not understand what
the Sudanese Ambassador meant when he wondered why
Egypt has not denied that one of the suspects is in
Afghanistan. I do not understand this. Egypt has nothing to
do with these suspects. It has absolutely no relationship
with them, so it cannot deny, confirm or affirm their
whereabouts. This stands in stark contrast to the established
link between the Sudan and the suspects.
It is regrettable that some official Sudanese circles, in
an attempt to deny the relationship of the Sudanese
Government to these terrorists, have proved this infamous
relationship beyond any doubt.
The Sudanese Ambassador mentioned a Sudanese
newspaper that was closely linked to security and official
circles in Khartoum. I would like to say that in a front-page
article, on 14 March 1996, that newspaper reported that the
three suspects harboured by Sudan would appear in a
different country and would tell the press that the Sudan
was innocent and had not taken part in the assassination
attempt. In fact, on 20 April, an Arab newspaper published
an interview with a person who said he was one of the
suspects, claiming that he was in Afghanistan. Despite the
fact that that terrorist confessed to his involvement in the
assassination attempt and stated that before that others had
entered Ethiopia via the Sudan, he denied that the Sudan
had taken part in the conspiracy, just as the Sudanese
newspaper had predicted more than a month before.
Consequently — and I hope this is clear — the piece
of evidence that was sought by the defence has turned
into proof positive that the Sudan was closely linked to
these terrorists.
Since the adoption of resolution 1044 (1996), the
Sudanese Government has hinted that it was about to
change its policies vis-à-vis the support of international
acts and activities that target the security and stability of
neighbouring countries.
We have heard two neighbouring countries today —
Ethiopia and Uganda. Regrettably, we do not see that the
words of the officials of the Government of Sudan match
their deeds. We hope that the resolution just adopted by
the Council will reaffirm the irreversible resolve to
implement the earlier resolution.
By adopting resolution 1054 (1996) today, under
Chapter VII of the Charter, the Security Council
reaffirmed that the dangers of international terrorism
represent a grave threat to international peace and security
and that concerted efforts by countries to eliminate that
threat and to deter those who assist in its perpetration are
a basic requirement for the maintenance of international
peace and security in today’s world.
History will record that in the Council’s
deliberations on this resolution, Egypt categorically
rejected the inclusion of any measure that would harm the
Sudanese people or increase its suffering, which results
from the policies of its Government. Egypt also rejected
the inclusion of any measure that would negatively affect
the unity, independence and territorial integrity of the
Sudan. The members of the Council supported that
position, and I should like to extend my thanks to all of
them.
The measures imposed by the resolution adopted
today were restricted to diplomatic action in order to send
to the Sudan a clear warning of the consequences of
continuing its present policies, and I hope that the
Sudanese Government will not misinterpret the message.
The Council is determined, in accordance with the
resolution, to ensure the implementation of resolution
1044 (1996). It will look at the matter again in 60 days to
decide whether the Sudan has complied with the
resolution, and other measures can be adopted to
guarantee this compliance.
The Egyptian Government still hopes that the
Sudanese Government will comply, without delay or
23
Security Council 3660th meeting
Fifty-first year 26 April 1996
stalling, with the international demands included in
resolution 1044 (1996) and 1054 (1996). We hope that the
Secretary-General will be able to come back to inform the
Council that the Sudan has implemented all the measures
included in the two resolutions. These are the same
measures that were called for by the OAU Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution and that
the Secretary-General of the OAU has tried to convince the
Sudan to implement, to no avail.
Egypt hopes that diplomatic measures adopted by
various countries in the implementation of the resolution
adopted today, along with the efforts of all other countries,
will contribute to encouraging the Sudan to comply.
The implementation by the Sudan of the resolution
adopted by the Council today can bring about a real change
in Sudan’s orientation and in the Sudanese Government’s
policies, which have led it to the present regrettable
situation.
Allow me to conclude my statement by reaffirming
that every Egyptian feels and appreciates the special nature
of the historical relations that bind the peoples of the Nile
Valley in Egypt and in the Sudan. I repeat once again —
and I am speaking to the Ambassador of the Sudan — that
we in Egypt feel that we are a natural extension of the
Sudan, that the Sudan is a natural extension of us, that
anything that harms the people of the Sudan harms the
people of Egypt and vice versa. There is no doubt that
Egypt is eager for relations between the countries to return
to normal so that the brotherly Sudanese people can enjoy
stability, prosperity and good relations with all its
neighbours, particularly with Egypt, and we trust that the
deep-seated links that bind the Egyptian and Sudanese
peoples together — links that were formed and
strengthened over time — will continue to be strong in the
future.
Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): The conclusions
of the comprehensive report produced by the Secretary-
General in response to resolution 1044 (1996) are clear:
first, Sudan has not complied with the demand in that
resolution to extradite the three suspects wanted in
connection with the assassination attempt on President
Mubarak, and, secondly, many of Sudan’s neighbours
remain concerned about its support for terrorist activities
within their territories.
That is why the Council has had to take further action.
It has nothing to do with the orientation of the current
Government in Sudan: it is purely and simply a necessary
response to Sudan’s failure to respond adequately to the
demands of this Council and of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU).
We therefore welcome the initiative of the
non-aligned members of the Council in bringing forward
the resolution which has just been adopted. We fully
support the measures it contains and hope that they will
contribute to an early change of heart in Khartoum. The
solution to the problem is simple: the Government of
Sudan must recognize international concern about its
behaviour and comply with the demands of the Security
Council and the Organization of African Unity (OAU).
One of the principal demands of the resolution is the
requirement for Sudan to ensure that the three suspects
wanted in connection with the assassination attempt are
brought to justice in Ethiopia. We are convinced that the
Government of Sudan knows where they are. If they are
still in Sudan, the answer is straightforward: the
Government must extradite them to Ethiopia under the
terms of the Bilateral Extradition Treaty. If, as may be
the case, Sudan has helped at least one of the three leave
the country, this resolution clearly requires that the
Government of Sudan must take immediate action,
including, for example, by providing the necessary
evidence, to bring about extradition to Ethiopia. We will
not be satisfied until Sudan has secured this objective, and
has also ceased its support for international terrorism.
We draw the Government of Sudan’s attention to the
last paragraph of the resolution: it is a clear message that
the Security Council will remain engaged in this matter.
Mr. Matuszewski (Poland): Speaking on the
occasion of the Security Council debate concerning
resolution 1044 (1996), the Polish delegation expressed its
strong position on terrorism. We confirmed, in particular,
that the Government of the Republic of Poland condemns
terrorism in every form and that there are no
circumstances that could possibly justify its use. We also
made it clear that the accountability of those who
committed the acts of terrorism is a matter of primary
importance.
We regret to conclude that resolution 1044 (1996)
remains unheeded in what constitutes its main thrust —
namely, ensuring that those suspected of the terrorist
attempt on the life of President Mubarak are extradited
from the Sudan to Ethiopia to stand trial in a court of
law, which would demonstrate that the Government of the
24
Security Council 3660th meeting
Fifty-first year 26 April 1996
Sudan is willing to respect the international community’s
standards in dealing with terrorists.
The Polish delegation has voted in favour of the
resolution which the Security Council has just adopted. This
resolution contains a clear message to all those responsible
for allowing justice to be served, as appropriate. The
message is that the perpetrators of the acts of terrorism will
not go unpunished.
To conclude, let me also thank the Non-Aligned
Caucus for its work with regard to the resolution which has
been adopted this evening.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Chile.
On the occasion of the adoption of resolution 1044
(1996) on 31 January 1996, my delegation clearly stated its
position concerning terrorism, which Chile condemns and
repudiates. We also expressed our strongest rejection of the
attempted assassination of President Hosni Mubarak of
Egypt. At this time we wish to reiterate what we stated on
that occasion.
On 11 March 1996 we received the Secretary-
General’s report contained in document S/1996/179. After
that, the Security Council undertook a long process of
consultations and negotiations. Today we have adopted a
new resolution on this subject, which stems from Sudan’s
non-compliance with resolution 1044 (1996), which we
regret.
Chile listened carefully to the African members of the
Security Council to find guidance with respect to the path
we should follow. In that respect, we gave special
consideration in the Security Council to the option of
regional action, as well as to the views of the countries of
the region in question, and in particular, to the views of the
Organization of African Unity and its Secretary-General.
We have also been guided at all times — especially
now, when it has fallen to me to assume the delicate task
of President of the Security Council — by the need to
follow a procedure and a treatment of this question that
would be fair and transparent and in which the Security
Council would have all available background information
and evidence. The Sudan and all Governments wishing to
express their views on this subject were offered our full
cooperation, including the possibility of holding an open
debate of the Security Council, which was not requested
by any country.
The draft that became today’s resolution gave rise to
considerable discussion of the measures to be adopted,
and, as we have said on various occasions, Chile, in
principle, has doubts as to the effectiveness of using
sanctions. We are convinced that economic sanctions
disproportionately affect the innocent and the weak rather
than the leaders responsible for the reprehensible acts for
which we impugn the countries.
In this case, the great challenge that the Security
Council still has ahead is how to apply sanctions that are
effective and, at the same time, human. This is not being
achieved with our current practices. Sanctions regimes
must be increasingly aimed at the leaders who are
politically responsible, and not at the common people. In
the quest for international peace and security the Security
Council cannot forget its humanitarian responsibility.
In this particular case, we are using diplomatic
sanctions which, while they exert a considerable degree
of pressure, cannot be equated with economic sanctions.
Together with this, we must also say that we are
deeply concerned over the statements of neighbouring
countries about the activities of the Sudan in their
territories. They are the countries of the region; they share
borders and should, in theory, be brotherly countries. We
are also concerned over the information that terrorist
groups could be operating in their territories.
The Security Council will continue to follow
developments related to the implementation of this new
resolution. The terrorism of a few, or of many, cannot
leave us indifferent. The Security Council must know
how to act when it determines that it is occurring.
We appeal to the Government of the Sudan to do
everything within its power to comply with the resolution
adopted today. We sincerely hope that in that way this
item can be removed from the agenda of the Security
Council.
25
Security Council 3660th meeting
Fifty-first year 26 April 1996
For all these reasons, we voted in favour of the
resolution.
I now resume my function as the President of the
Council.
There are no further speakers. The Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the item
on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 7.20 p.m.
26
