United Nations S/PV.3831
97-86485 (E) This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fifty-second Year
3831st Meeting
Wednesday, 12 November 1997, 1.20 p.m.
New York
President: Mr. Qin Huasun . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (China)
Members: Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Larraín
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Berrocal Soto
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Elaraby
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dejammet
Guinea-Bissau . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Cabral
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Owada
Kenya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mahugu
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wlosowicz
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Monteiro
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Park
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dahlgren
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Mr. Gomersall
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Richardson
Agenda
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
Security Council 3831st meeting
Fifty-second year 12 November 1997
The meeting was called to order at 1.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
The President (interpretation from Chinese): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the
following documents: S/1997/829, letter dated 29 October
1997 from the Permanent Representative of Iraq to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting the text of a letter of the same date
from the Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq addressed to the
President of the Security Council, and S/1997/855 and
S/1997/867, letters dated 6 and 10 November 1997 from the
Chargé d’affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of
Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council and the Secretary-General, respectively,
transmitting letters of the same date from the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Iraq addressed to the President of the
Security Council and to the Secretary-General, respectively;
S/1997/830, S/1997/836, S/1997/837, S/1997/843,
S/1997/848, S/1997/851 and S/1997/864, letters dated 30
October and 2, 3, 4, 5 and 7 November 1997, respectively,
from the Executive Chairman of the Special Commission
established by the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
9 (b) (i) of Security Council resolution 687 (1991)
addressed to the President of the Security Council; and
S/1997/833, letter dated 31 October 1997 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security
Council.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1997/872, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America. Chile, Costa Rica, Japan, Poland, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea and Sweden have joined the sponsors of
the draft resolution contained in document S/1997/872.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless
I hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the
vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Berrocal Soto (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Spanish): I should like to convey greetings to you, Sir,
and to express my delegation’s deep gratification at
seeing you guide our work in this month of November,
particularly in the context of such a delicate and serious
issue as the one now before us, which puts to the test key
principles of the peaceful coexistence among nations and
the very provisions of the Charter.
The core of the question is not merely the issue of
sanctions but the Government of Iraq’s outright defiance
of the international community and of the very authority
of the Security Council under the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations. This is a challenge that
goes beyond the purely juridical; we are facing a political
challenge with unforeseeable implications.
This circumstance explains more clearly than could
mere words the unanimous and undivided reaction of the
Security Council. The Government of Iraq is putting to
the test the jurisdiction and the legal powers of this
primary organ of the United Nations, whose fundamental
responsibility — and it is important to recall this at this
point — is to maintain international peace and security,
as stipulated very precisely and explicitly in Article 24 of
the Charter.
The sanctions regime imposed on Iraq has its
origin — and it is also essential to recall this today — in
an absolutely unjustifiable and reprehensible war of
aggression and territorial conquest against a neighbouring,
bordering country that is a State Member of the United
Nations. It is true that seven years have elapsed, but
neither time nor the unanimous and strongly expressed
censure of the international community, the sanctions
regime imposed by the Security Council, nor indeed
international public opinion seem to have been enough to
impress on the Iraqi authorities the gravity and far-
reaching implications of its past actions and current
defiance.
The sole purpose of the sanctions is to impress upon
the political and military authorities of Iraq that they must
comply with their international commitments and that the
inspection activities of the Special Commission are
intended to ensure that that country cannot use, develop,
build or acquire armaments having a nuclear, biological
or chemical capacity. This is a fundamental point, and the
one to which resolution 687 (1991) refers. On this last
2
Security Council 3831st meeting
Fifty-second year 12 November 1997
point the opinion of the international community is
unanimous and unswerving.
The purpose of sanctions is not to affect the capacity
for economic, social and political development of the Iraqi
people or of Iraqi society. My country has maintained a
consistent and clear-cut position on this issue. Costa Rica
takes the view that the sanctions must be carefully designed
so as to fulfil a single objective — that of changing the
unlawful policies of the Government of Iraq and securing
its full reintegration into the international community’s legal
framework.
The draft resolution that we are about to adopt, on
which Costa Rica will vote in favour, falls within this set
of principles. It is a firm and robust yet well-balanced draft
resolution. Admittedly, it expands the sanctions regime, but
the new provisions are confined solely to those political and
military individuals who are responsible for this latest
challenge by Iraq to the international community and the
Security Council.
My delegation’s greatest wish is to see the
Government of Iraq reintegrated into the framework of
international law and state clearly and firmly its resolve to
comply with all the resolutions of the Security Council, in
particular resolution 661 (1990) and 687 (1991). We hope
and trust that the Baghdad authorities will act accordingly.
In conclusion, I should like to express to the
Secretary-General the respect and esteem that my
delegation feels for him as a result of his action in sending
a high-level mission to Baghdad last week. This served to
strengthen the authority of the Secretariat and demonstrated
once again Secretary-General Annan’s devotion to peace
and his unswerving dedication to the provisions of the
Charter and the powers that he holds under it.
The President (interpretation from Chinese): I thank
the representative of Costa Rica for the kind words he
addressed to me.
Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): The question before us is
not only whether or not Iraq is cooperating with the United
Nations Special Commission and its weapons inspectors.
What we have seen is a clear refusal to abide by the
decisions of the Security Council, and thereby also a
challenge to the entire United Nations.
When the Council in October again demanded that
Iraq comply with its obligations, Iraq shortly thereafter set
out unacceptable conditions for the work of the Special
Commission in the country. The Security Council swiftly
demanded that Iraq rescind its decision. My Government
commends the Secretary-General for his initiative, which
then followed, to send a high-level mission to Baghdad to
try to avert a potentially serious threat to international
peace and security.
Regrettably, Iraq did not grasp that opportunity to
find a solution to the crisis. Instead, it has continued to
violate its obligations to cooperate fully and
unconditionally with the Special Commission. In addition,
it has implicitly threatened the safety of the
reconnaissance aircraft operating on behalf of the
Commission.
This is in flagrant violation of Iraq’s obligations
under relevant resolutions. It warrants a firm and clear
response from the Security Council.
My delegation feels that the draft resolution before
us is an appropriate response consistent with earlier
Council resolutions. The measures will affect only those
individuals who are responsible for, or are participating
in, instances of non-compliance. Innocent Iraqi civilians
will not be affected. Through diplomatic means, the Iraqi
Government should now be made to understand that
cooperation with the international community is in its
own interest and in the interest of the Iraqi people.
It is the continuing and unanimous determination of
the Security Council that Iraq’s weapons of mass
destruction must be eliminated. The draft resolution
reflects that determination. It also underscores that full
cooperation with the Special Commission and
implementation of the relevant resolutions is the only way
forward towards having the sanctions lifted. If Iraq wants
to find an audience for its grievances, it should not
challenge the international community and provoke the
United Nations, but should cooperate and establish itself
as a credible partner for dialogue.
The unity demonstrated in the Council today will
send a clear message: that Iraq must rescind its decision
and cooperate with the United Nations Special
Commission fully, immediately and without conditions or
restrictions. For these reasons, Sweden supports the draft
resolution before us.
Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Portugal deeply regrets
this serious crisis, which was provoked by the Iraqi
challenge to the authority of the Security Council. The
obstacles repeatedly raised by the Iraqi authorities in the
3
Security Council 3831st meeting
Fifty-second year 12 November 1997
last months to the work of the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM) are unacceptable. The Special
Commission is an arm of the Security Council, with the
duty to conduct inspections on its behalf. Challenging
UNSCOM is challenging the Council is challenging the
United Nations. That is intolerable.
Also intolerable is the decision announced by Iraq on
29 October and the Iraqi behaviour since then: the
conditions Iraq has sought to impose on UNSCOM
operations; its refusal to accept members of the Special
Commission on grounds of their nationality; the removal of
equipment; the threats against aircraft in the service of the
United Nations.
The present draft resolution, which we have joined in
sponsoring, is the logical outcome of previous decisions
taken by the Council since June. Then, the Council sent a
clear message of warning to the Government of Iraq by
adopting unanimously resolution 1115 (1997). By that
resolution the Council called upon Iraq to cooperate fully
with the Special Commission or face additional sanctions.
On 29 October, the Council, once again unanimously,
through the voice of its President, made a strong statement
of condemnation of the decision of the Government of Iraq
in attempting to dictate the terms of its cooperation with the
Special Commission. The Council also warned of the
serious consequences of Iraq’s failure to comply
immediately and fully with its obligations.
Portugal has supported all diplomatic efforts developed
to make the Iraqi authorities understand the need to rescind
their unacceptable decision and comply unconditionally
with their obligations. We welcomed in particular the
initiative taken by the Secretary-General in sending personal
representatives all the way to Baghdad to try to convey this
message directly to the Iraqi Government. Unfortunately,
we have not seen any positive results.
This draft resolution is therefore the necessary next
step. The additional sanctions foreseen are sharply targeted
in order not to impose further suffering on the Iraqi
population, which has made many sacrifices, or on
neighbouring countries. They are designed to affect those
Iraqi officials and members of the Iraqi armed forces who
are responsible for Iraq’s non-compliance with its
obligations.
Nobody should forget why ultimately we are here,
confronted with another crisis with Iraq — one more such
crisis since 1990. Iraq faces sanctions imposed by the
Security Council because Iraq violated international law
by invading another country. The United Nations has no
quarrel with the Iraqi people. Nor is it the aim of the
United Nations to question Iraq’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
It is in the hands of the Government of Iraq to bring
an end to these sanctions. The only way they can be lifted
is through Iraq’s full compliance with the resolutions of
the Security Council. They can be lifted soon, provided
Iraq cooperates fully, honestly and unconditionally with
UNSCOM.
We hope this clear message from the Council will
finally be understood in Baghdad, so that a new path of
true cooperation with the Security Council will be opened.
We want the Iraqi nation to regain its full role within the
international community and the Iraqi people to see an
end to their suffering.
Mr. Owada (Japan): Let me begin by stating the
fundamental position of Japan that it is Japan’s sincere
wish to see Iraq immediately and unconditionally comply
with all the relevant resolutions of the Security Council so
that Iraq can resume normal relations with the
international community. It is for this reason that Japan,
after the Iraqi decision on 29 October to impose
conditions on its cooperation with the United Nations
Special Commission (UNSCOM), has made a series of
diplomatic efforts in Tokyo, in Paris and in New York to
persuade Iraq to comply fully with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. But Iraq has not responded positively
to these efforts by Japan.
Other countries, both within and outside the Council,
as well as the Secretary-General through the dispatch of
his three envoys, have also endeavoured to persuade Iraq
to rescind its decision. It is most regrettable that Iraq has
to this day not rescinded its decision of 29 October.
The Security Council pronounced its unequivocal
and united position through the presidential statement of
29 October 1997 [S/PRST/1997/49] that the Iraqi decision
of 29 October is unacceptable. It demanded that Iraq
cooperate fully with UNSCOM in accordance with the
relevant resolutions, and without any conditions or
restrictions.
The exclusion of UNSCOM personnel of a certain
nationality from field activities is totally unacceptable
from the standpoint of ensuring the effective execution of
UNSCOM’s mandate and in the light of Article 100 of
4
Security Council 3831st meeting
Fifty-second year 12 November 1997
the Charter of the United Nations. Also, Iraq’s position on
the aircraft operating on behalf of UNSCOM cannot be
accepted. What is more, the letter dated 5 November 1997
from the Executive Chairman of UNSCOM [S/1997/851]
states that Iraq had moved dual-use equipment subject to
monitoring by UNSCOM without the required prior
notification and had apparently tampered with UNSCOM’s
monitoring cameras. As indicated by the Executive
Chairman of UNSCOM, Ambassador Butler, such acts
might prejudice the future long-term monitoring capabilities
of the Special Commission and of the International Atomic
Energy Agency. This is a cause for grave concern on our
part.
The Security Council must address the issue of the
Iraqi decision to impose conditions on its cooperation with
UNSCOM with the utmost seriousness, in particular
because the issue concerns the programme of the
elimination of weapons of mass destruction from Iraqi soil
and directly affects peace and security in the region.
In the course of the recent repeated cases of Iraqi non-
cooperation with UNSCOM, which has continued since
June, Iraq has been given ample time to accept the
Council’s just and unequivocal demand that it cooperate
immediately and unconditionally with UNSCOM. Iraq had
been offered a chance to rescind its decision of 29 October
when the Secretary-General dispatched three envoys to
Baghdad last week.
Despite these efforts, Iraq continues to refuse to
resume full cooperation with UNSCOM. Instead, Iraqi
authorities are suggesting unacceptable preconditions for its
resumption of cooperation with UNSCOM and for its
compliance with the relevant resolutions. Such Iraqi actions
are a challenge to the authority of the Security Council, as
well as to the international community.
Under these circumstances, the Security Council,
acting in unity and with firmness, is going to declare that
this Iraqi position is unacceptable. The Council demands
that the Iraqi Government cooperate immediately and
unconditionally with UNSCOM.
Japan joins all the other members of the Council in
support of this draft resolution.
In conclusion, Japan calls on the Government of Iraq
to accede to this united voice of the international
community.
Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): The Polish delegation
expresses its grave concern that, instead of adhering to
the decisions of the Security Council contained in its
resolutions 1115 (1997) and 1134 (1997), the Government
of Iraq has chosen to impose conditions on its cooperation
with the United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM),
thus posing a challenge to the United Nations and the
authority of its Security Council.
Having ignored the 29 October 1997 statement by
the President of the Security Council, Iraq has further
aggravated the current crisis. Due to the intransigent
position of the Iraqi authorities, the Special Commission
has been prevented from discharging its responsibility
under Security Council resolutions.
Along with others, the Polish delegation remains
extremely concerned at the successive incidents involving
Iraqi discrimination against some of the United Nations
personnel on the grounds of their nationality. We are
equally concerned at the instances of Iraqi interference in
the effective operation of the monitoring system,
including the removal of dual-use equipment from the
view of UNSCOM surveillance cameras, as well as at the
Iraqi demand that the aircraft operating on behalf of the
Special Commission be withdrawn from use, with the
accompanying implicit threat to its safety.
Numerous appeals made by Member States to
reverse the course taken by the Government of Iraq have
remained unheeded.
In view of the seriousness of the situation and the
potential escalation of the crisis, we supported the
initiative of the Secretary-General to send his high-level
mission to Baghdad to convey to the Iraqi authorities the
clear and unambiguous message that Iraq must return
immediately to full compliance with all relevant Security
Council resolutions. Regrettably, that mission did not
reach its intended and much desired objective.
In its resolutions 1115 (1997) and 1134 (1997), the
Council expressed and reaffirmed its firm intention to
adopt additional measures, in case of Iraqi failure to fully
cooperate with UNSCOM, to ensure unconditional
compliance by Iraq with its obligations in this regard.
Today, faced with the unchanging position of Iraq,
the Council cannot but follow unanimously and decisively
the logic of its earlier decisions.
5
Security Council 3831st meeting
Fifty-second year 12 November 1997
The draft resolution before us reiterates the Council’s
demands concerning the full and unconditional cooperation
of Iraq with the Special Commission. It reflects the
determination of the Council to ensure that the Special
Commission continues its progress towards the elimination
of Iraqi programmes of weapons of mass destruction, as
well as the Council’s commitment to see the completion of
the UNSCOM mandate.
We express our earnest hope that the present draft
resolution will yet again remind the Government of Iraq
that its full cooperation with UNSCOM is one of the basic
conditions which must be fulfilled for the process of the
lifting of sanctions to begin. Poland, for its part, would
certainly welcome the attainment of such an outcome as
quickly as possible.
That is why Poland supports the draft resolution before
the Council.
Mr. Larraín (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
We regret that it has been necessary to meet today in this
Chamber, but this is dictated by the fact that the
Government of Iraq not only is not complying with the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, but is also
actually defying them. This is inadmissible.
On 29 October the Government of Iraq took the
decision to impose conditions on its cooperation with the
United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM). On that
same day, the Security Council reacted by condemning that
decision and demanding that Iraq cooperate fully in the
discharge of UNSCOM’s mandate. However, that was not
enough, and we have witnessed Iraq’s continued obstruction
of the work of the Special Commission.
Let us recall that UNSCOM has a mandate from the
Security Council — that is to say, from the international
community — to ensure that Iraq’s weapons of mass
destruction are eliminated. That mandate imposes an
inescapable obligation on Iraq. Regrettably, Iraq has
hindered the fulfilment of that mandate, and we now find
ourselves compelled to respond with a new Security
Council resolution.
It is very important to bear in mind that this draft
resolution has behind it the full weight of the Council,
which is acting unanimously. The Government of Iraq must
understand the clear message that is being sent to it by the
international community through this draft resolution.
We should like nothing better than to see this
difficult situation created by the Iraqi authorities resolved.
This will be possible only to the extent that the
Government of Iraq fully complies with the relevant
resolutions of this Council.
We wish to reaffirm once again our support for the
Special Commission in its effort to fulfil the mandate
entrusted to it by the Security Council. In this context, we
would remind the Government of Iraq of its responsibility
in connection with the security of the personnel of the
Special Commission, which includes nationals of my
country.
Lastly, my delegation would like to place on record
today our particular appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the initiative that he took at the beginning of this
crisis, once again honouring his commitment to peace.
Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
The draft resolution to be voted on today reflects the
rapid succession of events during the last two weeks,
since the beginning of the current crisis.
Since the beginning of this crisis, Egypt has called
for all possible efforts to be made to contain it through
dialogue and diplomatic means. Egypt has also called for
averting confrontation and escalation and any action that
would affect the stability of that sensitive part of the
world.
In this regard, I would like to pay tribute to the
efforts and the important contacts made recently by the
Secretary-General. I would like to express Egypt’s
appreciation for the valuable effort made by the high-level
mission sent to Baghdad under the chairmanship of
Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi.
In addition, Egypt spared no effort in conducting
contacts at all levels — at the highest levels — in
Baghdad, in Cairo and here in New York. Up to the very
last moment, we had hoped that all these efforts would be
successful in defusing the crisis and in persuading Iraq to
reverse its position, which would have negated the need
to put the draft resolution before the Council today to the
vote.
Egypt understands the feelings of despair and
frustration of the ordinary people of Iraq because of their
continued suffering, which results from the sanctions
imposed on Iraq. There is not even a glimmer of hope
that they will be lifted after the six and a half years
6
Security Council 3831st meeting
Fifty-second year 12 November 1997
during which Iraq has been dealing with the United Nations
Special Commission. While we recognize that its
cooperation has not been ideal, it could be said that Iraq
has gone a long way in that direction.
Nonetheless, we do not see wisdom in Iraq’s
insistence on its recent position with regard to the Special
Commission. Nor do we see wisdom in its lack of
responsiveness to the efforts we and other parties made to
dissuade it from insisting on this position. We do not see
wisdom in that position because it means squandering the
achievements made on Iraq’s long road of cooperation with
the Special Commission over the past years. We do not see
any wisdom in this position because the completion of the
process of cooperation between Iraq and the Special
Commission and of Iraq’s compliance with the relevant
resolutions of the Council is the means of lifting the
sanctions imposed on Iraq and, therefore, the means of
alleviating the suffering of our brothers, the Iraqi people.
On the other hand, the current crisis must be seen as
a good opportunity to extract lessons. The Council must
recognize this in its dealings with Iraq in the future. This
should be in a manner that takes into account the concerns
and suffering of the Iraqi people and the causes and
ramifications of the feelings of frustration that lead to the
taking of positions that, we hasten to reaffirm once again,
are unacceptable to us. Such positions do not serve the
interests of any party, including Iraq itself.
At yet another level, the Council should review the
Special Commission’s methods of work in order to ensure
increased efficiency in carrying out its tasks as a subsidiary
organ of the Council, within the context of the current
dialogue taking place in the corridors of the United Nations
on the need to reform all United Nations bodies in general.
We are currently discussing reform and development in the
General Assembly and in all other bodies, and we must do
so here, too, so that we do not push Iraq, with its back to
the wall, into believing that it has nothing to gain from its
continued cooperation with the Commission and nothing to
lose from a cessation of that cooperation.
At any rate, we share the conviction of many
delegations, both members and non-members of the
Council, regarding the necessity always to comply fully
with constitutional provisions and legal standards by not
depriving any State Member of the United Nations of the
right to express its view before the Council, in accordance
with Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter. This is the right of
all States Members of the United Nations, especially if the
question relates to sanctions imposed on that State under
Chapter VII of the Charter. Such sanctions cause human
suffering, as is well known.
In this context, I call upon the Council to take into
very serious account the comments made by the
Secretary-General in his talking points for his briefing of
the members of the Council on 10 November with regard
to the outcome of the mission of his envoys to Iraq:
(spoke in English)
“Had Iraq agreed to return to full compliance,
I would have had no hesitation to recommend to the
Council that Iraq be granted a hearing by the
Council in whatever format the Council might deem
appropriate. I believe it is reasonable for any country
being at the receiving end of United Nations
sanctions to ask for such a hearing provided it
strictly complies with the resolutions of the
Council.”
(spoke in Arabic)
The delegation of Egypt today finds itself in the very
sensitive position of voting on a draft resolution that
imposes any kind of sanctions on an Arab State. Indeed,
we abstained in the voting on the draft resolution adopted
by the Council last month as resolution 1134 (1997),
which hinted at the imposition of some additional
sanctions but did not go beyond that to their enforcement.
But today we view the question from various angles. The
delegation of Egypt participated in the consultations on
the draft resolution. It proposed some amendments,
including the addition of a paragraph on respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of both Kuwait and
Iraq. Fortunately, the sponsors responded positively to
that amendment. The consultations also resulted in the
deletion of some formulations in the preliminary draft that
implicitly threatened dire consequences and the use of
various methods in dealing with Iraq. Despite our very
difficult position, Iraq’s lack of responsiveness to the
many and intensive efforts we and many other States
made up to the very last minute leaves us with no choice
but to vote in favour of the draft resolution in the hope
that Iraq will alter its position and resume its cooperation
with the Special Commission in a manner that will ensure
the lifting of the sanctions and an end to the suffering of
the brotherly Iraqi people.
While we intend to vote in favour of the draft
resolution, we would like to place on record here our
understanding that the travel restrictions contained in the
7
Security Council 3831st meeting
Fifty-second year 12 November 1997
draft resolution must not obstruct Egypt’s discharge of its
responsibilities as the host country of the headquarters of
the League of Arab States. This involves facilitating the
participation of the States members of the League in its
meetings held in Cairo. This is a responsibility which Egypt
has the honour to undertake in its capacity as the host
country, under the Charter of the League of Arab States.
We should like also to place on record, and very clearly,
our conviction that the draft resolution contains nothing that
could open the way to an escalation of the situation, to the
use of force or to resort to a military option. We hope that
dialogue and the use of diplomatic means will continue,
that normal relations will be resumed between Iraq and the
Special Commission and that the constructive and fruitful
cooperation between them will be resumed in manner that
will enable the Council to consider lifting the sanctions
imposed on the Iraqi people.
Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): First of all, we would like to
state that we find Iraq’s decision to expel United Nations
Special Commission (UNSCOM) personnel of one
nationality totally unacceptable. Iraq must rescind that
decision.
Immense efforts have been made by many to resolve
this crisis, but to no avail. In this regard, my delegation
warmly commends the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
for his tremendous efforts, including his decision to send
three special envoys to Baghdad in an attempt to defuse the
situation. We feel that this was a timely and right decision
that falls squarely within his mandate as Secretary-General.
We, too, in this Council have an obligation to ensure that
the situation gets our full attention and does not deteriorate
further.
The draft resolution before us responding to this new
situation is balanced and in our view sends a clear message
to Iraq. We see it as an improvement on the initial draft,
and it has in the main addressed our concerns. UNSCOM
must be allowed to complete its work on the basis of the
mandate given to it by the Security Council. We hope that
the message will be heard.
We are disappointed that, despite the level of
cooperation UNSCOM enjoyed and recorded in its latest
comprehensive report [S/1997/774], we are confronted with
the current level of tension, which must not be allowed to
escalate any further. Today we are all united in accepting
this draft resolution. What we would like to see, sooner
rather than later, is a level of cooperation from Iraq’s
authorities that will allow the Council to review the
sanctions imposed on Iraq. Such a review should provide a
degree of hope to the people of Iraq. At the end of the
day, they should be able to see light at the end of the
tunnel.
In the meantime, Iraq, under a comprehensive
sanctions regime, must comply with its resulting
obligations substantively and in good faith. It is important
that we all reject Iraq’s decision of 29 October 1997, and
Kenya will, therefore, support the draft resolution before
us.
Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from
French): On 3 April 1991, in resolution 687 (1991) the
Security Council decided to establish a Special
Commission which
“shall carry out immediate on-site inspection of
Iraq’s biological, chemical and missile capabilities,
based on Iraq’s declarations and the designation of
any additional locations by the Special Commission
itself” [resolution 687 (1991), para. 9 (b) (i)]
That resolution is the legal and political framework which
both defines and guides all the activities of the Special
Commission, by clearly laying down its mandate and the
obligations of the Iraqi authorities in the carrying out of
this mission, decided upon by the Security Council on
behalf of the international community.
Relations between the representatives of the
Government of Iraq and the Special Commission have not
always been in line with the spirit and the letter of the
relevant Security Council resolutions. This is why the
Security Council has always studied the successive reports
of the Special Commission on the progress of its work
with particular attention and has noted with concern the
existence and persistence of certain difficulties, and even
impediments to the execution of its mandate.
Many presidential statements and Security Council
resolutions have recognized this state of affairs and
expressed unambiguously the disapproval of the members
of the Council with regard to the attitude and conduct of
certain representatives of the Iraqi authorities, because in
the Council’s opinion they had departed from prior
commitments and amounted to a serious failure to fulfil
obligations. The Security Council has several times had
to remind the Iraqi authorities how vital it was, as it still
is, to cooperate fully with the Executive Chairman of the
Special Commission and all the members of his team so
as to facilitate their work and ensure that the purpose of
the mission entrusted to them by the Security Council is
8
Security Council 3831st meeting
Fifty-second year 12 November 1997
achieved in a satisfactory manner, because this is a
precondition for the operation of the mechanisms provided
for in resolution 687 (1991).
On 21 June 1997 the Security Council renewed its
appeal and reiterated the principles underlying its action by
adopting resolution 1115 (1997). Unfortunately, this did not
have the desired results; it certainly did not lead to any
change of attitude by the Iraqi authorities. Given the
persistence of serious incidents, and faced with the need to
shoulder its responsibilities with regard to not only the
Special Commission, but all its personnel and the
international community in general, the Security Council
concluded after lengthy deliberations that further measures
needed to be considered, measures which, by their coercive
nature, could persuade the Iraqi authorities to respect their
obligation to comply scrupulously with Security Council
decisions by removing all the obstacles hampering the
Special Commission or preventing it from carrying out its
mandate. This was the thinking and purpose of resolution
1134 (1997).
The Security Council regarded as unacceptable the
decision of the Iraqi authorities of 29 October, which
challenges the operational capacity of the Special
Commission and certain cardinal principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, particularly Article 100. For several
days, considerable efforts have been made to convince the
Iraqi authorities of the need to rescind that decision, a
decision which does not respect the established rules and,
moreover, does nothing to further the interests of the Iraqi
people. It is a decision whose possible consequences must
be clear to all.
The Special Commission was set up by the Security
Council and acts in its name. Therefore, the Council cannot
tolerate disregard for its decisions or allow the Special
Commission to be prevented from continuing its work to
carry out its mandate.
In the view of my delegation, it should be possible to
resolve the current crisis through dialogue without
abandoning certain fundamental principles. The members of
the Council have tried hard, and continue to try, to ensure
that reason prevails, by favouring direct contact with the
Iraqi authorities to reach a solution. The highly
commendable initiative of the Secretary-General in sending
three personal representatives to Baghdad and the bilateral
approaches by many countries to Iraq are eloquent
testimony to, and further evidence of, our desire to see the
role accorded diplomacy further strengthened.
The aim of the Security Council is not and could not
be to inflict further suffering on the Iraqi people, who
have already been put through so much by so many years
of hardship. But we are not responsible for this hardship.
We are certainly very well aware of all the suffering of
the Iraqi people. That is why the Security Council
adopted resolution 986 (1995), in order to attest to its
sensitivity to their sufferings and demonstrate its
awareness of its responsibility to seek appropriate
solutions.
But the international community cannot forget the
reasons that compelled the Security Council to impose
sanctions on Iraq in its name. All States have the
obligation to comply with and respect the principles set
out in the United Nations Charter, in particular that of
non-aggression and non-occupation by force. What
happened in Kuwait must never happen again. And I
would add that it is our duty to persist in seeking to
determine the fate of prisoners of war and persons who
disappeared during the occupation of Kuwait, without
forgetting the vital need to restore to Kuwait all its
records and other illegally seized assets.
My delegation desires to see the creation of all the
necessary conditions for the Special Commission to
continue its work without difficulty or hindrance, with a
team that should continue to be distinguished by its
ability, impartiality and diversity of national origin, which
are the basic, essential and inviolable criteria for any
action carried out in the name of and on behalf of the
United Nations. This is the goal of the draft resolution.
Guinea-Bissau will support its adoption and assist in its
implementation.
Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from
French): France regrets that Iraq did not wish to rescind
its unacceptable decision to limit its cooperation with the
Special Commission. We were among the first to express
our disapproval of this decision, which violates
resolutions of the Security Council. We very quickly
agreed to a strong, unanimous statement by the President
of the Council condemning Iraq’s attempt to dictate the
conditions of its cooperation with the Special Commission
and demanding total cooperation from Iraq. In the days
that followed, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of France
and Russia recalled, in a joint statement dated 1
November, that resolutions of the Security Council are
mandatory for all States and must be fully implemented.
No discrimination with regard to any Member State can
9
Security Council 3831st meeting
Fifty-second year 12 November 1997
be tolerated. We must remain firm on this principle, which
is in keeping with the Charter of the United Nations.
Persistent diplomatic efforts were made to seek a way
to end the crisis. From the start, France supported the
initiative of the Secretary-General to send a mission to
Baghdad to persuade Iraqi leaders to reverse their decision.
Here I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
courageous initiative, as well as the members of the
mission, whose work was commendable, but unfortunately
without success. We ourselves made repeated efforts in our
discussions with the Iraqi authorities to convince them to
rescind their decision. Until the last minute, we believed
reason would prevail. Unfortunately, that was not the case.
So today we require a strong and unanimous reaction
from the Security Council to send a clear signal to
Baghdad. This reaction will not take place in a vacuum.
Resolutions 1115 (1997) and 1134 (1997) have already
urged Iraq to cooperate fully with the Special Commission.
These words were not heeded, much to our regret.
The reaction of the Council that we will be expressing
must, however, be balanced and commensurate with the
realities of the situation. The nature of the sanctions — that
is, travel restrictions — was already covered in resolutions
1115 (1997) and 1134 (1997). In fact, these sanctions will
not worsen the situation of the Iraqi people, who are
already sorely tried by seven years of economic embargo.
The search for a peaceful solution to end the current crisis
will in no way be hampered by the travel bans covered in
the text we will be voting for. Bona fide diplomatic
activities are authorized and do not, unlike other missions,
require prior authorization of the Committee established
under resolution 661 (1990).
The mechanism for lifting the sanctions is clearly spelt
out: as soon as Iraq again complies with the Special
Commission’s right of access, sanctions will be lifted.
The Council’s authority is maintained. The Council is
still master of its judgements and future actions. That in
particular is the thrust of paragraph 8. As was spelt out in
the French-Russian joint declaration, we continue to
advocate strongly that any action with regard to Iraq be
considered and led strictly within the framework of the
Security Council. The language of the draft for which we
shall be voting has therefore been carefully weighed. It
does not encourage or justify any escalation. In the coming
days we must persevere in our active search for a
diplomatic solution, and we must avoid any counter-
productive attitude. We must bear in mind our basic goal:
the continuation, under favourable conditions, of the work
of the Special Commission on the ground. Nothing would
be worse than to call into question the main strength of
resolution 687 (1991) and United Nations relations with
Iraq. The system of ongoing verification and monitoring
cannot be suspended; the security of the region is at
stake.
It is a good thing that the draft we will be voting on
commands unanimity in the Council. For France, this was
a very important condition, since we must in crisis
situations maintain the unity of the Council. This
consensus lends more weight and force to the message to
be sent to Baghdad. The clear will of the authors of the
draft resolution to take into account the views of all
States members of the Council was decisive in this
respect, and should be commended.
We still hope that this message will be heeded. We
reiterate the urgent appeal we have constantly addressed
to the Iraqi authorities for reason to prevail, urging them
to rescind their decision and refrain from any action
incompatible with Security Council resolutions.
Then, and only then, will it be possible to discuss
their concerns regarding the working methods of the
Special Commission and the manner in which it
discharges its responsibilities. Then, and only then, can
discussions be undertaken in a positive climate to explore
prospects for resolving the crisis and to take into account
the significant progress that has been made on the
substance, notably in the nuclear and ballistic areas.
Only complete and effective cooperation with the
Special Commission will make it possible to implement
paragraph 22 of resolution 687 (1991) regarding the
lifting of the embargo and to ensure the reintegration of
Iraq into the international community. The Iraqi
population is not responsible for the current situation, but
it is suffering terribly. It is worth recalling the figures that
appear in the United Nations Development Programme’s
annual Human Development Report. Over the past seven
years, the average calorie intake has fallen by a third,
infant mortality has increased by 124 per cent, and life
expectancy has dropped from 65 to 57 years.
The exorbitant price paid by the Iraqi population
cannot go on rising indefinitely, amidst general
indifference. Only compliance by Iraq with its
international obligations can put an end to this situation.
10
Security Council 3831st meeting
Fifty-second year 12 November 1997
Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): My delegation
finds it most unfortunate that the Council has to meet again
today to deal with the issue at hand less than a month after
the adoption of resolution 1134 (1997) on 23 October and
the presidential statement of 29 October, following the Iraqi
decision to seek to impose conditions on its cooperation
with the United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM).
In the view of my delegation, it is particularly regrettable
that another window of opportunity — provided by the
Secretary-General through the dispatch of his three-envoy
mission to Baghdad last week — was missed by Iraq as
well.
The Republic of Korea has consistently hoped that
Iraq, a country with a long history and old civilization,
should be allowed to rejoin the international community as
a normal and responsible member at an early date, so that
the humanitarian sufferings of the Iraqi people could be
brought to an end and Iraq could make its due share of
contributions to world peace and prosperity. As we all
know, the fundamental condition for normalizing Iraq’s
relationship with the international community through the
lifting of sanctions lies in the faithful implementation of
relevant Council resolutions by Iraq.
In that regard, although the latest report of UNSCOM
noted some positive progress in the missile and nuclear
areas, there still remain some ambiguities in other areas,
including the biological area. Furthermore, by seeking to
impose certain conditions on the manner UNSCOM
discharges its responsibilities under relevant Council
resolutions, Iraq has regrettably narrowed the path toward
the normalization of its relationship with the international
community.
Under these circumstances, my delegation demands
that Iraq cooperate fully and unconditionally with
UNSCOM, in accordance with the relevant resolutions, so
that UNSCOM can, in turn, inform the Council of Iraq’s
full implementation of its obligations under the relevant
Council resolutions as early as possible.
Although the draft resolution before the Council
contains certain additional measures, such as travel
restrictions, we rather wish to draw attention to paragraphs
6 and 7, which clearly delineate the exit out of the present
deadlock. In a nutshell, my delegation strongly hopes that
this draft resolution will be able to convey the unambiguous
and united message of the Security Council to Iraq that it
must rescind its decision of 29 October and cooperate fully
and unconditionally with UNSCOM. This was the very
same message that our esteemed Secretary-General tried
to deliver to the Iraqi leader through his own intervention.
For these reasons, my delegation will vote in favour
of the draft resolution before us.
The President (interpretation from Chinese): It is
my understanding that the Security Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution contained in
document S/1997/872. If I hear no objection, I shall put
the draft resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Chile, China, Costa Rica, Egypt, France, Guinea-
Bissau, Japan, Kenya, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Russian Federation, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
The President (interpretation from Chinese): There
were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has
therefore been adopted unanimously as resolution 1137
(1997).
I shall now call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements following the voting.
Mr. Richardson (United States of America): The
Security Council has taken a very important action today
in passing — unanimously — this resolution. This is the
unambiguous message to the leaders of Iraq: the Security
Council is united in its determination that Iraq must
comply with the resolutions of the Council and that Iraq
must reverse its decisions challenging the Council and the
international community. It is not for Iraq to set the terms
of its compliance; Iraq must simply comply. And, as this
resolution demonstrates, there will be consequences for
Iraq if it fails to do so.
Iraq’s course of action must now be clear: to
announce the reversal of its unacceptable decisions and
pledge its full, immediate and unconditional compliance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Sadly, Iraq has been following a different path. The
Deputy Prime Minister, since arriving in New York, has
insisted that his primary goal is to get the sanctions on
Iraq lifted. But he has learned today that the lifting of
11
Security Council 3831st meeting
Fifty-second year 12 November 1997
sanctions must follow compliance, and not precede it. And
he asserts that it is the sanctions, not Iraq, that are wrong.
Iraq does not seem to understand that its objective can only
be reached through full compliance.
Let us not forget that, after years of trying every trick
to deceive the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) inspectors, on 29 October Iraq sought to bar
UNSCOM inspectors with American citizenship, out of the
more than 20 nations represented in the organization. Then
it blocked UNSCOM inspections, interfered with
monitoring operations, and menaced UNSCOM
reconnaissance aircraft. All of these actions are gross
violations of Iraq’s obligations under Security Council
resolutions. And, as this resolution states, threaten
international peace and security.
Iraq has failed in other areas mandated by the Council
and it has given no sign that it will cease activities and
policies intended to threaten its neighbours. Indeed, it gives
every indication that it intends to continue to develop a
dangerous arsenal of weapons of mass destruction. Which
is what this is all about.
In 37 previous reviews of Iraq sanctions, the Security
Council has concluded that Iraq has not met the simple
conditions for lifting sanctions. The current crisis is not just
more of the same at a higher volume. It is a violation of the
United Nations Charter itself, as well as a categorical
rejection of Council resolutions. And, in response, the
Council has imposed the first new sanctions on Iraq since
the Gulf War.
Because Iraq’s obstructionist actions have been taken
under orders of the highest authorities in Baghdad, the new
sanctions target only Iraq’s leaders, not its people. The
Deputy Prime Minister arrived this week to lobby
delegations that Iraq is too impoverished to face continued
sanctions. The Council enacted resolutions 986 (1995) and
1111 (1997) to protect the Iraqi people from the Iraqi
Government’s insistence on guns instead of butter. The
Iraqi regime waited a year before accepting the resolution
and ever since has tried to manipulate its implementation.
In September, the Council had to adopt resolution 1129
(1997) to make up for Iraq’s refusal to sell oil under this
programme.
The United States feels, just as does every member of
this body, compassion for the Iraqi people and empathy for
their plight. That is why the United Nations and the
Sanctions Committee have gone to great lengths, battling
Iraqi obstructionism at every step, to ensure the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. That is why, thanks to the
Sanctions Committee’s efforts, implementation of
resolution 1111 (1997) is moving forward. And that is
why we are prepared to examine ways to further improve
the delivery and effectiveness of humanitarian aid in the
interest of the people of Iraq.
The United States looks forward to the day when the
sanctions against Iraq can be lifted. It is not our desire to
see Iraq, a land of past greatness which could be great
again, permanently saddled with United Nations sanctions.
But Iraq must first comply fully and unconditionally with
the requirements of relevant Security Council resolutions.
Iraq has known this all along. There is a light at the end
of the tunnel and the Iraqi leaders control the switch.
Today we are here to get Iraq to reverse its decision
to challenge UNSCOM. Neither the Secretary-General,
nor his envoys nor the Security Council has been willing
to negotiate Iraqi compliance with Council resolutions.
Today’s resolution marks our determination to continue to
proceed together on a firm and united course. Iraq should
heed today’s message. Iraq must abandon its hope to
escape its obligations through deception or defiance.
Today’s resolution is a clear call for Iraqi
compliance and a reaffirmation that the Council is willing
to use the tools of the United Nations Charter to ensure
compliance. Iraq should get that message.
Mr. Gomersall (United Kingdom): I would like first
of all to read out a statement just made by the British
Foreign Secretary, Mr. Robin Cook.
“Today, the United Nations has responded to
Saddam Hussein’s provocation swiftly, strongly and
unanimously. We have met his defiance with a
tightening of sanctions. I hope Saddam will now
return to his senses and let UNSCOM resume its
work. If he does, and Iraq then complies with all the
relevant United Nations resolutions, the process for
lifting sanctions can be started. But as the resolution
just passed has made clear, if he continues to defy
the will of the United Nations, further measures will
be taken. Saddam Hussein should be in no doubt
that the Security Council is united and determined.”
My Government is glad that the Council has
unanimously delivered an unequivocal message to Iraq.
There is no short cut to the lifting of sanctions. The
international community is determined that Iraq should
comply fully with the Council’s resolutions.
12
Security Council 3831st meeting
Fifty-second year 12 November 1997
We are meeting today in the face of the latest and
most serious challenge which we have faced from Saddam
Hussein since the end of the Gulf War. At stake is the
future of the Special Commission (UNSCOM), the body
charged by the international community to rid Iraq of its
illegal weapons of mass destruction. This body was
established in resolution 687 (1991), whose acceptance by
Iraq brought an end to the Gulf War. The Government of
Iraq, through its unacceptable decision of 29 October, has
tried to dictate to the United Nations the terms and
conditions of how the Special Commission fulfils its
mandate. All such conditions are totally unacceptable to my
Government.
The successful completion of the work of the Special
Commission is essential for maintaining regional and
international peace and security. The latest report of the
Special Commission makes clear that there is still much
work to be done, especially in the chemical and biological
weapons areas, before it can report that it has accomplished
its task and the world is free from the threat posed by Iraqi
weapons of mass destruction. It is therefore crucial that it
be able to continue its work, without restrictions or
conditions. We want UNSCOM to complete its task.
We welcomed the initiative of the Secretary-General
and the efforts of others to persuade Iraq to reverse its
decision of 29 October. We agreed to go the extra mile in
the hope that Saddam Hussein would listen to reason. The
Iraqi response was a flat “no” to the Secretary-General, his
representatives and the Security Council. The Council has
now acted unanimously to send a clear message to the
Government of Iraq that it must comply fully and
unconditionally with all relevant resolutions.
We have heard a lot of special pleading from Iraq on
the damage caused by six and a half years of sanctions. I
will not repeat the steps which we and other Governments
have taken to alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi people. We
will continue to see that resolutions 986 (1995) and 1111
(1997) are implemented as intended. But what we would
ask Mr. Tariq Aziz: For whose purposes did Iraq invade
Kuwait? For whose purposes did it unleash its weapons on
its own people? For whose purposes has Iraq continued to
obstruct the efforts of the Special Commission to draw an
end to its investigation and destruction of Iraq’s weapons of
mass destruction?
It is clear that the humanitarian interests of the Iraqi
people and their welfare have been subordinated to the
misguided policies of the leadership and that it is these
policies which are the fundamental problem. We therefore
welcome the Council’s endorsement today of the simple
message that the only route to normalization for Iraq lies
through the implementation of the Council’s resolutions
and that the Council will remain fully determined to
achieve this.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation
from Russian): The Security Council has again been
compelled to return to the consideration of the question of
Iraq as a result of Baghdad’s decision to introduce
restrictions on the work of the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM), including prohibitions on the
participation of American citizens in the work of its
inspection teams and on flights of the Special
Commission’s U-2 aircraft.
We have consistently sought Iraq’s full compliance
with its obligations under the pertinent Security Council
resolutions and we support the efforts made by the
Special Commission to that end. The decision by Baghdad
to place restrictions on the work of the Special
Commission runs counter to the resolutions of the
Security Council, the principles of the United Nations and
the obligations of Iraq, and should be rescinded
unconditionally.
Throughout recent days Russia has been working
intensively in coordination with a number of other
countries in order to de-escalate the situation around Iraq.
Unfortunately, our diplomatic efforts — including those
made in Baghdad and New York over the last 24
hours — were ineffective. Nor did the mission that was
sent to Iraq by the Secretary-General of the United
Nations with the support of the members of the Security
Council achieve the desired result.
In this situation the Security Council has no other
way out than to adopt concrete measures on the basis of
the consensus already established in June this year in
Security Council resolution 1115 (1997), which was
confirmed today in the resolution we have just adopted.
However, we are convinced that any complications
that arise, including the current complication, should be
resolved exclusively by political means and strictly within
the framework of the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council. Any other approaches, particularly actions
involving force or the threat of the use of force, could
nullify all our achievements so far in reaching a post-
crisis settlement in the Persian Gulf and take us all a long
way back from the goal, already coming within our reach,
13
Security Council 3831st meeting
Fifty-second year 12 November 1997
of eliminating the threat to peace and security in that
region.
This consistent position was clearly set forth in the
recent joint statements at the meeting of the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Russia and France, and also during the
Russia-China summit. This position is reflected in the
resolution that has just been unanimously adopted by the
Security Council.
The resolution puts into effect limited, well-adjusted
measures to restrict foreign travel by Iraqi officials, the list
of which will be further determined. Here, the restrictions
automatically exempt all travel involving the discharge of
diplomatic functions. The resolution is aimed not at
punishing Iraq but at ensuring Baghdad’s immediate return
to unconditional cooperation with the Special Commission.
All the humanitarian shipments to Iraq will continue. The
resolution rules out the possibility of using the authority of
the Security Council and the United Nations to justify any
attempts to use force.
We sincerely hope that the resolution will be properly
understood by the Iraqi leadership and that it will resume
constructive interaction with the Special Commission. This
will lead to the automatic rescission of the restrictions
imposed on foreign travel. But the main thing is that it will
open the way for the logical closure of the disarmament
dossier in keeping with resolution 687 (1991), the lifting of
sanctions and the easing of the plight of the Iraqi people.
The members of the Security Council are acutely concerned
about this. It is up to Iraq.
The resumption of the work of the Special
Commission in Iraq at full capacity will make it possible
specifically to look at ways to speed up its work in strict
compliance with its mandate, so that this work can be
carried out without artificial delays and the Security
Council can objectively assess the progress made. Here the
Council cannot and should not abdicate its responsibility for
the full compliance of all of its disarmament resolutions on
Iraq.
Russia is firmly convinced that Iraq should see the
“light at the end of the tunnel”, and if the switch is in the
hands of the Iraqi Government then at least some electric
current should pass along the wires.
The Council recently considered the comprehensive
joint reports submitted by the Special Commission and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on the
significant work they have done to clarify the remaining
blanks. The many inspections have confirmed that Iraq
has no proscribed activities going on involving nuclear
weapons, and the facilities and dual-use equipment are
being reliably monitored. In this connection, the nuclear
dossier can be deemed to be closed. The balance sheet is
virtually completed on proscribed missiles. All capacity
and components for the production of chemical weapons
have been eliminated.
Such serious results cannot pass by without adequate
evaluation by the Security Council. We intend to revert to
this question immediately after the current crisis situation
around Iraq has been resolved.
We again call upon Baghdad to resume its
unconditional cooperation with the Special Commission.
We are convinced that this would conform to the vital
interests of Iraq and its people and to the goal of
integrating Iraq into the international community insofar
as it complies with the decisions of the Security Council.
The President (interpretation from Chinese): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as representative of
China.
China is very much concerned about current
developments on the question of Iraq. We support the
tireless efforts of the Secretary-General and the parties
concerned for a proper solution to this problem. We have
all along supported the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM) in the performance of its
inspections as mandated by the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council. In our view, the resolutions of the
Security Council on Iraq should be implemented
comprehensively and in earnest. China has made
constructive efforts in this regard and has time and again
called upon Iraq to resume its cooperation with the United
Nations as soon as possible and to fully carry out its
relevant obligations.
At the same time, we have always been of the view
that Iraq’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and legitimate
concerns for its own security should be respected. The
progress achieved by Iraq in the past few years in its
cooperation with UNSCOM should receive an objective
and fair assessment.
In our view, three feet of ice could not have been
accumulated as a result of just one day’s cold weather.
The causes of the current crisis are multifaceted and
complex. The Security Council should hear the views of
UNSCOM and Iraq on the question of inspections in
14
Security Council 3831st meeting
Fifty-second year 12 November 1997
order to make a fair and reasonable judgement on progress
achieved in inspections. Problems that have come up in the
course of inspections should be appropriately settled
through dialogue and cooperation. We are opposed to the
use or the threat of force or any actions that might further
exacerbate tensions. We hope that the parties concerned
will exercise restraint and find a proper solution to the
problem through cooperation and dialogue and avoid the
escalation of tensions. In particular, the occurrence of
armed conflict must be avoided.
In our view, in order to achieve a solution to the
problems, the most urgent task is to persevere in diplomatic
efforts, to promote cooperation between Iraq and the
Special Commission and not to complicate further the
problem and increase the difficulty of resolving them.
We hope that resolution 1137 (1997) will be
conducive to promoting an appropriate settlement of the
problems. Therefore, with a view to advancing a proper
solution to this question, we voted in favour of the
resolution. At the same time, I also wish to point out that
our vote in favour of the resolution does not imply any
change in our position on the question of sanctions.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.
The meeting rose at 2.50 p.m.
15
