United Nations S/PV.3878
98-85316 (E) This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fifty-third Year
3878th Meeting
Wednesday, 13 May 1998, 12.25 p.m.
New York
President: Mr. Mahugu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Kenya)
Members: Bahrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Al-Dosari
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Valle
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Shen Guofang
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Sáenz-Biolley
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dejammet
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Onanga
Gambia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Touray
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Konishi
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Monteiro
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Karev
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Türk
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dahlgren
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Sir John Weston
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Richardson
Agenda
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
Security Council 3878th meeting
Fifty-third year 13 May 1998
The meeting was called to order at 12.25 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of May, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to Mr. Hisashi Owada, Permanent Representative
of Japan to the United Nations, for his service as President
of the Security Council for the month of April 1998. I am
sure I speak for all members of the Security Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Owada for the
great diplomatic skill with which he conducted the
Council's business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia
The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/1998/386, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Costa Rica, France, Japan, Kenya, Portugal,
Slovenia, Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/1998/376, which contains the
text of a letter dated 5 May 1998 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting a letter dated 16 April 1998 from the President
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
addressed to the Secretary-General.
Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
Central and Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union — Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania and
Slovakia — and the associated country Cyprus, as well as
the European Free Trade Association countries members of
the European Economic Area — Iceland and Norway —
align themselves with this statement.
The European Union wishes to reaffirm once again
its strong support for the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and its admiration for the
achievements of that Tribunal since it was established
under Security Council resolution 827 (1993). The
important mandate entrusted to the Tribunal by this
Council is to prosecute persons responsible for serious
violations of international humanitarian law committed in
the territory of the former Yugoslavia since 1 January
1991. This mandate is vital not only to avoid the
possibility of the perpetrators of these crimes enjoying
impunity, but also to ensure the full implementation of the
Dayton Accords and thus support a peaceful resolution of
the situation in the former Yugoslavia as a whole.
The European Union notes with satisfaction that the
work of the International Tribunal has recently intensified.
One trial has been completed, subject to appeal, and in
another the accused has pleaded guilty and been
sentenced to five years' imprisonment. Four other cases
are ongoing. Sixty individuals are currently under
indictment by the Tribunal, 26 of whom are in its
custody. At the same time, we note with concern that
compliance by the States in the region with their
obligations under resolution 827 (1993) and article 29 of
the Statute of the Tribunal to cooperate fully with the
International Tribunal remains uneven. The European
Union calls upon all States and entities in the region to
fulfil their obligations to cooperate with the Tribunal.
Given the increase in the Tribunal's workload,it is no
surprise that the existing judicial resources of the Tribunal
are under heavy pressure. While the Statute of the
Tribunal does guarantee all those appearing before it a
fair and expeditious trial, it is nevertheless the case that
some of those persons who are in custody have been
awaiting trial for a long period of time. The addition of
a third Trial Chamber of the International Tribunal, which
has been requested by the President of the Tribunal, will
enable the backlog of cases before the Tribunal to be
dealt with more efficiently. The European Union is
therefore in favour of the establishment of the third Trial
Chamber in accordance with the draft resolution before
the Security Council today.
The European Union also supports the request made
to the Secretary-General in this draft resolution to
enhance further the effective functioning of the
International Tribunal, in particular by the timely
provision of personnel and facilities. In this context, the
European Union is pleased to recall that a second
courtroom has recently been opened for the holding of
2
Security Council 3878th meeting
Fifty-third year 13 May 1998
trials and that a third courtroom is expected to be
completed in the near future. We reaffirm once again that
it is essential that the Tribunal be given adequate resources
to carry out its mandate effectively and that personnel of
the Tribunal be managed efficiently. The European Union
and its member States have made voluntary contributions to
assist the Tribunal in fulfilling its functions. We express the
hope that the Tribunal will continue to be provided with the
necessary financial support, not least through the payment
of annual contributions promptly and in full.
Finally, I would like to emphasize that the decision to
increase the number of Trial Chambers of the International
Tribunal, together with the decision taken by the Council
last month in resolution 1165 (1998) to increase the number
of Trial Chambers for the Rwanda Tribunal, both point to
the broader concern of the international community that
persons who commit serious offences, such as war crimes,
be brought to justice. In this context, the European Union
wishes to emphasize its strong support for the establishment
of the international criminal court at the Diplomatic
Conference to be held in Rome in June and July this year.
The European Union firmly believes that the establishment
of such a court is necessary in order to provide a permanent
mechanism to bring to justice those who commit the most
serious crimes of international concern and to deter the
commission of such crimes in the future.
The President: It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft
resolution before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put
the draft resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Sáenz Biolley (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Spanish): On 25 May this year, five years will have elapsed
since this Council established the International Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in
the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia. Those years have
marked a historic era for the international administration of
justice. In that time, the Tribunal's administration has been
consolidated, its rules of procedure have been drafted and
a small but significant number of cases has been heard. The
Tribunal's work has been of surpassing importance for the
development of international humanitarian and human rights
law. The Tribunal's jurisprudence has become an
authoritative interpretation of international customary law
and promoted the progressive development of that law in
those areas where gaps or imprecisions remain.
We note with particular satisfaction the progress
made, both in practice and in the rules of procedure, with
regard to the protection of victims and witnesses as well
as the correct interpretation, characterization and
categorization of crimes against women and girls.
Moreover, my delegation believes that the very
existence of the Tribunal has given the requisite impetus
to the establishment of an international criminal court. In
this context, we cannot fail to reiterate Costa Rica's firm
commitment to the establishment of a permanent,
independent, impartial and effective international criminal
court at the Conference of Plenipotentiaries to be held in
Rome in June and July this year. We are firmly
convinced that solely through the creation of such a court
can the international community definitively and truly
reject and condemn the most serious crimes that offend
the world's conscience. In contrast with this future court,
the special tribunals created by the Security Council are
merely temporary and transitional palliatives with roles
confined to addressing emergency situations that pose real
threats to international peace and security.
As my delegation has repeatedly indicated, we
consider that justice is an indispensable element of peace.
We believe that there can be no reconciliation if the truth
is not brought to light and that a free and democratic
society cannot be built while the criminal perpetrators of
the most horrible atrocities go unpunished. We are
convinced that impunity is a threat to peace, since it
incites victims to revenge and strengthens the aggressors'
arrogance. That is why we believe that the existence of
this Tribunal is an indispensable element of the Balkan
peace process.
In this context, the lack of cooperation with the
Tribunal of some Governments, local authorities and
international entities, in violation of their international
obligations, is scandalous. The authorities of the
Republika Srpska, the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia must
comply with their international obligations. It is
indispensable that the authorities of these entities arrest
and extradite to the Tribunal the accused found on their
territories. These arrests can no longer be postponed. It is
also indispensable for these authorities to help in the
collection of evidence and to facilitate the participation of
witnesses.
3
Security Council 3878th meeting
Fifty-third year 13 May 1998
These authorities must also bring to justice all the
possible perpetrators of crimes not being prosecuted by the
International Tribunal. We must not forget that the
International Tribunal's existence does not exempt them
from their primary obligation to administer justice and
punish those found guilty.
Another problem is the Tribunal's financial situation
and lack of personnel. There is no doubt that the Tribunal
requires greater resources and more staff of its own. The
United Nations financial authorities and our own
delegations in the Fifth Committee will have to make
greater efforts to guarantee the Tribunal the necessary
resources.
For all those reasons, Costa Rica cannot fail to
respond favourably to the request made to the Security
Council by the Tribunal, through its President, Judge
Gabrielle Kirk McDonald, that a third trial chamber be
established in order to try promptly all the accused now in
custody. A basic requirement of the proper administration
of justice is that it be speedy. In that connection, the
decision the Council will take today is intended simply to
guarantee full respect for the fundamental rights of the
accused. We have therefore joined in sponsoring the draft
resolution, and will vote in favour of it.
Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): My delegation associates
itself fully with the statement delivered by the
representative of the United Kingdom on behalf of the
European Union.
As a sponsor of the draft resolution before the Council
today, Portugal reaffirms its full support for the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. The
Tribunal plays a crucial role in the significant efforts that
the international community is making to help peace take
root in the former Yugoslavia. In Bosnia today, it is the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) that ensures a secure
environment for the implementation of the Peace
Agreement. Portugal continues to field troops in that Force.
But the mere absence of war does not make peace. In
paving the way towards the reconstruction and rehabilitation
of Bosnia, the High Representative is responsible for
overseeing the implementation of the civilian aspects of the
Peace Agreement, in which the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and, particularly, the United
Nations International Police Task Force, play a crucial role.
There too, Portugal has police observers on the ground.
However, this long process of peace-building must
also be based on reconciliation among the various
communities. This is where the Tribunal comes into play.
In seeking to prosecute, try and convict war criminals, the
international community, through the Tribunal, is laying
a foundation of justice which in turn will foment trust and
hope in Bosnia and elsewhere in the former Yugoslavia,
where former neighbours became enemies, and where
former enemies must now become neighbours once more.
For this entire process to be effective, the Tribunal
must be given the necessary means to function, and this
is the reason for today's draft resolution. Through the
Secretary-General, the President of the Tribunal, Judge
Gabrielle Kirk McDonald, has requested that the Security
Council establish a third trial chamber. This would be
decided in the draft resolution before us. We strongly
support these additional resources for the Tribunal.
Portugal is honoured to have a judge serving on the
Tribunal.
Security Council resolutions demand that States fully
cooperate with the Tribunal in the fulfilment of its
mandate. We strongly support the appeals to that end.
Finally, I would like to say that the important work
of this Tribunal and of the International Tribunal for
Rwanda points ever more emphatically to the need for a
permanent court to bring the perpetrators of war crimes
and other serious international crimes to justice. Portugal
will strongly support the establishment of an international
criminal court this summer at Rome.
Mr. Konishi (Japan): I should like at the outset to
express the sincere appreciation of my delegation to you,
Sir, for the kind words you conveyed to Ambassador
Owada in his capacity as the previous President of the
Security Council.
My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us, which would decide to establish a
third trial chamber of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and would decide also that three
additional judges should be elected.
My delegation believes that the prosecution of
persons responsible for serious violations of international
humanitarian law committed in the territory of the former
Yugoslavia is a prerequisite for true reconciliation among
the ethnic groups and for the restoration and maintenance
of peace in the former Yugoslavia.
4
Security Council 3878th meeting
Fifty-third year 13 May 1998
At the same time, we are aware that the constantly
increasing workload of the Tribunal, particularly in the last
several months, has made it difficult for the Tribunal to
conduct its important tasks effectively. This problem creates
difficulties in bringing to justice without delay those
responsible for the tragedy and the atrocities which took
place in the former Yugoslavia, and also in ensuring that
the accused will have fair and expeditious trials.
My delegation is convinced that the trial chamber and
judges to be added by the terms of the draft resolution,
together with additional efforts by the Tribunal to improve
the effectiveness of its functioning, will contribute to
resolving these difficulties.
Finally, my delegation wishes, on behalf of the
Government of Japan, to pay high tribute to the significant
and diligent work of the Tribunal so far, and to stress the
importance of full cooperation by all States with the
Tribunal in accordance with their obligations under the
relevant resolution.
The President: I thank the representative of Japan for
the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): Let me first say that I
concur with the statement made earlier by the representative
of the United Kingdom on behalf of the European Union.
The wars in the former Yugoslavia were marked by
horrendous crimes against international humanitarian law,
often committed in the name of that repulsive policy,
“ethnic cleansing”. Crimes such as mass killings, the
systematic rape of women and detention under horrible
circumstances constitute a threat to international peace and
security. To prevent them from recurring, in the Balkans or
elsewhere, the persons responsible must be brought to
justice. The establishment in 1993 of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia was an important
indication of the international community's determination to
put an end to such crimes.
The work of the International Tribunal is also a crucial
element in the broader peace-implementation and
reconciliation process in the former Yugoslavia, in both the
short-term and the long-term perspectives. Impunity breeds
continued hate and mistrust. Rendering transparent justice
brings clarity and hope for future generations, and that is
why all indicted war criminals must be brought to The
Hague.
These are the main reasons for Sweden's strong
support over the years for the work of the Tribunal, both
politically and in substance.
Today, we are very pleased to see that the work of
the Tribunal has intensified. The recent increase in the
number of indictees taken into custody has been most
welcome. But we must also be prepared to adapt the
resources of the Tribunal accordingly, so that the
indictees can be tried without undue delay. It has become
clear that the caseload has reached a point where we need
to increase the judicial resources of the Tribunal.
Today's decision will confirm the strong support in
the Council for the work and role of the International
Tribunal. Having chaired the working group dealing with
the ad hoc tribunals, Sweden is particularly gratified that
the Council will be able to give a positive response today
to the request from the Tribunal. By adding a third trial
chamber, we will make it possible for the backlog of
cases to be dealt with more expeditiously and the
resources of the Tribunal, including the new courtrooms,
to be used more effectively.
In closing, I would like to stress that today's
decision, along with the similar decision the Council took
last month concerning the Rwanda Tribunal, also
highlights the need for a permanent international criminal
court, to bring to justice any future crimes of this nature.
At the Diplomatic Conference in Rome this summer, we
must not hesitate to take the historic step of establishing
such a court.
Mr. Richardson (United States of America): In
approving this draft resolution to amend the statute the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the
Council will again reaffirm its commitment to holding
accountable the perpetrators of the terrible ethnic crimes
witnessed during the conflict in the former Yugoslavia.
This is a commitment the United States has backed with
words and deeds since the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia was established over five years ago.
We would like to express our appreciation to the
Swedish delegation for their leadership in the
consideration of this draft resolution.
We are particularly pleased to support this draft
resolution because it is an affirmation of the important
work already completed by the Tribunal and of the still
daunting task at hand. Increasing the Tribunal's capacity
to try cases confirms its success thus far. In the past year,
5
Security Council 3878th meeting
Fifty-third year 13 May 1998
the Tribunal has seen a dramatic increase in the number of
persons in custody. That many of these have recently
chosen to surrender voluntarily indicates the growing
realization that justice cannot be avoided.
But despite the efforts of the international community,
and particularly the efforts of the International Tribunal
itself, a number of the most notorious indictees of the
Tribunal remain at large. We call upon all States to enhance
their cooperation with the Tribunal to ensure that all
indictees are brought to justice as swiftly as possible. Those
indictees not yet in custody must understand that there is no
safe haven for them. That they will be held accountable is
a foregone conclusion. The only question is when.
The United States commends the work of the Tribunal
and its efforts to function as efficiently and effectively as
possible.
Having created a new trial chamber, the international
community cannot assume that all the needs of the
International Tribunal have been met. The Tribunal's
increased workload will intensify the demand for additional
resources beyond those available through the Tribunal's
budget. We strongly urge all States to make voluntary
contributions to the trust fund established for the Tribunal.
This Tribunal was established because we all believe in the
principle of accountability. We must now help the Tribunal
complete its mission.
Last month, the Council took an important step in the
quest for justice by expanding the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda. Today, we take another such step.
My Government hopes the Council will also, in that same
spirit, work constructively on the important issue of
establishing a tribunal to bring to justice senior Cambodian
Khmer Rouge leaders during the period 1975 through 1979.
Mr. Türk (Slovenia): I wish to begin by expressing
the support of our delegation for the statement made at the
beginning of this discussion by the representative of the
United Kingdom on behalf of the European Union and
associated countries.
The Security Council has, in resolution 827 (1993),
entrusted the Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia with a
historic mandate to prosecute persons responsible for
serious violations of international humanitarian law
committed in the territory of the former Yugoslavia since
1 January 1991.
In the nearly four and a half years of its existence,
the Tribunal has established admirable credibility as an
independent court. Furthermore, it has proved to be an
important international judicial institution whose proper
functioning is vital for the implementation of the Dayton
peace accords. Any kind of hindrance of the Tribunal's
statutory functions would have negative effects on the
endeavours of the Security Council and the international
community in building substantive grounds for a lasting
peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and on security in the
region. The International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia can therefore not afford to fail in its mission.
In addition to its immediate purpose, the Tribunal
also has a significant symbolic role of global importance.
The Tribunal symbolizes the end of the culture of
impunity and marks the advent of peace with justice
rather than mere appeasement. This is a valid contribution
of the Tribunal to the strengthening of real peace.
Moreover, the Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
is playing a pioneering role and, jointly with the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, is setting
important precedents in international criminal
jurisprudence. Its existence has underscored the need for
the creation of a permanent international mechanism to
address human rights and humanitarian law violations. In
this context, let me emphasize Slovenia's strong
commitment to the establishment of an independent,
impartial and effective permanent international criminal
court at the Diplomatic Conference to be held in Rome in
June and July of this year.
It is our conviction that the Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia should be given all the necessary resources to
efficiently deliver justice. We further believe that the
accused persons in custody are entitled to be tried without
unnecessary delays, in accordance with the internationally
accepted standards of due process.
We are pleased to see that there has been significant
progress in improving the procedures of the Tribunal. We
have confidence in the ability of the Tribunal to continue
managing its work efficiently so as to ensure optimal use
of all its resources. The request by the Tribunal for
additional judges, which was presented to the Security
Council by its President, Judge Gabrielle Kirk McDonald,
in February this year, is valid, especially since the
workload of the Tribunal has recently intensified.
Despite the increased number of persons in custody,
my delegation is compelled to express its serious concern
6
Security Council 3878th meeting
Fifty-third year 13 May 1998
at the fact that the most prominent military and political
leaders who have been indicted remain at large. It is
imperative that they be brought to justice. This is an
important condition for lasting peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
The creation of a third trial chamber, which is the
object of the draft resolution before the Council today, is
timely. It will ensure full utilization of the three courtrooms
and will, as a final result, expedite the Tribunal's work.
We note with satisfaction that the members of the
Council are unanimous in their positive response to the
request of the President of the Tribunal. We would like to
take this opportunity to express our appreciation to the
delegation of Sweden for its leading role in the preparation
of the draft resolution. For our part, we will continue to do
our utmost for justice, reconciliation and peace in the
region. Full support for the Tribunal is one of the means to
achieve that goal. Slovenia will therefore vote in favour of
the draft resolution, of which we are a sponsor.
Mr. Valle (Brazil): Some 15 days ago the Security
Council adopted resolution 1165 (1998) authorizing the
creation of an additional Trial Chamber for the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. It is with the same spirit
that prevailed then that Brazil supports the idea of an
additional trial chamber for the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia to bring to justice those responsible
for serious violations of international humanitarian law and
thus contribute to the restoration and maintenance of peace
in the subregion.
Indeed, we must not forget that those indicted by the
Tribunal have been charged with extremely serious crimes,
and that unless the Tribunal is given appropriate working
conditions it will not be able to satisfactorily fulfil the
mandate ascribed to it by the Security Council.
It is also true, however, that the financial implications
of the decision we are about to take are not entirely clear.
Therefore Brazil's support for the creation of a third trial
chamber should not be construed as approval of any
amount of additional resources for the Tribunal. We should
consider the financial issue in the appropriate forum, taking
into account the specific demands of the Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia as well as the need to dispense
equitable treatment to both ad hoc Tribunals.
Brazil has supported the creation of the ad hoc
Tribunals as an exceptional action on the part of the United
Nations and of Member States in the face of the
exceptionally grave circumstances that demanded their
creation. Since then, the United Nations and the
international community as a whole have put forward a
strong effort to make sure that atrocities such as the ones
we have witnessed in the former Yugoslavia and in
Rwanda will not go unpunished.
Weeks away from the Rome Conference on the
Establishment of an International Criminal Court, we
believe that we must concentrate our efforts on the
creation of a permanent institutional mechanism of
administration of justice that is independent, impartial and
efficient. Thus, it is our understanding that with the
establishment of the International Criminal Court there
will be no more need for the United Nations to resort to
ad hoc tribunals.
Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from
French): The Security Council, in resolutions 808 (1993)
and 827 (1993), entrusted the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia with the task of
trying persons charged with serious violations of
international humanitarian law committed in the territory
of the former Yugoslavia from 1 January 1991. The
members of the Tribunal have carried out that task in a
manner that we greatly admire and that justifies our
support of them.
Last January the President of the Tribunal requested
an increase in the number of judges so that a third Trial
Chamber could be established and trials could be carried
out within a reasonable time. France supported this
request as soon as it was submitted to the Security
Council. The increase in the number of judges had indeed
become necessary because of the growing number of
cases submitted to the Tribunal.
France is pleased that, following the adoption of
resolution 1165 (1998), which increased the number of
judges for the International Tribunal for Rwanda, there
has also been unanimity among the members of the
Council with regard to responding affirmatively to the
request made by the President of the Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. We shall vote in favour of the draft
resolution.
The adoption of the draft resolution will show the
Council's resolve to give the Tribunal the resources it
needs so that it can continue its work for justice. We
welcome the efforts made to enhance its functioning and
its procedures. We are confident that it will continue
along this track.
7
Security Council 3878th meeting
Fifty-third year 13 May 1998
Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian): My delegation attaches great importance to the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, whose
activities we believe to be contributing to general efforts to
restore peace in the region. Given the need to enhance the
effectiveness of the work of the Tribunal, our delegation
supports the request made by the President of the
International Tribunal for the establishment of a third Trial
Chamber. We trust that this will expedite the activities of
the Tribunal in carrying out the tasks assigned to it.
We understand that the reference in the draft
resolution to Chapter VII of the Charter is purely a
technicality and will not set a precedent for the Security
Council's consideration of any similar situation.
Ms. Onanga (Gabon) (interpretation from French):
The serious human rights violations in the former
Yugoslavia in 1991 called for a response from the
international community, and in particular the United
Nations. Thus five years ago, on 25 May 1993, Security
Council resolution 827 (1993) provided for the
establishment of an international Tribunal to try persons
presumed to be responsible for serious violations of
international humanitarian law committed in the territory of
the former Yugoslavia. Gabon reaffirms its full support for
this special Tribunal.
In his letter of 5 May 1998, the Secretary-General,
referring to the letter of 16 April 1998 from the President
of the Tribunal, asked for a third Trial Chamber to be
established. This request is justified by the fact that the
capacities of the two existing Trial Chambers are limited
and at saturation point because of the very great increase in
the number of persons charged and held. The decision to
increase the number of Trial Chambers of the Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia will make it possible to improve the
functioning of the Tribunal, particularly its capacity to try
cases.
The Council will recall that two weeks ago, through
resolution 1165 (1998) of 30 April 1998, it decided, for
similar reasons, to create a third Trial Chamber for the
International Tribunal for Rwanda.
For all these reasons, the delegation of Gabon can
only vote in favour of the draft resolution before us.
Mr. Al-Dosari (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
At the outset, I should like to express my sincerest thanks
and appreciation to the delegations of Sweden and the
United States of America for their efforts in preparing the
draft resolution before us, which has the support of all
members of the Security Council. We should also like to
commend the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia for its important
work, and to pay tribute to the President of the Tribunal,
Mrs. Gabrielle Kirk McDonald.
The meeting last 12 February between members of
the Security Council and the President of the Tribunal
provided an important opportunity for learning about the
concerns of the Tribunal and the situations with which it
has to deal. In this connection, we hope that the draft
resolution before us has met all of these concerns, and we
hope that it will contribute to moving the work of the
Tribunal forward so that it can fulfil its mandate and its
tasks as soon as possible.
My delegation urges the various parties in the
territory of the former Yugoslavia to cooperate fully with
the International Tribunal. In this respect, we should like
to express our great satisfaction with regard to the
progress achieved in the past few months and the increase
in the number of people who have surrendered voluntarily
to the Tribunal either individually or through various
bodies and international institutions. The Security
Council's adoption of this draft resolution today will
enable us to have high hopes for the efforts of the
Tribunal, which we expect will greatly improve over the
coming months.
We believe that all those who are responsible for
crimes of ethnic genocide and other serious violations of
international humanitarian law in the former Yugoslavia
should receive just retribution for their crimes. My
delegation supports this draft resolution and will vote in
favour of it. We hope that its adoption will promote the
work and increase the effectiveness of the International
Tribunal.
Mr. Touray (Gambia): In 1991 the former
Yugoslavia witnessed one of the most horrendous
offences against international humanitarian law, to which
the international community, through the Security
Council, responded very fittingly by establishing in 1993
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia to prosecute the persons responsible for those
crimes. The establishment of the Tribunal was and still is
a necessary measure for the process of national
reconciliation and the restoration of peace in the former
Yugoslavia.
8
Security Council 3878th meeting
Fifty-third year 13 May 1998
The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia currently has on its case list 29 accused persons
awaiting trial. This dramatic increase in the number of
accused persons has rendered the Tribunal unable to
expeditiously conclude the trials of all the accused persons.
We also understand that there are 54 public indictees
who are not in custody. If all these people are to be brought
to trial, it is obvious that the Tribunal cannot, under its
existing arrangements, expeditiously conclude all the trials.
We believe that the Tribunal needs additional judicial
support in the form of a third Trial Chamber. The report of
the President of the Tribunal makes a very compelling case
for the establishment of a third Trial Chamber. We agree
with the assessment of the situation.
One important issue for consideration is that the matter
impinges on the right of the accused person to be tried
expeditiously, as guaranteed by the Statute of the Tribunal.
If a third Trial Chamber is not established, this fundamental
right will be violated. For these reasons, we support the
establishment of a third Trial Chamber.
We note with satisfaction the successes registered by
the Tribunal in improving its working procedures. We
believe, however, that more could still be done in this
regard, and we thus urge the members to reconsider their
working procedures with a view to enhancing them further.
The Government of the Gambia has a very strong
commitment to the protection of fundamental rights. Thus,
we will always support legitimate measures that have as
their objective the protection of fundamental human rights.
This draft resolution falls within this category. The Gambia
will vote in favour of it.
Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): China has always attached great importance to
humanitarian questions in the territory of the former
Yugoslavia, and it always opposes actions violating
international humanitarian law. On the basis of this political
consideration, China voted in favour of Security Council
resolution 827 (1993) on the establishment of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
We note that, since its establishment, the Tribunal,
thanks to the cooperation of all sides concerned, has made
earnest efforts and certain achievements. In particular,
recently all sides concerned have been cooperating even
more actively with the Tribunal. We encourage the
continuation of this cooperation so that the Tribunal can
complete its work as early as possible, in accordance with
the provisions of the Council resolution.
We appreciate the efforts made by the Tribunal to
improve its efficiency, and we understand the difficulties
it faces. We hope that the decision to be taken by the
Security Council today will help speed up the work of the
Tribunal. In view of the current requests and needs of the
Tribunal and of the requests of all sides concerned, China
will vote in favour of the draft resolution before us.
However, we wish to express our reservation about
invoking Chapter VII of the Charter in the draft
resolution. When the Security Council was adopting
resolution 827 (1993) we expressed a similar reservation.
Over the last five years the situation in the territory of the
former Yugoslavia has undergone tremendous changes.
This makes it even less appropriate to invoke Chapter VII
now.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Kenya.
On 30 April 1998, when the Council took a decision
on the Rwanda Tribunal similar to the one now before us
for consideration, my delegation underscored the primary
goal of the two ad hoc Tribunals established by the
Security Council to bring peace and reconciliation through
justice. The cause of justice, however, cannot be served
unless the Tribunals and their organs are provided with
the necessary tools to enable them not only to fulfil their
mandates but also to function in an effective and efficient
manner.
The guarantee of fair and expeditious trials is
paramount, and it is for this reason that we welcome and
support the proposed decision to establish the third Trial
Chamber of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. We thank those Member States that have
helped the Tribunal overcome some of its difficulties by
financing the building of additional court facilities. We
hope that these facilities will be fully utilized in order to
ensure the speedy conclusion of the pending trials.
The draft resolution urges all States to cooperate
fully with the International Tribunal and its organs in
bringing to justice all persons suspected of having
committed heinous crimes in the former territories of
Yugoslavia. As new evidence of gross human rights
abuses perpetrated against the civilian population in
Bosnia and elsewhere in the region continues to emerge,
we appeal to those concerned to take appropriate steps to
9
Security Council 3878th meeting
Fifty-third year 13 May 1998
ensure that those who have been indicted for the war
crimes and are still at large are apprehended and brought to
trial.
In conclusion, I wish to thank the delegation of
Sweden for once again coordinating work on the draft
resolution, to which we are proud to render our support.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/1998/386.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1166 (1998).
There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.
10
