United Nations S/PV.3877
98-85303 (E) This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fifty-third Year
3877th Meeting
Thursday, 30 April 1998, 12.45 p.m.
New York
President: Mr. Owada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Japan)
Members: Bahrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Buallay
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Amorim
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Shen Guofang
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Sáenz-Biolley
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Teixeira da Silva
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dangue Réwaka
Gambia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Touray
Kenya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mahugu
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Gomes
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Karev
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Türk
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dahlgren
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Sir John Weston
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Soderberg
Agenda
The situation concerning Rwanda
Establishment of an international tribunal for the prosecution of persons responsible for serious violations of
international humanitarian law committed in the territory of Rwanda and Rwandan citizens responsible for such
violations committed in the territory of neighbouring States
Security Council 3877th meeting
Fifty-third year 30 April 1998
The meeting was called to order at 12.45 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Rwanda
Establishment of an international tribunal for the
prosecution of persons responsible for serious
violations of international humanitarian law
committed in the territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan citizens responsible for such violations
committed in the territory of neighbouring States
The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/1998/353, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Costa Rica, France, the Gambia, Kenya,
Portugal, Slovenia, Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/1997/812, which contains the
text of a letter dated 15 October 1997 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the letter dated 1 August 1997 from the
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
addressed to the Secretary-General.
Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
Central and Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union — Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania and
Slovakia — and the associated country Cyprus, as well as
the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) country
member of the European Economic Area, Norway, align
themselves with this statement.
The International Tribunal for Rwanda was established
by the Security Council in resolution 955 (1994) with the
aim of putting an end to the impunity of persons
responsible for genocide and other serious violations of
humanitarian law committed in Rwanda in 1994. The
establishment of the Tribunal reflected the will of the
international community that, by the prosecution of the
perpetrators of these grave crimes, their repetition should
be prevented and that justice should be seen to prevail.
The European Union has cooperated closely with the
Tribunal through the arrest and transfer of suspects to the
Tribunal, through voluntary contributions to the Trust
Fund in surplus of assessed contributions and through the
provision of staff to the Tribunal. The European Union
reiterates its strong support for the Rwanda Tribunal as it
discharges its difficult and important mandate, which is
essential for national reconciliation and the prevention of
future conflicts.
In paragraph 7 of resolution 955 (1994), the Council
agreed that it would consider increasing the number of
judges and Trial Chambers of the Tribunal if it became
necessary. In this context, the European Union
emphasizes the importance of respecting the human rights
of the individual and the need to try those accused of
crimes within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal without
undue delay. Justice delayed is justice denied. We have
therefore noted with great concern the current situation
with regard to the number of accused persons in pre-trial
detention in the Tribunal’s prison quarters in Arusha. Of
the 25 accused persons currently detained, 21 are in pre-
trial detention and five have been detained awaiting their
trial for almost three years. We also note that it is
possible that other accused persons, and that still others
against whom charges have not yet been filed, may in the
future join those currently detained in Arusha. In these
circumstances, the European Union believes that it is now
important to create a third Trial Chamber for the
International Tribunal for Rwanda, consisting of three
judges, in order that the administration of justice by the
Tribunal can be accelerated and so that those in custody
can be brought swiftly to trial.
At the same time, the European Union reiterates its
position that, in order to administer justice promptly and
fairly, the Tribunal must be able to function efficiently.
We are pleased to recall that the Office of Internal
Oversight Services has recently reported significant
improvements in the functioning of the Tribunal. We do,
however, note that a number of problems remain, not
least in the areas of financial and administrative control,
recruitment of personnel and the establishment of an
effective witness-protection programme. The European
Union stresses the importance of a continued
improvement in practical arrangements in these areas in
order that the expanded Tribunal can function effectively.
2
Security Council 3877th meeting
Fifty-third year 30 April 1998
The President: It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft
resolution before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put
the draft resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): Sweden fully agrees with the
statement just made by the representative of the United
Kingdom on behalf of the European Union.
It is now four years since the genocide in Rwanda,
four years since that cruel wave of killings of up to 1
million people. In his recent report on Africa, the Secretary-
General highlighted the failure of the international
community to prevent the genocide. We agree with him
when he states,
“The horrifying suffering of the Rwandan people
sends the clear and unmistakable message that the
international community must never again tolerate
such inaction.” [S/1998/318, para. 32]
The genocide in Rwanda showed us the imperative of
action to see to it that those responsible are brought to
justice and to do everything possible to prevent the
atrocities of 1994 from recurring.
The establishment of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda was in itself an important step, as
evidence of the willingness of the international community
to deal with the aftermath of genocide. Rendering justice is
crucial to ending impunity and to achieving reconciliation
and peace within Rwanda and in the region.
In this context, it is also important that the national
judicial system of Rwanda be strengthened in parallel with
the continued work of the Tribunal.
Today, three and a half years after its establishment,
the Tribunal faces a heavy workload, with 25 suspects
currently in the custody of the Tribunal. The cause of
justice requires that those indicted be tried without undue
delay.
These are the main reasons why Sweden strongly felt
the need for an initiative in the Council to strengthen the
Tribunal for Rwanda by adding a third Trial Chamber. It
gives us great satisfaction that the Council is able to
respond positively to the request from the International
Tribunal for three additional judges. It is our hope that
this decision will be a concrete contribution to peace,
justice and stability in Rwanda.
We hope that the establishment of a third Trial
Chamber will also be matched by continued efforts by all
organs of the Tribunal to improve the efficiency of their
work. In particular, it is necessary for the third Chamber
to be given the resources it needs to function effectively.
Members of the Council look forward to being kept
informed of progress in this regard, and we trust that the
various organs will comply with the recommendations of
the latest report from the Office of Internal Oversight
Services.
The International Tribunal for Rwanda needs our full
cooperation and support to be able to carry out its
mandate. We welcome the cooperation which has already
been extended to the Tribunal, and we hope all States will
continue to cooperate fully with it.
In conclusion, I would like to place on record the
warm appreciation of my delegation to members of the
Council, to the Secretariat and to the Tribunal itself for
the constructive atmosphere and spirit of cooperation
which have guided the negotiations on the draft resolution
before us. We feel that today’s decision is an important
one for the Tribunal and for Rwanda. Its adoption by
consensus will be a clear sign of the continued unanimous
support of the Council for the International Tribunal for
Rwanda.
Ms. Gomes (Portugal): The International Tribunal
for Rwanda was established in 1994 to prosecute persons
responsible for genocide and other serious violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law. The
creation of this Tribunal should be seen as part of the
response of the international community to the tragedy
that occurred in the Great Lakes region. It is no doubt
contributing to the restoration of peace and justice in that
region.
But the International Tribunal was meant to serve,
above all, as a means to enable as much as possible the
redressing of the gross violations perpetrated. We cannot
forget how important this is for those who survived and
suffered the effects of those blatant human rights
violations. We also recognize that the trials of the persons
responsible for them will serve as a clear signal to the
international community: crimes such as those perpetrated
3
Security Council 3877th meeting
Fifty-third year 30 April 1998
in Rwanda are simply not admissible and will not be
tolerated; impunity cannot continue.
The same views and goals lead us today to adopt this
draft resolution. Justice has to be done, and has to be done
without delay. Those accused must be tried fairly and
promptly. We are extremely concerned about the large
number of people detained and waiting for trial in Rwanda.
The Council is aware of its responsibility to ensure these
rights of the accused and does not forget that justice
delayed is justice denied.
We know the difficulties faced by the International
Tribunal, and we recognize the efforts put forward by all its
magistrates and personnel to overcome them. We believe
that the Council, in establishing this important judicial
mechanism, cannot overlook the need to continue to
provide them with the necessary means to carry out their
tasks.
The creation of a third Trial Chamber, which is the
object of the draft resolution before the Council, is the
appropriate response at this moment. We are confident that
this measure will result in improving the efficiency of the
Tribunal. In taking this measure, we are also contributing
to redressing a horrifying tragedy and thus to the restoration
of peace, justice and security in the Great Lakes region.
Mr. Türk (Slovenia): The International Tribunal for
Rwanda was established by the Security Council to bring to
justice persons responsible for the 1994 genocide in
Rwanda. The Tribunal cannot undo what was done, but it
can have an important preventive effect by ensuring that
there is an end to impunity. The work of the Tribunal is
crucial for national reconciliation in Rwanda and its
liberation from the traumas of the past, and is also
important for the stabilization of the whole Great Lakes
region. The Tribunal should be provided with appropriate
means to fulfil its mandate in its entirety.
In resolution 955 (1994), the Security Council
expressly kept open the possibility of increasing the number
of judges and Trial Chambers should this become
necessary. We believe that the current situation calls for
such action by the Council. The waiting periods in pre-trial
detention have become too long. There is a danger that
international standards of due process may not be fully
observed. In this connection, we wish to stress the
importance of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, which provides in article 14, paragraph 3
(c) for the right of everyone to be tried without undue
delay. This is an international standard of universal
importance.
The Tribunal has to be given the opportunity to
render justice fairly and swiftly in order to meet
international standards, as well as the expectations of
Rwandans and of the international community. We should
keep in mind that we are talking about the gravest of
crimes — genocide and crimes against humanity — and
that the performance of this Tribunal also effects the
ongoing preparations for the establishment of the
international criminal court. The International Tribunal for
Rwanda cannot afford to fail in its mission, and the same
can be said for the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia.
In the light of what I have just said, Slovenia
supports the establishment of the third Trial Chamber for
the International Tribunal for Rwanda, consisting of three
judges. At the same time, we would like to reiterate our
commitment to the principle of independence of the
judiciary and our support for all the measures and
proposals that could help improve the functioning of the
Tribunal so that it can carry out its work in the most
effective and efficient way possible.
The draft resolution submitted for action by the
Security Council today contains all the elements of the
necessary assistance to the Tribunal. We wish to pay
tribute to the delegation of Sweden for its efforts in
preparing the draft resolution.
It is also important that the draft resolution stresses
the need for international cooperation to strengthen the
courts and judicial system in Rwanda, with particular
regard to the necessity for those courts to deal with the
large number of accused awaiting trial. We see such
cooperation as a necessary complement to the
strengthening of the International Tribunal.
Slovenia shall vote in favour of the draft resolution
before the Council today.
Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): Let me begin by expressing
our gratitude to the delegation of Sweden for
spearheading the early consideration of the matter before
us and for coordinating work on the draft resolution that
contains the important decision we are about to take,
namely, the establishment of a third Trial Chamber of the
International Tribunal for Rwanda.
4
Security Council 3877th meeting
Fifty-third year 30 April 1998
Since last year, when nine key suspects were arrested
in Operation NAKI by Kenya law enforcement personnel
and handed over to the Tribunal, the activities of the
Tribunal have continued to increase. Currently there is a
total of 23 suspects in custody, out of which six have been
detained for nearly three years while awaiting trial. The
Tribunal cannot abdicate from meeting its statutory
obligations of providing the accused persons with fair and
expeditious trials. As the maxim goes, justice delayed is
justice denied. Undue delay is therefore unacceptable.
Our timely action today, in response to the request by
the Tribunal to expand its capacity to enable it to fulfil its
tremendously important mission, demonstrates not only the
Security Council’s support for the Tribunal but also its
determination to help bring about and maintain international
peace and security in the subregion. Indeed, this decision to
establish an additional Trial Chamber averts a crisis which
would inevitably have faced the Tribunal in the not-too-
distant future.
The draft resolution calls upon the Tribunal and its
organs to consider ways to increase further its efficiency as
well as to improve the methods and procedures of its work.
This is an important measure, without which the
effectiveness of the Tribunal in dispensing justice will be
brought into question. In this regard, we note that most of
the recommendations contained in the 1997 report of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) on the
operations of the Tribunal, which had identified various
difficulties in its overall management and its organs, have
been implemented. The follow-up OIOS report [A/52/784],
dated 6 February 1998, acknowledges this progress and
notes in the summary, on page 2,
“Improvements were observed in virtually every area
[of the Tribunal] surveyed by the team of investigators
and auditors”
and in paragraph 7 that
“In the past six months, the new officials of the
Tribunal have effected major improvements in its
operations.”
Of course it cannot be denied that some aspects of the
environment in which the Tribunal for Rwanda operates,
including logistical and infrastructural limitations, as well
as the lack of adequate facilities, have contributed to the
operational deficiencies experienced since its inception.
These considerations may have been in the mind of Judge
Laïty Kama, the President of the Tribunal, when on 8
December 1997 he told the General Assembly that the
Rwanda Tribunal was like “a cottage industry” [Official
Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session,
Plenary Meetings, 66th meeting, p. 3] when compared to
the Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. Thus, as we
commend the staff of the Rwanda Tribunal for their
efforts to surmount some of these difficulties, we wish to
stress that unless adequate financial and administrative
resources are provided, the Tribunal will not be able to
overcome these problems.
The primary goal of the two ad hoc tribunals
established by the Security Council is to bring peace
through justice. To this end, the tribunals are critical not
only for the orderly development of jurisprudence in an
area of international law that has regained great
importance, particularly during this period when the
international community is geared towards establishing a
permanent international criminal court, but also for the
role they play in contributing to national reconciliation
and political stabilization, especially in the Great Lakes
region. The Security Council must therefore ensure that
the Rwanda Tribunal is able to fully discharge its
responsibilities without compromising on established
standards of criminal justice. It is for this reason that we
welcome and support this decision to establish the third
Trial Chamber of the Rwanda Tribunal, and are pleased
to co-sponsor this draft resolution.
Mr. Sáenz Biolley (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Spanish): Costa Rica believes that in countries that have
suffered internal conflict there can be no peace without
justice and no reconciliation without the truth coming to
light, and that a free and democratic society cannot be
constructed while criminals who have committed the most
horrible atrocities go unpunished. Impunity is a threat to
peace, as it provokes victims to seek revenge and
reinforces the arrogance of the aggressors.
In this context, the existence of the Tribunal for
Rwanda is an indispensable element for reconciliation in
the Great Lakes region. That is why my delegation is
pleased to co-sponsor and to vote in favour of this draft
resolution to increase the number of judges of the
International Tribunal for Rwanda.
Costa Rica can only respond favourably to the
request of the Tribunal addressed to the Security Council
through the President of the Tribunal, Judge Kama, to
establish a third Trial Chamber with a view to trying
without delay all those who have been detained and
charged and who are already in the custody of the
5
Security Council 3877th meeting
Fifty-third year 30 April 1998
Tribunal. We are convinced that one of the basic
requirements for the proper administration of justice is that
it be swift. In this regard, the decision that the Security
Council will take today is, to put it simply, a way of
ensuring that the fundamental rights of the accused are fully
respected.
On the other hand, we acknowledge the efforts that the
Tribunal has been making to improve its efficiency.
However, we believe that there are still areas where further
improvements can be made, particularly with regard to
procedures and methods of work, as well as in coordinating
its activities with the office of the Prosecutor.
Furthermore, the Tribunal cannot be truly effective if
it does not have the full and impartial cooperation of all
States, in particular the countries of the Great Lakes region,
or if it does not have the necessary financial and human
resources. All of us must make greater efforts in this area.
My delegation cannot fail to take this opportunity to
mention its concern about the execution by the Rwandan
authorities of various individuals accused of committing
acts of genocide. Costa Rica opposes the death penalty in
all circumstances. The administration of justice must not
violate the fundamental right to life of all human beings.
For that reason we call upon those authorities to impose
sentences that are in keeping with the highest standards of
respect for human rights.
We are also compelled to express our deep concern
about the large number of detainees in the prisons of that
nation and the poor conditions under which they are being
held. More must be done to ensure proper conditions for
those prisoners. Above all, their legal rights must be strictly
respected when they are tried.
I should like to take this opportunity to reaffirm that
Costa Rica believes that the work of the criminal tribunals
established by the Security Council must be restricted to
exceptional situations in which the States with jurisdiction
over the criminals are genuinely unable to bring them to
justice or are prejudiced to such an extent that justice
cannot be properly administered.
We believe that the establishment of such tribunals
must respond to a real need and must in no way eliminate
the primary responsibility of the States involved to
administer justice. In this connection, we should recall that
the International Tribunal for Rwanda cannot take the place
of the local courts of that nation, which is why the
international community must cooperate with them in their
work to shed light on the atrocities committed in that
nation and punish those responsible.
In this same context, we should like to reaffirm our
country’s steadfast commitment to a permanent
independent, impartial and effective international criminal
court’s being established by the diplomatic conference
that will take place in Rome in June and July this year.
Only by establishing such a court will the international
community definitively and genuinely reject and condemn
the most serious crimes, which shock the conscience of
the world. In contrast to that future court, the tribunals
established by the Security Council are no more than a
temporary and transitory palliative for emergencies when
there is a real threat to international peace and security.
Once that standing court is established, the Security
Council will never again have to establish ad hoc
tribunals.
In conclusion, allow me to thank the delegation of
Sweden for its leadership in preparing the draft resolution
before us.
Mr. Amorim (Brazil): The genocide in Rwanda is
one of the most tragic events of the last decades. There is
a prevailing feeling that the international community
could have done better and that steps could have been
taken to avoid the massacres. Given the difficulties faced
by the Rwandan judiciary system, the International
Tribunal has become an increasingly relevant tool for
ensuring the fair trial of those involved in the genocide,
thus contributing to peace and reconciliation in Rwanda.
The increase in the number of indicted persons
justifies the addition of a third Trial Chamber. The
decision the Council is about to take, which we support,
takes into account the political factors involved and is a
signal to the Rwandan people that the international
community is ready to assume its share in the process of
healing the wounds of the terrible events of 1994.
The clear commitment of the Tribunal to enhance its
efficiency and improve its administrative practices was
yet another key element that made consensus on this issue
possible.
In view of the well-known positions of Brazil on
human rights in general and on the death penalty in
particular, let me state that it is our hope that an
expanded and more efficient International Tribunal for
Rwanda may render executions such as the ones we have
witnessed recently less likely in the future.
6
Security Council 3877th meeting
Fifty-third year 30 April 1998
Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): Since its establishment, the International Tribunal
for Rwanda has done quite a lot of work and has played a
certain positive role for the stabilization of the situation in
the Great Lakes region as well as that of Rwanda. China
fully understands the request of the Rwandan Government
and other concerned African countries that a third Trial
Chamber be established so as to expedite the trial of the
indicted. China hopes that this will help further stabilize the
situation in the region and promote the national
reconciliation process.
In view of the above, China will vote in favour of this
draft resolution and hopes that the International Tribunal
will take effective measures to enhance its efficiency. At
the same time, I wish to reiterate that China’s position with
regard to the creation of international tribunals remains
unchanged. I also want to point out that the reference to
Chapter VII of the Charter in the draft resolution is only a
technical reaffirmation of the content of resolution 955
(1994) and does not constitute any precedent.
Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
The Security Council created the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda by resolution 955 (1994) of 8
November 1994. The fundamental aim of the Tribunal was
to bring to justice those persons presumed responsible for
the genocide and other serious violations of international
humanitarian law committed in Rwanda in 1994.
The genocide perpetrated in that country is appalling.
In our opinion, no one will forget the images that were
transmitted by all the media, showing citizens roaming the
countryside, having left their homes for fear of suffering the
cruel fate of the rest of their families. We will not forget
the spectacle of the corpses piled up after the various
massacres.
The persons presumed responsible for these criminal
acts must be tried as an example to others. There is
overwhelming proof of who the real perpetrators of these
calculated and systematic acts are. These acts represent a
violation of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide of 1948.
Concerned not to let the perpetrators of these crimes
evade justice, the Security Council decided to establish the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations. The competence
of the Tribunal and its temporal and geographic limits were
defined: it is competent to try persons responsible for
serious violations of international humanitarian law
perpetrated on the territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
citizens responsible for such violations on the territories
of neighbouring States. The competence of the Tribunal
is thus extra-territorial, extending beyond Rwanda to
neighbouring countries, because atrocious massacres were
also committed in Rwandan refugee camps in these
countries.
The International Criminal Tribunal must continue
its work of trying the accused and fulfil its responsibility
to bring these people to trial without delay. The citizens
of Rwanda and the world are waiting for justice to be
done and for the criminals to be punished.
This is why my delegation wishes to facilitate the
judicial procedures and today supports the establishment
of a third Trial Chamber so that the Tribunal can actively
pursue its efforts to improve the effectiveness of its work,
strengthen its working methods and procedures, and try
the accused promptly. Therefore, Bahrain will vote in
favour of the draft resolution that we have before us.
Mr. Dangue Réwaka (Gabon) (interpretation from
French): The horror of the massacres perpetrated in 1994
in Rwanda by extremist groups aroused the consternation
and the indignation of the international community.
Therefore, concerned to put an end to these
extremely violent acts and to punish the perpetrators
severely, the Security Council, by resolution 955 (1994),
established the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda to prosecute those presumed responsible for acts
of genocide or other grave violations of international
humanitarian law committed on the territory of Rwanda,
as well as those Rwandan citizens accused of such acts or
violations committed on the territory of neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994.
In our opinion, the establishment of this institution
should — by the exemplary nature of its judgements —
not only alleviate the great sorrow of the families of the
victims, but also contribute to mitigating the social
tensions and serve as a deterrent to all those who might
be tempted to commit such acts.
Given the limited capacities of the operating
structures and the number of people who have been
accused, the President of the Tribunal proposed, as was
foreseen in the provisions of resolution 955 (1994), that
a third Trial Chamber of the International Tribunal for
Rwanda be established.
7
Security Council 3877th meeting
Fifty-third year 30 April 1998
This Third Chamber will make it possible for the
accused to be prosecuted without delay, thereby meeting the
legitimate expectations of the Rwandan population and of
the international community. This draft resolution
accomplishes this, and my delegation firmly supports it.
Mr. Teixeira da Silva (France) (interpretation from
French): The Security Council, in resolution 955 (1994),
entrusted the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
with the mission of prosecuting, trying and punishing the
persons responsible for acts of genocide committed in 1994
in Rwanda. No one can underestimate the importance of
this task, nor its difficulty. The judges of the Tribunal are
discharging their work in a manner that deserves our
particular tribute.
The President of the Tribunal requested in August
1997 an increase in the number of judges, to make it
possible to establish a third Chamber and to complete the
trials in a reasonable time-frame. France supported that
request the moment it was presented to the Council. This
increase in the number of judges, foreseen by the Council
when it adopted resolution 955 (1994), was, in fact, made
necessary by the growing number of cases before the
Tribunal.
The French delegation is pleased that the members of
the Council are unanimous in their positive response to the
request of the Tribunal President. We will vote in favour of
the draft resolution, of which we are a sponsor. We pay
tribute to the Swedish delegation for its initiative in
preparing the draft resolution.
The adoption of this draft resolution will attest to the
Council’s determination to endow the Tribunal with the
means necessary for it to continue its work for justice.
Furthermore, we have every confidence that the Tribunal
will pursue the efforts it has already made to improve its
functioning and procedures.
The French delegation hopes that the Security Council
can also respond positively to the similar request made by
the President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia for an increase in the number of that
Tribunal’s judges.
Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian): The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
is an important element of the general process of achieving
national reconciliation in that country. In support of efforts
to enhance its effectiveness, we welcome the request of the
President of the Tribunal to create a third Trial Chamber
in order to accelerate the trial process.
We also believe that, if the Tribunal is to function
effectively, further measures will have to be taken to
improve its procedures and methods of work and to
rectify the situation with regard to the lack of
administrative and technical personnel and the
construction of additional facilities for the Tribunal. Such
a comprehensive approach will help to overcome those
obstacles that continue to prevent the Tribunal from
promptly and fully fulfilling the tasks that have been
entrusted to it.
In supporting the draft resolution, we believe that the
reference made in it to Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations is a purely technical one and will not set
a precedent for the Security Council’s consideration of
similar situations.
Mr. Touray (Gambia): The events in Rwanda in
1994 represented one of the most heinous offences against
international humanitarian law. The international
community responded very fittingly by establishing in the
same year the International Tribunal for Rwanda to
prosecute the persons responsible for those crimes. The
establishment of this Tribunal was and is still a very
necessary measure for the process of national
reconciliation and the restoration of peace in Rwanda.
In paragraph 7 of resolution 955 (1994) of
November 1994 establishing the Tribunal, the Council
expressly reserved the possibility of increasing the
number of Trial Chambers should this become necessary.
The International Tribunal for Rwanda has been
functioning very smoothly since its inception. We now
understand that 20 people are presently detained in the
Detention Facility in Arusha, 14 of whom are already
indicted and awaiting trial. In a letter from the President
of the Tribunal dated 1 August 1997, contained in
document S/1997/812 addressed to the Secretary-General,
the President of the Tribunal, Judge Kama, indicated that,
with the Tribunal’s present capacity, it would take at least
88 months to try the incarcerated suspects. Under the
present arrangement, this would mean that some of the
incarcerated persons would wait longer than duly
necessary for their trials. This would be a violation of the
fundamental right of the accused to be tried without
undue delay.
8
Security Council 3877th meeting
Fifty-third year 30 April 1998
The Government of the Gambia values the
fundamental rights of the person, particularly the rights of
the accused. We believe in the old adage and time-
honoured maxim that justice delayed is justice denied. The
earlier the accused are tried, the better. We believe that the
Rwandan people have no lesser expectations. In their
journey towards national reconciliation, it is imperative that
these trials be concluded with reasonable dispatch so that
the people of Rwanda can put their grief behind them as
they move forward.
We believe that it is now necessary to increase the
number of judges and to constitute a third Trial Chamber.
In this way, the accused can be tried without delay and the
expectations of the Rwandan people will not be
disappointed. There is some economic wisdom in this
move, as it would eventually result in financial saving.
My delegation would, for these reasons, support the
establishment of a third Trial Chamber in Rwanda, as
provided for in the draft resolution. Under the draft
resolution, the election of the judges for the third Trial
Chamber would be conducted together with the election of
the judges for the existing two Chambers. While the
mandate of the newly elected judges for the third Trial
Chamber would commence soon after their election, the
mandate of the judges elected for the existing Chambers
would commence on the expiry of the mandate of the
present holders of those offices.
This arrangement would ensure that we have only one
election and also an early establishment of the third Trial
Chamber. We believe that this is a very convenient and
reasonable arrangement.
As the present draft resolution is to ensure no delay in
the trial of the accused persons, we believe that an
improvement in the working methods of the Tribunal would
be helpful. We therefore urge the members of the Tribunal
to reconsider their working methods with a view to
enhancing them.
We believe that this draft resolution and the letter are
very timely. The Gambia is pleased to be a sponsor of the
draft resolution and will vote in its favour.
Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): The
Security Council and the international community have
followed closely the progress of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda since its inception in 1994 after the
horror of genocide in that country. The challenges of
bringing the perpetrators of genocide to justice, addressing
the issues of impunity and contributing to reconciliation
in Rwanda still loom large.
The International Tribunal for Rwanda must carry
out its mission more effectively, more efficiently and
more productively. The trials must be completed and
judgments rendered in a timely manner. The United
Nations Office of Internal Oversight Services has made
extensive recommendations for reforms of the
administration of the Tribunal, the practices of the
Registry and the judges’ Chambers. Some have been
implemented. We remain deeply concerned that, despite
those efforts at reform, serious problems remain. The
Tribunal must continue to implement reform measures to
improve its operations.
Today’s draft resolution expands the International
Tribunal by adding another Trial Chamber with three
judges, who will be elected immediately. This expansion
should enable the Tribunal to render prompt justice.
Enlarging the Tribunal should not replace ongoing reform
efforts, but be carried out at the same time to enable the
Tribunal to perform its important work more effectively.
The effort to bring to justice those responsible for
crimes against humanity is equally urgent in two other
cases, those of the former Yugoslavia and Cambodia. The
United States is therefore working to expand in a similar
way the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and to establish a tribunal to bring to justice
those who were senior Cambodian Khmer Rouge leaders
during the period 1975 to 1979.
The draft resolution that we are about to consider is
a reaffirmation of the international community’s
commitment to providing fair trials and just punishment
to those who perpetrated genocidal crimes in Rwanda.
The United States remains committed to holding those
responsible for crimes against humanity accountable for
their actions.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Japan.
The international community has been drawing many
lessons from the human tragedies that took place in
Rwanda in 1994. One of those lessons was that, in order
to achieve national reconciliation, it was essential to deal
with the root causes of the problem by addressing the
issue of social justice through the pursuit of socio-
economic development, on the one hand, and through the
establishment of the primacy of justice based on the
9
Security Council 3877th meeting
Fifty-third year 30 April 1998
principle of the rule of law, on the other. I believe that, for
this very reason, the International Tribunal for Rwanda was
established by the Security Council.
With this recognition clearly in mind, the Security
Council decided four years ago to establish the International
Tribunal for Rwanda. The Council’s primary goal in doing
so was to put an end to the acts of genocide and other
violations of international humanitarian law that had been
committed in Rwanda and to take effective measures to
bring to justice the persons responsible for them. Thus, the
establishment of the International Tribunal was meant to
contribute to the restoration of peace in Rwanda and to the
process of national reconciliation in that country.
My delegation believes that the motives and goals
which underlay the Council’s action in 1994 remain
unchanged to this day. Concerned by reports that standard
judicial procedures have not necessarily been observed in
Rwanda, we in the Council today feel more strongly than
ever that the Tribunal must provide a model mechanism for
bringing criminals to justice.
The International Tribunal for Rwanda was created to
function primarily as a judicial mechanism. However, in the
opinion of my delegation, the significance of the Tribunal
goes beyond its being just a judicial mechanism. Through
its examples, the Tribunal can show how a judicial system
should function under the rule of law, assuring due process
even to those accused of committing the most heinous of
crimes. Through its own practice, the Tribunal can
demonstrate to the Rwandan people that emotional acts of
revenge and retribution will only feed further destructive
enmities. Peace can persevere only if it is accompanied by
justice, based on the rule of law and the respect for the
human rights of all.
Recognizing these significant roles and functions
expected of the International Tribunal for Rwanda, Japan is
going to vote in favour of the draft resolution before us.
My delegation hopes that the adoption of this draft
resolution will help the Tribunal fulfil those tasks by
enhancing the capacity of the Tribunal.
We must frankly admit that during the three and a half
years of its existence the Tribunal has not always been
successful in performing the functions expected of it in an
exemplary manner. There are problems of an administrative
and managerial nature that have been adversely affecting its
effective functioning. While I understand that there are
many difficulties in the environment in which the Tribunal
has had to operate, and while I also note that some serious
efforts are being made in order to overcome its
inefficiencies, I am of the view that the Tribunal itself
must make further sincere efforts to remedy the present
situation. Simply creating the third Trial Chamber will not
be enough to cure the Tribunal of its present deficiencies
and to restore its full potential. It is with this
consideration in mind that Japan strongly feels that the
letter from the President of the Security Council to the
President of the Tribunal pointing to the need to facilitate
the efficient functioning of the Tribunal should be part
and parcel of the decision of the Security Council to
authorize the expansion of the Tribunal.
In conclusion, I should like to express the ardent
hope of my delegation that with the addition of a third
Trial Chamber the International Tribunal for Rwanda will
be able to function more effectively in such a way that
the expectations of the international community will be
met to the full.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/1998/353.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1165 (1998).
There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.
The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.
10
