United Nations S/PV.3939
98-86320 (E) This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fifty-third Year
3939th Meeting
Thursday, 5 November 1998, 4.05 p.m.
New York
President: Mr. Burleigh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (United States of America)
Members: Bahrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Buallay
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Amorim
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Qin Huasun
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Niehaus
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dejammet
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dangue Réwaka
Gambia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Jagne
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Satoh
Kenya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mahugu
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Monteiro
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Türk
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dahlgren
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Agenda
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
Letter dated 31 October 1998 from the Deputy Executive Chairman of the Special Commission
established by the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 9 (b) (i) of Security Council resolution 687
(1991) addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/1998/1023)
Letter dated 2 November 1998 from the Executive Chairman of the Special Commission established
by the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 9 (b) (i) of Security Council resolution 687 (1991)
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/1998/1032)
Letter dated 3 November 1998 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1998/1033)
Security Council 3939th meeting
Fifty-third year 5 November 1998
The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p.m.
Expression of welcome to the new Permanent
Representative of Japan to the United Nations
The President: I should like, at the outset of the
meeting, to extend on behalf of the Council a warm
welcome to the new Permanent Representative of Japan to
the United Nations, Mr. Yukio Satoh. We look forward to
cooperating with him in the Council’s work.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of November, I should like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to Sir Jeremy Greenstock, Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland to the United Nations, for his service as
President of the Security Council for the month of October
1998. I am sure I speak for all members of the Security
Council in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador
Greenstock for the great diplomatic skill with which he
conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
Letter dated 31 October 1998 from the Deputy
Executive Chairman of the Special Commission
established by the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 9 (b) (i) of Security Council resolution
687 (1991) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/1998/1023)
Letter dated 2 November 1998 from the Executive
Chairman of the Special Commission established
by the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 9
(b) (i) of Security Council resolution 687 (1991)
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/1998/1032)
Letter dated 3 November 1998 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1998/1033)
The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in
its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the letter
dated 31 October 1998 from the Deputy Executive
Chairman of the Special Commission established by the
Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 9 (b) (i) of
Security Council resolution 687 (1991) addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/1998/1023); the letter
dated 2 November 1998 from the Executive Chairman of
the Special Commission addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/1998/1032); and the letter dated 3
November 1998 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/1998/1033).
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1998/1038, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Japan, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States
of America. Brazil, Costa Rica, Portugal, Slovenia and
Sweden have joined as sponsors of the draft resolution.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution (S/1998/1038)
before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Satoh (Japan): First of all, thank you very
much, Sir, for your very kind words regarding my first
Security Council meeting. I assure you of my full
cooperation.
I would also like to endorse what the President said
with regard to the excellent job that our colleague
Ambassador Greenstock did. I would also like to say that
I know that with his renowned expertise, the current
President, Ambassador Burleigh, will do a good job of
leading the Council.
On 31 October, the Revolutionary Command Council
and the Baath Party of Iraq decided to suspend
cooperation with the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) and to maintain the restrictions on the work
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
Japan strongly regrets this decision. To our great surprise,
the decision came the day after the Security Council
completed its work on the presidential letter to the
2
Security Council 3939th meeting
Fifty-third year 5 November 1998
Secretary-General describing the Council’s initial views on
a comprehensive review of Iraq’s compliance with the
relevant Council resolutions, which was proposed by the
Secretary-General on 6 August.
The decision on 31 October, together with Iraq’s
decision on 5 August, has, in effect, rendered impossible
the implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions,
including the provisions of resolution 687 (1991), which
stipulate the conditions that must be met in order for the
sanctions to be lifted. This is a regrettable situation for both
Iraq and the international community as a whole.
Deeply concerned by the Iraqi decision, Japan, for its
part, made a démarche to the embassy of Iraq in Tokyo on
2 November, urging Iraq to immediately resume full and
unconditional cooperation with UNSCOM and the IAEA.
In view of the gravity of the situation, the Council
responded immediately by issuing a presidential press
statement on 31 October, sending a firm, unequivocal and
unanimous message to Iraq. The draft resolution before us
is the formal response of the Security Council to the Iraqi
decision of 31 October. The message is quite clear:
sanctions can be lifted only when Iraq complies with the
relevant provisions of the Security Council resolutions and
the Memorandum of Understanding signed by the Deputy
Prime Minister of Iraq and the Secretary-General, and this
can be achieved only through full cooperation with
UNSCOM and the IAEA.
My delegation considers this draft resolution to be
appropriate and, therefore, has joined the United Kingdom
in co-sponsoring it.
The President: I thank the representative of Japan for
his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
Along with the other Council members, France has lent its
support to the draft resolution that is going to be put to the
vote, and given the final draft, we wish to join the other
sponsors. In expressing itself in a unanimous way the
Council demonstrates its unity in the face of an
unacceptable and irrational Iraqi decision. The Council is
acting firmly because Iraq’s decision represents a serious
violation of that country’s obligations. By so acting,
Baghdad is turning its back on the Council’s clearly
expressed intention to proceed without delay to a
comprehensive review of the implementation of its
resolutions as soon as the restrictions imposed on the
United Nations Special Commission and the International
Atomic Energy Agency on 5 August were lifted.
The draft resolution that we are going to adopt today
restates the Council’s intention to carry out this
comprehensive review. It also reaffirms the intention of
the Council
“to act in accordance with the relevant provisions of
resolution 687 (1991) on the duration of the
prohibitions referred to in that resolution”.
These provisions, as everyone knows, are embodied in
paragraphs 21 and 22 of Council resolution 687 (1991).
Finally, in its last operative paragraph, the text we
will adopt reaffirms unambiguously the responsibilities
and the prerogatives of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security,
responsibilities that include evaluating situations as and
when necessary and making the appropriate conclusions.
France appeals to Iraq to seize the opportunity that
the Council is ready to offer it through the undertaking,
initially proposed by the Secretary-General, of a
comprehensive review. The only way for this to be done
and for there to be progress towards lifting the sanctions
that are causing suffering to the Iraqi people is for
Baghdad to rescind without delay the unjustifiable
measures of 5 August and 31 October.
Mr. Türk (Slovenia): Today, two months will have
passed since the Iraqi authorities decided, on 5 August, to
suspend cooperation with regard to the inspection
activities of the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) and the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA).
The Security Council at that time unequivocally
rejected that decision as being totally unacceptable and in
contravention of Iraqi obligations. While demanding in
vain that Iraq rescind its decision, the Council showed
remarkable patience. Moreover, in its resolution 1194
(1998) of 9 September 1998, the Council clearly indicated
its willingness to address the concerns of Iraqi authorities
by expressing its readiness to conduct a comprehensive
review of Iraq’s compliance with its obligations and by
welcoming the Secretary-General’s proposal in this
regard.
In the face of the persistent absence of full Iraqi
cooperation with UNSCOM and the IAEA, the Security
3
Security Council 3939th meeting
Fifty-third year 5 November 1998
Council and the Secretary-General continued to work
towards the realization of a comprehensive review, to be
conducted once Iraq resumes full cooperation. These efforts
culminated last Friday when the Council, after intensive
consultations, reached a consensus on an outline of the
comprehensive review.
This was an achievement of great importance. It was
also a clear signal to Iraq that the Council is serious about
a comprehensive review. Faced with this clear and
promising prospect, Iraq, however, decided to cease
cooperation with UNSCOM.
This reaction from Iraq is really astonishing. While the
Council was patiently moving towards meeting Iraqi
concerns, Iraq chose to move in the opposite direction. It is
difficult to understand the motives for this reaction. It is
also difficult to see how this grave challenge to the
Council’s authority can result in anything other than a
serious aggravation of the situation.
This will not serve any of Iraq’s interests. Indeed, the
only way for Iraq to progress towards the lifting of the
sanctions remains the fulfilment of its obligations under all
relevant resolutions, notably resolution 687 (1991). If
paragraph 22 of that resolution is to be implemented, the
effective operation of the Special Commission and the
IAEA is essential. This is clearly stated in the draft
resolution before us today.
We believe that this draft resolution is a timely and
necessary one. Slovenia co-sponsored it and will vote in
favour of it. It is well-balanced and focused. It signals to
Iraq in no uncertain terms that it still has a choice: either to
resume full cooperation, whereupon the Council will
proceed to the comprehensive review, or to forfeit another
opportunity and further delay the moment the Council can
act in its favour.
We strongly hope that Iraq will make the right choice
and that it will do so soon.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian): We learned with deep concern of the decision of
the Iraqi leadership on 31 October to halt cooperation with
the United Nations Special Commission. That decision is
unacceptable. It has jeopardized the search of recent months
for a solution to the Iraqi problem. That step runs counter
to the agreements between the Secretary-General and the
Iraqi side that Baghdad would rescind its decision of 5
August and that the Security Council would conduct a
comprehensive review of the Iraqi situation. Those
agreements opened the way to the lifting of sanctions on
Iraq.
Following upon Iraq’s decision of 31 October,
Russia immediately informed the Iraqi leadership of its
position. We are engaging in active diplomatic efforts to
promote a settlement of the problem, in the belief that
only the resumption of the constructive cooperation of
Iraq with the United Nations will make possible a
comprehensive review and the prospect of lifting the oil
embargo.
The way to overcome this new crisis lies, we
believe, exclusively in political and diplomatic efforts
alongside the active role of the Secretary-General. Any
attempt to resolve the problem by force would have
highly unpredictable and dangerous consequences, both
for the United Nations ability to continue to monitor
proscribed military activity in Iraq and for peace and
stability in the region and in the Middle East as a whole.
We are pleased to note that the draft resolution
before us seeks precisely a political solution to the Iraqi
problem and contains no language that could be arbitrarily
interpreted as some kind of permission to use force. The
draft resolution makes it clear that the Security Council,
in accordance with its primary responsibility under the
Charter for the maintenance of international peace and
security, will remain actively seized of the situation.
Without in any way attempting to justify Iraq’s
actions, I wish to stress the exceptional importance of
total clarity with regard to the Security Council’s
intentions to implement its own resolutions. The draft
resolution clearly reaffirms the Council’s intention to take
a decision on the current sanctions in accordance with the
relevant provisions of resolution 687 (1991). This
naturally refers to action under paragraph 22 of that
resolution regarding the lifting of the oil embargo once
Iraq meets its disarmament obligations. The same
understanding was stated in the letter sent on 30 October
by the President of the Security Council to the Secretary-
General in support of his idea of a comprehensive review.
That concept is reaffirmed in the draft resolution. We
hope that, in the light of all this, Baghdad will again
assess the emerging situation and rescind its decision of
31 October.
With this in mind, as well as the fact that the
sponsors incorporated a number of amendments reflecting
our principled approach to the situation, the Russian
4
Security Council 3939th meeting
Fifty-third year 5 November 1998
delegations joins the consensus and will support the draft
resolution.
Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): After the signature of the
Memorandum of Understanding by the Secretary-General
and the Government of Iraq last February and up to the
beginning of August, we witnessed a period of progress in
the disarmament activities in Iraq. This progress was due to
the cooperation lent by the Iraqi authorities to the United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), which was
acknowledged by the Council.
The Iraqi decision of 5 August put an end to what had
finally become a positive trend — a trend leading, we
thought, to the swift completion of the road map known to
Iraq as necessary to achieve the lifting of sanctions.
In a serious effort to re-establish such a trend, the
Council, with the assistance of the Secretary-General,
offered to engage, soon after Iraq were to rescind its
unacceptable decision of 5 August, in a comprehensive
review of Iraq’s compliance with its obligations under the
relevant resolutions, in order to identify any tasks which
still needed to be undertaken to satisfy the remaining
requirements of those resolutions.
In view of those efforts, it was with dismay and
incomprehension that all Council members received the
decision of Iraq, last Saturday, to cease any cooperation
with the United Nations Special Commission and to
continue to impose restrictions on the work of the IAEA,
the effective operation of which is essential for the
implementation of resolution 687 (1991).
The draft resolution we have before us contains the
message the Council must now convey to Iraq. It expresses
a firm condemnation of the Iraqi decision of 31 October; it
renews the support of the Council for the Special
Commission and the IAEA; and it demands that Iraq
immediately rescind that decision, as well as the 5 August
decision.
Iraq must understand that it cannot continue to miss
the opportunities offered. Iraq cannot continue to delay
fulfilling the conditions that will enable the Council to act
in accordance with paragraphs 21 and 22 of resolution 687
(1991). Iraq cannot continue to delay the moment when the
Council will be in a position to act on the duration of the
prohibitions referred to in that resolution.
The draft resolution before us represents a firm,
unambiguous and determined reaction by the Council. It
also expresses, in no uncertain terms, the united response
of all Council members to the Iraqi stand.
It is up to Iraq now. Iraq must immediately
reconsider its position, re-engage once and for all on the
path of cooperation with UNSCOM and the IAEA, and
ensure full compliance with its obligations. Only in this
way will Iraq enable the Council to lift the sanctions.
Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): On 31 October, Iraq
announced its complete cessation of the little remaining
cooperation it had offered to the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM). It also decided to continue to
restrict the work of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). The Iraqi decision was surprising, and
somewhat incomprehensible, in the light of the important
fact that the Security Council, the day before, had
formulated a unified view on the concept of a
comprehensive review of Iraqi compliance. Such a
comprehensive review would, inter alia, have marked the
road out of sanctions for Iraq. But it cannot take place
until Iraq is back in full cooperation with UNSCOM and
the IAEA, and steps like those now being taken by Iraq
will not bring it any closer to the lifting of sanctions. We
are always ready to listen to the views of the Government
of Iraq, but attempts to bargain with the Security Council
over its resolutions cannot be accepted.
In the draft resolution before us, the Security
Council condemns Iraq’s behaviour and confirms its
demands on Iraq. That message cannot be misunderstood:
Iraq must immediately rescind its unacceptable decisions
of 5 August and 31 October and return to full compliance
and cooperation. There is no room for compromise on
these fundamental principles.
At the same time, this draft resolution not only
repeats the Council’s demands; it also reaffirms that
Iraq’s compliance with all its obligations will make it
possible for the Security Council to lift the sanctions, as
stipulated in resolution 687 (1991). It restates the
Council’s readiness to carry out a comprehensive review
of Iraq’s compliance with its obligations once Iraq has
rescinded its decisions and resumed full cooperation with
UNSCOM and the IAEA. It is our sincere hope that the
message embedded in these paragraphs — an exit sign, as
it were, for the route out of sanctions — shall not be
missed by Baghdad.
5
Security Council 3939th meeting
Fifty-third year 5 November 1998
Finally, a very important principle is reflected in the
last paragraph of the draft resolution. The Security
Council’s primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, as laid down in the Charter
of the United Nations, must not be circumvented. We see
this paragraph as an expression of the desire of members to
safeguard that responsibility.
Sweden fully supports the draft resolution before us.
Mr. Amorim (Brazil): The draft resolution we are
about to vote on clearly condemns the decision of the
Government of Iraq to stop its cooperation with the United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM). It also refers to
the continued restrictions imposed by Iraq on the work of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
Since 5 August, when these restrictions first came
about, Brazil has joined other members of the Security
Council in stressing that the lack of full cooperation with
both agencies was totally unacceptable and constituted a
violation of Security Council resolutions. We have also
supported the Secretary-General in his efforts to seek Iraq’s
cooperation in accordance with the Memorandum of
Understanding he signed with the Deputy Prime Minister of
Iraq in February 1998.
The decision of 31 October came at a moment when
the Security Council had just been seriously engaged in
discussing the concept of a comprehensive review of Iraq’s
compliance with Security Council resolutions, as presented
by the Secretary-General. Brazil considers that the
Secretary-General’s possible concept of a comprehensive
review constitutes a thoughtful and balanced approach
which could allow for progress in the implementation of
resolution 687 (1991).
As conceived by the Secretary-General and supported
by the Council, the review shall consist of two distinct and
equally important phases, the first dedicated to
disarmament-related issues and the second encompassing
the other requirements arising from relevant resolutions,
including those relating to Kuwaiti missing persons and
Kuwaiti property.
However, and as the Secretary-General himself
stressed, a condition sine qua non for the Council to
proceed with the review is the rescission by Iraq of its
decision to stop cooperation with UNSCOM and restrict the
activities of the IAEA. Complete and unconditional
cooperation with the Special Commission and the IAEA is
the only way to achieve our goal of addressing fully the
disarmament-related requirements of section C of
resolution 687 (1991). Only with such cooperation can we
envisage the moment in which the disarmament phase
would be concluded and the ongoing monitoring and
verification phase would be fully in place with the effects
stipulated in paragraph 22 of resolution 687 (1991).
Precisely on the day before the Iraqi decision to halt
its cooperation with UNSCOM, the members of the
Security Council had agreed on a letter, which was sent
by the President of the Security Council to the Secretary-
General, in which the Council offered its initial views on
how to hold a comprehensive review. The letter was
forward-looking and in our opinion provided a reasonable
blueprint for the review. It reflected the consensus of the
Council that this comprehensive assessment of Iraq’s
compliance should be designed so as to lead to the
definition of an agreed course of action and timetable
which, if followed, would enable the Council to fulfil its
intention to act in accordance with the relevant provisions
of resolution 687 (1991) on the duration of the
prohibitions referred to in that resolution.
It was thus with a deep sense of dismay that the
Brazilian Government learned of the Iraqi decision of 31
October. That decision makes it much more difficult for
all of us to proceed in our work with a view to ensuring
Iraq’s compliance with its obligations, thus making it
possible to reintegrate Iraq into the international
community. With that objective in mind, we urge Iraq to
rescind both its decisions, of 5 August and of 31 October,
and to resume full and unconditional cooperation with
UNSCOM and the IAEA.
Finally, from the point of view of my delegation, it
is of special importance that operative paragraph 6 of our
draft resolution stresses that the Security Council will
continue to be seized of this issue, in accordance with its
primary responsibility under the Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security. It is our
view that this principle should continue to guide our
consideration of this matter. Bearing these facts in mind,
my delegation decided to join the group of sponsors of
this draft resolution.
Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): The draft resolution before
us demands that Iraq rescind immediately and
unconditionally the decisions taken to suspend cooperation
with the United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM)
and to maintain restrictions on the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA).
6
Security Council 3939th meeting
Fifty-third year 5 November 1998
We are among those who believe that the situation in
Iraq will see notable improvement with the commencement
of the comprehensive review and are therefore disappointed
at the latest turn of events. We expect the Government of
Iraq to fulfil its obligations under all relevant Security
Council resolutions and to cooperate fully with the IAEA
and UNSCOM on the basis of the Memorandum of
Understanding of 23 February 1998. It is on the basis of the
understanding reached therein that a way forward must be
forged to facilitate the conclusion of the outstanding issues
and de-escalate the tension caused by recent developments.
We are grateful that our concerns regarding the
content of the draft resolution were taken on board,
including the demand that Iraq rescind its decisions of 31
October and 5 August this year; the reaffirmation of the
Council’s readiness to take up the comprehensive review;
the intention of the Council, as spelt out in operative
paragraph 5, to act in accordance with the relevant
provisions of resolution 687 (1991) on the duration of the
prohibitions; full support for the efforts of the Secretary-
General and our confidence in his ability to carry this
process forward on the basis of the Memorandum of
Understanding; and our understanding that the present draft
resolution contains nothing that could open the door in any
eventuality for any kind of action without the clear and
precise authority of the Security Council. In that respect,
we are happy to note that the Security Council, in operative
paragraph 6 of the draft resolution,
“Decides, in accordance with its primary
responsibility under the Charter for the maintenance of
international peace and security, to remain actively
seized of the matter.”
It is, inter alia, on the basis of that understanding that my
delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution.
In conclusion, we would once again like to see a
resumption of full cooperation between Iraq and the United
Nations, and urge Iraq to act quickly and decisively in
addressing the current situation.
Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
After the signing of the Memorandum of Understanding
between Iraq and the United Nations on 23 February 1998,
the relationship between the two sides continued to be a
good one. Everything seemed to be going smoothly and
naturally. That relationship was free of any problem
whatsoever; during that period no problems, in the full
sense of the word, were created.
Everyone hoped that this situation would continue.
However, Iraq’s decision of 5 August this year has caused
much damage to that relationship. That was followed by
the decision of 31 October, which further complicated the
situation.
My delegation finds those decisions by Iraq
unfortunate. Even as the Security Council was preparing,
over the last two months, to undertake a comprehensive
review, the latest Iraqi decision put an end to all those
strenuous efforts made by the members of the Council.
It is in Iraq’s interest to rescind those two decisions
and resume its cooperation with the United Nations
Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). We hope that this will
be done as soon as possible. My delegation believes that
there is still a chance, and it should be seized. The
international community should make a greater effort to
convince Iraq and to encourage it to rescind its two
previous decisions.
Iraq’s decision to rescind these two decisions to
cease cooperation with UNSCOM and IAEA would pave
the way for the comprehensive review which was
prepared by the Council and contained in the letter of its
President addressed to the Secretary-General on 30
October.
The review consists of two phases: that of destroying
weapons of mass destruction and that of freeing Kuwaiti
prisoners and restoring Kuwaiti property. We hope that
through this review, Iraq will commit itself to meeting its
obligation. Then the lifting of the long-lasting embargo
could begin, an embargo that has caused the Iraqi people
much suffering and much material and moral damage.
In conclusion, my delegation supports the draft
resolution that we are about to endorse today, and we
hope that it will have positive effects. At the same time,
we hope that consultation and dialogue will continue so
that a way out of the present crisis can be found. That
would enable Iraq to implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions and thereby devote itself to the
economic and social development that it so sorely needs.
Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Spanish): On several occasions during its current
membership of the Security Council, the delegation of
Costa Rica has expressed its firm conviction that the
logical and viable solution to the constant crises that have
arisen in the context of the relationship between the
7
Security Council 3939th meeting
Fifty-third year 5 November 1998
United Nations and Iraq lies in the full implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Time and again, whenever the Iraqi authorities have
pushed that relationship to the limit, Costa Rica has stressed
that Iraq must comply with the disarmament obligations
imposed on it by those resolutions, as an indispensable
condition for the lifting of the sanctions imposed.
That unswerving position on the part of my delegation
is based on the fact that we have repeatedly noted a
persistent course of action on the part of the Government of
Iraq to avoid full compliance with those obligations,
through excuses and evasions designed to secure new rules
of the game that could diminish its responsibilities under
those Council resolutions.
The decision taken by the Government of Iraq on 31
October to cease cooperation with the United Nations
Special Commission, together with its continued restrictions
on the work of the International Atomic Energy Agency,
are a further example of that dangerous course of action
and give us good reason to doubt the Iraqi authorities’
willingness to comply.
This new challenge by Iraq to the authority of the
Security Council not only disregards the obligations that it
entered into with the international community, but also calls
into question the willingness and readiness that it expressed
in the Memorandum of Understanding that it signed with
the Secretary-General on 23 February this year.
That Memorandum established ample scope for
political dialogue, which has now been ignored by Iraq for
the sole purpose of securing further concessions in the
process of implementing Council resolution 687 (1991).
That is why the delegation of Costa Rica cannot accept or
consider valid the attempt to justify Iraq’s decision on the
basis of a failure to understand because of an alleged lack
of clarity in the letter that the President of the Security
Council addressed to the Secretary-General on 30 October.
Costa Rica hopes that Iraq will proceed to comply
with its international disarmament obligations, honour its
word as given in the Memorandum of Understanding of 23
February and resume cooperation with the Special
Commission and the International Atomic Energy Agency
without conditions.
Costa Rica also hopes that the Government of Iraq
will demonstrate clearly and unequivocally to the
international community its willingness to resolve the
current situation and to take firm steps that will enable
the Council promptly to embark on the comprehensive
review.
In this connection, I should like to take the
opportunity to reaffirm my delegation’s support for the
valuable and tireless efforts that the Secretary-General has
made and is still making and to urge him to continue his
work in the hope that dialogue and negotiation will make
it possible to achieve a political solution to the current
crisis.
For all of those reasons, Costa Rica sponsored and,
of course, will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before us.
Mr. Jagne (Gambia): My delegation would simply
like to reiterate that it was flabbergasted by the decision
taken by Iraq on 31 October 1998 to cease cooperation
with the United Nations Special Commission and to
continue imposing restrictions on the work of the
International Atomic Energy Agency. This constituted yet
another slap in the face, especially at that time, when the
Security Council was in the process of fine-tuning a
possible concept for a comprehensive review of sanctions
imposed on Iraq. The Security Council was working
painstakingly in that direction when what had been
conveniently described as a “hiccup” suddenly assumed
another dimension because of the decision taken on 31
October, so that now it looks like a stranglehold. What
this draft resolution is attempting to do is free the
international community from that deadly grip and,
hopefully, break the vicious cycle of mini-crisis after
mini-crisis. We want to move forward.
It was in that spirit that resolution 1194 (1998) was
adopted in order to set in motion the process that would
culminate in a comprehensive review — provided, of
course, that the logical sequence was adhered to. There is
no need to emphasize that the first step in this sequence
of events is for Iraq to rescind its decision of 5 August.
My delegation subscribes wholeheartedly to the view that
by failing thus far to comply with its relevant obligations,
Iraq is unnecessarily postponing the proposed
comprehensive review and, by extension, prolonging the
unwarranted suffering of the people of Iraq.
In view of the fact that the draft resolution calmly
but firmly provides yet another opportunity for Iraq to
resume cooperation, my delegation will vote in favour of
it.
8
Security Council 3939th meeting
Fifty-third year 5 November 1998
Mr. Dangue Réwaka (Gabon) (interpretation from
French): In resolution 1154 (1998) of 2 March 1998, which
endorsed the Memorandum of Understanding signed on 23
February 1998 in Baghdad by the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq, the
Security Council reaffirmed its intention to comply with the
provisions of resolution 687 (1991) concerning the duration
of the prohibitions contained in that resolution, provided
Iraq placed no more obstacles in the way of the activities
of the United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
The assurances that we received from the Iraqi
authorities indicated that nothing would be done to impede
the process of dismantling the weapons of mass destruction
that might still be on Iraqi soil.
However, contrary to every expectation, on 5 August
1998, Iraq decided to suspend and, on 31 October to halt,
its cooperation with those two bodies, running the risk of
postponement, sine die, of the comprehensive review that
the Security Council was preparing to conduct.
Whatever the reasons for Iraq’s decision, we can only
condemn them. Indeed, we believe that that attitude can
only increase our suspicions regarding Iraq’s goodwill to
comply with the provisions of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. That attitude also has the effect of delaying the
moment when the Security Council must take a decision
under the provisions of paragraphs 21 and 22 of resolution
687 (1991), thereby prolonging the suffering of the Iraqi
people.
It is for all these reasons that, once again, we wish to
encourage Iraq to resume full cooperation with the Special
Commission and the IAEA, because only a resumption of
dialogue — and, particularly, the technical dialogue
between Iraqi experts and the experts from UNSCOM and
the IAEA — will help to provide answers to the Iraqi
Government’s questions regarding the possibility of a
lifting, even a partial lifting, of sanctions by the Security
Council.
Therefore we will support the draft resolution before
us, since it is in keeping with that idea.
We believe that the unreserved support expressed by
members of the Council for the efforts that the Secretary-
General has been making to implement the Memorandum
of Understanding of 23 February 1998, and their
reaffirmation to conform to the relevant provisions of
resolution 687 (1991), should inspire greater confidence in
Iraq regarding the real desire of Council members to
conduct a review of actions undertaken since the
imposition of the embargo.
Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): The Chinese delegation is deeply disturbed and
concerned at the present development in Iraq. We have
always believed that Iraq should implement in full
Security Council resolutions and resume, as soon as
possible, its cooperation with the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM) and the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). At the same time the Security
Council, in accordance with the provisions of its relevant
resolutions, should also make a timely and objective
assessment of Iraq’s compliance. Only then can Council
resolutions be fully and effectively implemented. It is our
hope that questions left over from the Gulf war can be
properly resolved as soon as possible.
As the Chinese saying goes, “three feet of ice is
hardly the result of one day’s cold”. We should seriously
reflect on the root causes of the present situation. There
is no doubt that Iraq has to fulfil in a comprehensive
manner its obligations under relevant Security Council
resolutions. But the Council also has the responsibility to
make a fair and objective assessment in light of Iraq’s
compliance.
We are of the view that regarding some weapon
files, conditions are ripe to move to the next ongoing
monitoring and verification stage. The fact that the
Security Council has been unable to make such a political
decision is regrettable.
The Secretary-General has proposed that the Council
conduct a comprehensive review of the Iraqi question and
put forward some concrete ideas in this regard. The
Secretary-General’s proposals and ideas have been
warmly received and supported by an overwhelming
majority of the Council members. We appreciate and
support the Secretary-General’s ideas and positive efforts.
We believe that, under the present circumstances,
conducting a comprehensive review is still a way out of
the present impasse. We support the Secretary-General in
his ongoing active role in this regard.
Only through dialogue and consultations and
confidence-building can we resolve the present problem.
There is no other way out. In this context, I should like
to appeal to all sides to exercise restraint and to try to
resolve their differences through dialogue and cooperation
9
Security Council 3939th meeting
Fifty-third year 5 November 1998
and to refrain from any actions that might sharpen the
conflict and exacerbate tension.
Although there are still elements in the draft resolution
that are not totally to our liking, it is also true that the draft
has incorporated amendments put forward by China and
other interested countries by taking out the part which
determines that the situation in Iraq poses a threat to
international peace and security, and by adding that it is the
primary responsibility of the Security Council to maintain
international peace and security, reiterating its support for
the Secretary-General in his efforts to ensure the
implementation of the Memorandum of Understanding and
reaffirming the Council’s intention to act in accordance
with the relevant provisions of resolution 687 (1991) on the
duration of the prohibitions.
We therefore believe that, in general, the text is a
balanced one. In order to ensure the full implementation of
Security Council resolutions and to seek an appropriate
solution to the present problem, we will vote in favour of
the draft resolution. We hope that this resolution will
facilitate the resumption of cooperation between Iraq, on
the one hand, and UNSCOM and IAEA, on the other, so as
to allow an early comprehensive review which will in turn
free the Iraqi people from sanctions.
The President: I shall now put to the vote the draft
resolution contained in document S/1998/1038.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
1205 (1998).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements following the voting.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): Thank
you, Mr. President, for your kind words addressed to me at
the beginning of this meeting, and congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency.
By its decisions of 5 August and 31 October, Iraq has
put itself in flagrant violation of its obligations under the
relevant resolutions of the Council. It is right that the
Council should react formally and unanimously to this
latest attempt to challenge its authority and that of the
United Nations as a whole.
This resolution reiterates the Council’s full support
for the Special Commission and the IAEA. Their work is
absolutely vital. Iraq’s constant attempts to undermine
them and avoid its obligations only delay the moment
when the decision can be taken on the lifting of sanctions.
Cooperation, not confrontation, is the only way out from
sanctions for Iraq.
Certain speakers have given their views on the
meaning of this resolution as regards the possible use of
force. Let me set out briefly the view of the United
Kingdom. It is well established that the authorization to
use force given by the Security Council in 1990 may be
revived if the Council decides that there has been a
sufficiently serious breach of the conditions laid down by
the Council for the ceasefire.
In the resolution we have just adopted, the Council
has condemned the Iraqi decision to cease all cooperation
as a flagrant violation of its obligations.
This resolution sends a clear message to Iraq:
resume cooperation now. If Iraq does so, the Council has
spelt out unambiguously that it stands ready to conduct a
comprehensive review of Iraq’s compliance with its
obligations under the relevant resolutions and what steps
remain to be taken. We hope Iraq will respond positively
and resume full cooperation soon.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United Kingdom for his kind words addressed to me. I
shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of the United States.
By adopting this resolution, the Security Council has
sent a clear and unmistakable message to Iraq: non-
compliance will not be rewarded or tolerated. Iraqi efforts
to defy Council resolutions and obtain a lifting of
sanctions without full compliance have failed, and will
fail. Compliance with the Council’s resolutions is the only
course which will lead Iraq back towards acceptance
within the community of nations.
The restrictions which Iraq has imposed on the
United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) since
5 August are intolerable. Let me be clear: key provisions
of resolution 687 (1991) cannot be implemented unless
10
Security Council 3939th meeting
Fifty-third year 5 November 1998
UNSCOM and the IAEA have Iraqi cooperation and full,
immediate and unimpeded access.
The Secretary-General, whose efforts to obtain Iraqi
compliance are commended in this resolution, has expressed
his own view that Iraq’s 31 October decision to halt
UNSCOM activities is a serious breach and major violation
of the 23 February Memorandum of Understanding. It is
significant that today’s resolution similarly cites the Iraqi
decision as a flagrant violation of resolution 687 (1991) and
other relevant resolutions. I would also recall that both
President Clinton and Secretary of State Albright have
emphasized that all options are on the table, and the United
States has the authority to act.
The Council has made clear on many occasions —
most recently in its 30 October letter to the Secretary-
General and today in this resolution — that it is prepared
to recognize and respond to Iraqi compliance, but not
until Iraq lifts all restrictions on UNSCOM and the IAEA
and resumes cooperation.
Iraq should recognize the gravity of the situation it
has created. Iraq must turn back from the dangerous and
self-defeating course it has chosen. The United States
sincerely hopes that Iraq will heed the clear message of
this resolution and take the necessary steps without delay.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.
11
United Nations S/PV.3955
98-86710 (E) This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fifty-third Year
3955th Meeting
Wednesday, 16 December 1998, 9.30 p.m.
New York
President: Mr. Buallay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bahrain)
Members: Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Amorim
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Qin Huasun
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Niehaus
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dejammet
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Essonghé
Gambia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Jagne
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Konishi
Kenya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mahugu
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Monteiro
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Türk
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dahlgren
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Sir Jeremy Greenstock
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Burleigh
Agenda
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
Letter dated 15 December 1998 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/1998/1172)
Security Council 3955th meeting
Fifty-third year 16 December 1998
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
Letter dated 15 December 1998 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/1998/1172)
The President (interpretation from Arabic): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Hamdoon (Iraq)
took the seat reserved for him at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President (interpretation from Arabic): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the letter
dated 15 December 1998 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
document S/1998/1172.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/1998/1173, which contains the
text of a letter dated 15 December 1998 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the letter dated 14 December 1998 from the
Permanent Representative of Iraq to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General and its enclosure.
Members of the Council have received photocopies of
the following communications: letter dated 16 December
1998 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council, which will be issued as document
S/1998/1175; letter dated 16 December 1998 from the
Chargé d’affaires ad interim of the United States Mission
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council, which will be issued as document
S/1998/1181; and letter dated 16 December 1998 from the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council, which
will be issued as document S/1998/1182.
The first speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Iraq. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Hamdoon (Iraq)(interpretation from Arabic): I
speak to you now while rockets and bombs are falling on
the cities and the villages of Iraq, Iraq that is steadfast
and patient. I am not speaking in symbolic language or
about a fireworks display in the Baghdad sky which is
being enjoyed by CNN viewers. Indeed, I am speaking
about bombs that are falling at this very moment to rip
out the hearts of elderly men and women and extinguish
smiles from the faces of children and scatter their limbs
everywhere. These are instruments of destruction that are
reaping the lives of Iraqi civilians who have been
suffering for the past eight years from one of the most
comprehensive and horrendous sanctions known in human
history.
The aggression launched by the United States and
Britain today is the most glaring evidence of the absence
of principles in international relations and of the
submission of the world to the authority of brute power.
Indeed, this is a very grim and sad day in the history of
the United Nations and the Security Council. At a time
when the Security Council, with the participation of the
Secretary-General, was discussing reports submitted by
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the
United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) on the
status of compliance by Iraq, and before the Council
reached any conclusion on this subject, the United States
and Britain launched their attack against Iraq. The two
Powers requested a suspension of the informal meeting of
the Security Council and their pretext for aggression was
that one of the two reports — the UNSCOM report —
emphasized the lack of full cooperation by Iraq with
UNSCOM. Thus, the United States has once again
arrogated to itself the Security Council’s authority and
flouted international law and the United Nations Charter.
Indeed, it has disregarded the prestige of the members of
the Council, who were in session and were not allowed to
even complete their discussion, in keeping with their
2
Security Council 3955th meeting
Fifty-third year 16 December 1998
responsibilities for maintaining international peace and
security.
Time and again we have warned against the partiality
and lack of objectivity of the United Nations Special
Commission. The conduct of the UNSCOM Executive
Chairman yesterday and today provided additional evidence
that his partiality, lack of integrity and lack of objectivity
as an international civil servant could indeed lead the world
to disasters, the first victims of which would be the United
Nations and its prestige. The UNSCOM Executive
Chairman singled out in his report yesterday five incidents
out of a total of 300 inspection operations; I repeat, five
incidents of 300 inspection operations that have been
undertaken since UNSCOM resumed its operations in Iraq
on 18 November. He considered those incidents as
categorical evidence of lack of cooperation on Iraq’s part.
What are these incidents? One is that the Iraqi side
requested UNSCOM to respect the Muslim religious
holiday on Fridays. Another was that the Iraqi side took
inspectors to the headquarters of a non-Iraqi organization
and the officers of that organization denied the inspectors
access to their headquarters. A third incident was that
UNSCOM inspectors entered a site where they were
expecting to find what was presumed to be documents and
they failed to find such documents because those documents
were not there.
Another incident relates to the "air force" document,
which we invited him to discuss jointly, in the presence of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General. He refused to
do so. Yet another incident relates to a visit to the party
headquarters, in which a party representative requested a
written request — just a few lines — to inspect the party
headquarters. They refused to do so. And to complete his
non-objective conclusions with regard to cooperation by
Iraq, the Executive Chairman of the Special Commission
today, without the knowledge or approval of the Security
Council — without its knowledge or approval — withdrew
his inspectors from Iraq in order to pave the way
completely for the military aggression against Iraq by the
United States and the United Kingdom.
The exaggerated uproar about Iraqi weapons of mass
destruction is nothing but a great lie; the other lie is the
allegation that Iraq poses a threat to its neighbours. With
regard to weapons of mass destruction, UNSCOM and the
International Atomic Energy Agency have been operating
since April 1991, with cooperation from the Iraqi side, and
have completed their essential work in the area of
disarmament. The International Atomic Energy Agency
announced recently that the disarmament phase has virtually
been completed, and UNSCOM declared that it was about
to complete that phase with regard to missiles and
chemical weapons, a month being set by the Chairman of
UNSCOM to do so.
The question that arises is, where are the prohibited
weapons which they allege that Iraq still has? If
UNSCOM has any evidence that Iraq possesses a
prohibited weapon or its components, then we challenge
them, as we have done in the past, to provide physical
evidence to the Security Council. Indeed, some members
of the Security Council have requested, time and again,
that such evidence be submitted, but UNSCOM has failed
to do so.
With regard to the threat posed by Iraq to its
neighbours — and there is a well-known exception in this
context — we ask the Security Council to tell us which
of Iraq’s neighbouring States claims that Iraq is
threatening its peace and security. Indeed, we would pose
another question: what has the Security Council done in
the face of the threats to the peace and security of Iraq
made every day by some permanent members of the
Security Council, and of other threats posed by another
neighbouring country?
In closing, I invite the Security Council to fulfil its
responsibilities as set forth in the United Nations Charter
and request an immediate and unconditional cessation of
the aggression that is under way against Iraq.
Furthermore, I remind the Council of the content of the
statement issued by the national leadership of my country
today: that we are confident that the people of Iraq will
prove once again that this aggression is futile and a
failure, as they have done in the past with regard to every
prior instance of aggression.
Finally, I wish a holy Ramadan to the steadfast
Iraqis and to Arabs and Muslims everywhere in the
world.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation
from Russian): Today’s meeting is taking place at a time
when Iraq is being subjected to massive missile and bomb
strikes by the armed forces of the United States and the
United Kingdom. There have been casualties, valuable
material goods have been destroyed and a threat has been
created to peace and security not only in the region but
beyond it. I should like to recall that there are Russian
citizens in Baghdad. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Russian Federation, Mr. Ivanov, stated today that if
3
Security Council 3955th meeting
Fifty-third year 16 December 1998
their lives should prove to be imperilled, that will have
extremely serious consequences.
Grave harm has been done to the tremendous amount
of work done in recent years to effect a post-crisis
settlement in the Persian Gulf region and to dismantle the
capability of Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction and their
delivery systems. The very existence of the system that was
so carefully set up over a long period of time to monitor
the prohibited programmes of Iraq has been called into
question. Such a turn of events, to which Russia decidedly
objects, has caused very serious concern and deep alarm. In
carrying out this unprovoked act of force, the United States
and the United Kingdom have grossly violated the Charter
of the United Nations, the principles of international law
and the generally recognized norms and rules of responsible
behaviour on the part of States in the international arena.
Essentially, a threat has been made to the entire system of
international security, in which the United Nations and the
Security Council act as a central link.
The Security Council alone has the right to determine
what steps should be taken in order to maintain or restore
international peace and security. We reject outright the
attempts made in the letters from the United States and the
United Kingdom to justify the use of force on the basis of
a mandate that was previously issued by the Security
Council. The resolutions of the Council provide no grounds
whatsoever for such actions.
I should like to recall that paragraph 6 of the most
recent resolution of the Security Council on Iraq, resolution
1205 (1998), clearly states that the Security Council
“Decides, in accordance with its primary
responsibility under the Charter for the maintenance of
international peace and security, to remain actively
seized of the matter.”
Clearly, therefore, those actions have been undertaken
in violation of Security Council resolutions. The entire
responsibility for the consequences of those actions must be
borne by those States that have chosen a unilateral act of
force in order to resolve their problems with Iraq. No one
is entitled to act independently on behalf of the United
Nations, still less assume the functions of a world
policeman. Russia has consistently made intensive
diplomatic efforts to promote a swift settlement of the
situation around Iraq. The potential for a political and
diplomatic resolution of the Iraqi crisis has by no means
been exhausted, as is made particularly clear by the
basically normal course of cooperation between Iraq and
the United Nations recently. The Iraqi leadership even
now confirms its readiness to continue on that course.
We believe that although there are certain problems
regarding the cooperation between Iraq and the United
Nations Special Commission and the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the current crisis was created artificially,
partly as a result of the irresponsible acts of the Executive
Chairman of the Special Commission, Richard Butler. On
the night of 15 December this year, he presented a report
that gave a distorted picture of the real state of affairs and
concluded that there was a lack of full cooperation on the
part of Iraq. That conclusion was not borne out by the
facts. Without any consultations with the Security
Council, Richard Butler then evacuated the entire Special
Commission staff from Iraq. At the same time, there was
an absolutely unacceptable leak of the report to the
communications media, which received the text before the
members of the Security Council themselves. Richard
Butler thus grossly abused his authority. His acts have led
to a sharp deterioration of the situation regarding Iraq.
It is symbolic that precisely at the time when
Richard Butler, during today’s consultative Council
meeting, was attempting to defend the conclusions
reached in his report, we were informed about the strike
against Iraq, and the justification for that unilateral act
was precisely the report which had been presented by the
Executive Chairman of the Special Commission.
In the light of this new situation in Iraq, the Russian
Federation cannot remain unconcerned. We appeal for an
immediate end to these acts of military force, that
restraint and prudence be demonstrated and that no further
escalation of the conflict be allowed, a conflict which is
fraught with completely predictable consequences,
dangerous not only for the Iraqi settlement but also for
international stability as a whole.
We are convinced that the resolution of the Iraqi
problem is possible only through political and diplomatic
methods on the basis of compliance with the resolutions
of the Security Council and the norms of international
law.
We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
statement today in which he, inter alia, confirmed his
readiness to promote a peaceful settlement of the problem
in the region of the Persian Gulf.
We believe that the Security Council has its part to
play in accordance with the Charter of the United
4
Security Council 3955th meeting
Fifty-third year 16 December 1998
Nations, including giving an assessment, in principle, of the
current unilateral military action. In this context, today’s
meeting is of particular significance.
Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): This afternoon the United States and the United
Kingdom started a military attack against Iraq which
violated the United Nations Charter and norms governing
international law. We were deeply shocked by this act, and
we condemn it.
It must be pointed out in particular that with the joint
efforts of the Secretary-General and the international
community, Iraq had resumed its cooperation with United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), and progress
had also been made in verification efforts.
Against this backdrop, the unprovoked military action
of the two countries is completely groundless. We are
deeply concerned over the safety and security of the people
of Iraq and the United Nations staff in the country.
We also would like to thank the Secretary-General for
the remarks he made today on this question.
The Chinese delegation at the open debate this
morning on the question of the maintenance of peace and
security and post-conflict peace-building stated that we are
against power politics or the unilateral resort to the use or
threat of force in international relations. We believe that
such acts contravene international law and norms governing
international relations and are in themselves a serious threat
to international peace and security. These remarks of ours
were not without targets.
China has always strongly advocated peaceful
settlement of international disputes and is against the use or
the threat of use of force in international relations.
The differences that exist between UNSCOM and Iraq
on the verification issue can properly be settled through
dialogue and consultation. The use of force, far from
helping to reach a settlement, may create serious
consequences for the implementation of Security Council
resolutions, for relations between Iraq and the United
Nations and for peace and stability in the world and in the
region.
We call upon the United States and the United
Kingdom to immediately stop all military actions against
Iraq, to avoid any other acts which may worsen the
situation and to return to the path of cooperation and
dialogue.
The leader of UNSCOM has played a dishonourable
role in this crisis. The reports submitted by UNSCOM to
the Secretary-General were one-sided and evasive
regarding the facts. It is difficult for the UNSCOM leader
to shirk his responsibility in the current crisis.
From the letters addressed to the President of the
Council by the United States and the United Kingdom, it
can be seen that they have taken the relevant UNSCOM
reports as the main argument for the use of force against
Iraq. Perhaps that was precisely the purpose of those
reports, but I must point out that whatever the intention
was behind the preparation of the reports by the
UNSCOM leader, and however the countries which read
them try to make use of them, there is in fact no excuse
or reason for the use of force against Iraq.
We believe that only through political and diplomatic
means can an appropriate settlement be found to the
various contradictions and differences over the question
of weapons verification in Iraq.
The United Nations Charter entrusts the Security
Council with the main responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security. At this crucial moment
of war and peace, the Council should shoulder this sacred
responsibility. We are ready to join the international
community in an effort to this end.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): A few
hours ago the armed forces of the United Kingdom, along
with those of the United States, took military action in
Iraq. This was not a hasty decision.
There has been a long road to this crisis. At any
point on that road, Iraq could have chosen to cooperate
fully and freely, thereby avoiding the action which we
have been forced to take. It is worth looking back down
that road to see why we have reached this point.
Security Council resolution 687 (1991), bringing to
an end the Gulf War, made it a condition of the ceasefire
that Iraq both destroy its weapons of mass destruction and
agree to the monitoring of its obligation to destroy such
weapons.
Why was this assurance so vital? Because Iraq had,
unprovoked, invaded Kuwait. Because in the course of
that conflict, Iraq had launched indiscriminate ballistic
5
Security Council 3955th meeting
Fifty-third year 16 December 1998
missile attacks on neighbouring countries. Because Iraq had
already shown it was ready and willing to use the most
deadly weapons. It used chemical weapons extensively
against Iran, and against its own civilians in Halabja in
1988, using mustard gas and the nerve agent tabun, killing
thousands of civilians. Saddam Hussein is the only leader
ever to have authorized the use of nerve agents. Chemical
weapons casualties from the Iran-Iraq war number more
than twenty thousand. As was slowly revealed after the
Gulf War, Iraq had developed huge quantities of weapons
of the most deadly kind.
The United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM)
was set up to remove Iraq’s extensive weapons of mass
destruction capabilities and to provide a full and verifiable
account of what Iraq had produced and used in the past. To
complete this task UNSCOM was, in 1991, given
immediate, unconditional and unrestricted access to all the
areas, facilities, equipment and records it wished to inspect.
But Iraq has never given UNSCOM the cooperation it
needed to complete its tasks. Instead, it has concealed the
evidence of its past and current programmes and has
engaged in a policy of harassment and deceit to thwart
UNSCOM in its tasks. Iraq has blocked inspections
whenever it feared that anything incriminating would be
found. It has failed to produce documents UNSCOM knows
to exist, documents that are demonstrably relevant to Iraq’s
programmes of weapons of mass destruction. Even the
infamous “air force” document has yet not been handed
over.
Over the past 14 months, Iraq has deliberately
provoked a series of crises in an attempt to wear down the
will of the international community: in October 1997,
February 1998, August 1998 and at the end of October
1998. Each time, they used the withdrawal of cooperation
both for further prevarication and for the dispersal of their
military capability.
On 14 November, at the last moment and in the
knowledge that they were about to be attacked, the Iraqis
offered full, unconditional and unrestricted cooperation with
UNSCOM. The attack was called off. We willingly made
that last extra effort to avert the use of force. But we said
at the time that we would hold Saddam Hussein to his word
and that, should he break his word once more, there would
be no second chances. The Secretary-General added his
own words of warning, as did others with channels to
Baghdad. Those words were not heeded.
UNSCOM’s report makes clear that Iraq has yet
again failed to keep its promises. The report details not
merely the obstruction but the fact that it relates directly
to documents, sites and personnel that would give a clue
as to the whereabouts of weapons of mass destruction and
the capabilities to make them. It is not obstruction simply
for the sake of it, but a plan of deceit to prevent those
weapons of mass destruction from being located and
destroyed.
UNSCOM has made clear time and again that it can
only make progress in clearing up the outstanding
questions and establish an effective system of monitoring
and verification if Iraq offers real cooperation. Tragically,
that cooperation has not been forthcoming. The whole
continuing history of concealment and deceit is the reason
why we have reached the point of military action.
In this, our objectives are clear: to degrade Iraq’s
capability to build and use weapons of mass destruction,
and to diminish the military threat Iraq poses to its
neighbours. The targets chosen, therefore, are targets
connected with his military capability, his weapons of
mass destruction and his ability to threaten his
neighbours.
There is a clear legal basis for military action in the
resolutions adopted by the Security Council. Resolution
1154 (1998) made it clear that any violation by Iraq of its
obligations to allow the Special Commission and the
International Atomic Energy Agency unrestricted access
would have the severest consequences. That was three
resolutions and nine months ago. Resolution 1205 (1998)
established that Iraq’s decision of 31 October 1998 to
cease cooperation with the Special Commission was a
flagrant violation of resolution 687 (1991), which laid
down the conditions for the 1991 ceasefire. By that
resolution, therefore, the Council implicitly revived the
authorization to use force given in resolution 678 (1990).
And Ambassador Butler’s report makes clear that, despite
its undertakings to rescind the decision of 31 October,
Iraq has not only failed to resume full cooperation with
the Special Commission but has imposed new restrictions
on its work.
The British Prime Minister said in his statement
earlier this evening,
“This action could have been avoided. Since
the Gulf war, the entire international community has
worked to stop Saddam Hussein from keeping and
developing nuclear, chemical and biological weapons
6
Security Council 3955th meeting
Fifty-third year 16 December 1998
and from continuing to threaten his neighbours. For
the safety and stability of the region and the wider
world, he cannot be allowed to do so. If he will not,
through reason and diplomacy, abandon his weapons
of mass destruction programme, it must be degraded
and diminished by military force. Having exhausted all
other avenues, there is no realistic alternative”.
Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Spanish): As a small, peaceful, democratic and
demilitarized country, Costa Rica has maintained and
continues unswervingly to maintain an international policy
based on the principle of the rejection of the use of force
in relations among States. This long-standing policy is
grounded in our own national experience and in the firm
conviction that international law is the sole proper and
legitimate instrument for addressing and resolving disputes
among States.
Over the past two years, Costa Rica, as an elected
member of the Security Council, has applied that policy of
principle by actively supporting the use in all cases, as a
matter of first priority, of the means for the pacific
settlement of disputes provided for in Article 33 of the
Charter. Moreover, Costa Rica in that same capacity has
reaffirmed that recourse to the use of force envisaged as an
exceptional measure in Chapter VII, Article 42, of the
Charter falls within the sole and exclusive purview of the
Security Council, and that only this principal organ of the
United Nations can authorize collective action of that kind.
In that context, Costa Rica learned with great and
profound disquiet of the air strikes carried out today by the
United States of America and the United Kingdom against
military installations in Baghdad, Iraq. Given those events,
Costa Rica reaffirms its long-standing position rejecting the
unilateral use of force and insisting on adherence to
international legal instruments.
Nonetheless, Costa Rica wishes to say that over these
two years it has witnessed with frustration the Iraqi
Government policy of defying and ignoring international
obligations. That dangerous conduct by the Iraqi authorities
has undermined full implementation of Security Council
resolutions on the elimination of all weapons of mass
destruction in the possession of Iraq, has sapped
international trust in Iraq’s good word, has profoundly
harmed the living conditions of the country’s civilian
population, and has driven Iraq’s relations with the
international community into a dead end.
Hence, Costa Rica forcefully and vigorously appeals
to Iraq to put an end, once and for all and
unconditionally, to its provocative actions, to fulfil its
obligations without delay in conformity with the terms set
by the Security Council, and to bring its conduct into line
with what it has undertaken to do and with its promises
to the international community.
Costa Rica today appeals to all parties concerned to
do everything in their power to make possible, through
intensive recourse to the law and to diplomacy, a peaceful
solution to the present crisis.
Mr. Türk (Slovenia): Tonight’s meeting is a sombre
occasion to reflect on a development that we had all been
trying to avoid for quite some time. This year alone, the
Security Council was repeatedly confronted with crises in
its relations with Iraq. Laudable efforts by the Secretary-
General, by the Security Council as a whole and by
several of its members more than once created hope that
full implementation of Iraqi obligations under the Security
Council resolutions would be achieved by peaceful means.
On the other hand, already earlier this year, at the time of
endorsement of the Secretary-General’s Memorandum of
Understanding reached with Iraq, the Council made it
clear, in its resolution 1154 (1998) of 2 March 1998, that
any violation of its obligations would have the severest
consequences for Iraq.
That was a clear message of the seriousness the
Council has attached to the disarmament work in Iraq. It
was also but one in a series of opportunities provided by
the Council to Iraq to de-escalate tensions and to proceed
with the unfinished business of disarmament.
Unfortunately, Iraq failed to take full advantage of those
opportunities.
It is deplorable that we find ourselves today in a
situation characterized by military action against Iraq. We
would have preferred instead to be in a position to
proceed immediately with a comprehensive review, for
which the Security Council was patiently and diligently
working in the past few months. We particularly regret
that the Iraqi leadership themselves have prevented that
review by failing to live up to their latest unequivocal
commitment of 14 November 1998 to full and
unconditional cooperation. It should have been clear to
them that the perpetuation of crises could sooner rather
than later lead to a forceful action. They should have
understood better the repeatedly and unanimously stated
position of the Security Council that hindering the
disarmament work is not acceptable.
7
Security Council 3955th meeting
Fifty-third year 16 December 1998
We have reached the point where it is difficult to
predict how the Council could best deal with Iraq in future.
At this moment, we wish to emphasize that we share the
Secretary-General’s concern for human lives and for the
fate of humanitarian relief efforts. It is necessary to explore
all possible ways to continue to address the humanitarian
needs of the Iraqi people. We wish to welcome the
Secretary-General’s readiness to play his part in this
important task.
Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Portugal always hopes that
the Security Council will find peaceful solutions to
situations of conflict, and it feels no differently in the case
of Iraq.
We have always been of the view that full cooperation
by Iraq with the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) and the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) is essential to fulfil the disarmament tasks, to
ensure compliance with the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council and thus enable the Council to lift the
sanctions imposed on Iraq. The confirmation by UNSCOM
of full cooperation by Iraq, as promised in its letters of 14
November, would have enabled the Council to proceed
speedily with a comprehensive review of all disarmament
files, as proposed by the Secretary-General. But, after so
many efforts and attempts by the Council to bring Iraq to
the path of cooperation, the latest report of the Executive
Chairman of UNSCOM states that Iraq has not lived up to
its commitments and that, in fact, it has not cooperated
fully with UNSCOM.
We appreciate the efforts of the Secretary-General to
offer for the Council’s consideration several possible
options to react to the UNSCOM report. Portugal was ready
to consider those options, and said so this morning. In the
meantime, however, we have been informed of the decision
to withdraw all UNSCOM and IAEA personnel from Iraq
for reasons of safety. The Executive Chairman of
UNSCOM provided further elements on the degree of non-
cooperation by Iraq today to Council members.
The Security Council is thus confronted with a
declaration by Ambassador Butler that Iraq has not
cooperated fully. The United States and the United
Kingdom had made it perfectly clear last month that, in the
absence of full cooperation by Iraq, they would act without
returning to the Council. It is not, therefore, a surprise to
my delegation that a decision has been taken to act
militarily. Naturally, the Council will have to evaluate the
consequences of military action with regard to fulfilling the
goals of disarming Iraq and maintaining peace and
security in the region.
Portugal deeply regrets that a peaceful solution could
not be found. But the main cause of the current crisis is
the obstinate policy of Iraq’s rulers in refusing to comply
with Security Council resolutions. As Chairman of the
Committee established under Security Council resolution
661 (1990), I have been particularly sensitive to the
consequences of this crisis on the Iraqi people and have
sought to do everything possible in the context of the
humanitarian programme to alleviate their suffering.
Portugal will continue to try to contribute actively to
find ways to minimize the effects of the current
circumstances on top of the already difficult living
conditions of the Iraqi people. But we must also
remember that the primary responsibility for the well-
being of all Iraqis falls to the authorities of that country.
Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): Coalition
forces today began operations against military targets in
Iraq. Our ongoing military action is substantial. We are
focusing on Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction
programmes and its ability to threaten its neighbours.
Coalition forces are acting under the authority
provided by the resolutions of the Security Council. This
action is a necessary and proportionate response to the
continued refusal of the Iraqi Government to comply with
the resolutions of the Security Council and the threat to
international peace and security which Iraq’s non-
compliance represents. In carrying out this action, our
forces have taken appropriate measures to defend
themselves from any interference by Iraq and have made
every possible effort to avoid civilian casualties and
collateral damage.
As the Council is well aware, this resort to military
force was undertaken only when it became evident that
diplomacy had been exhausted. The coalition acted out of
necessity, and the Government of Iraq bears full
responsibility for the consequences of this military
operation. We did not act precipitately. On the contrary,
the United States has worked with its partners in the
Security Council over the past months in a sincere and
sustained effort to bring about a peaceful resolution of the
confrontation created by Iraq. For reasons best known to
Saddam Hussein, Iraq chose to reject that effort.
Following the liberation of Kuwait from Iraqi
occupation in 1991, Security Council resolution 687
8
Security Council 3955th meeting
Fifty-third year 16 December 1998
(1991) mandated a ceasefire; but it also imposed a number
of essential conditions on Iraq, including the destruction of
Iraqi weapons of mass destruction and acceptance by Iraq
of United Nations inspections.
In its resolutions — including, in addition to resolution
687 (1991), resolutions 707 (1991), 715 (1991), 1154
(1998), 1194 (1998), 1205 (1998) and others — the Council
has elaborated and reiterated those conditions, including
“full, final and complete disclosure” (resolution 707 (1991))
of all aspects of its programmes to develop weapons of
mass destruction, and “immediate, unconditional and
unrestricted access” (ibid.) for the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM) and the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) “to any and all areas, facilities,
equipment, records and means of transportation which they
wish to inspect” (ibid.). Iraqi compliance with all these
requirements is a fundamental element of international
peace and security in the region.
Nevertheless, Iraq has repeatedly taken actions which
constitute flagrant, material breaches of these provisions.
On a number of occasions the Council has affirmed that
similar Iraqi actions constituted such breaches, as well as a
threat to international peace and security.
Just one month ago, on 14 November, the Government
of Iraq committed to provide full and unconditional
cooperation with UNSCOM, as required by the resolutions.
The Iraqi Government described it as a “clear and
unconditional decision by the Iraqi Government to resume
cooperation with UNSCOM and IAEA”. Iraq stated that the
weapons inspectors could “immediately resume all their
activities according to the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council”. It must be noted that Iraq rescinded its
restrictions on the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) and the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) and offered those assurances only in the face of a
credible threat of force. Military force was not employed at
that time, however, because the United States, along with
other members of the Security Council, sought a peaceful
resolution to the situation created by Iraq and opted to go
the extra mile to test Iraqi intentions.
In that event, Iraq failed to fulfil its assurances. As the
15 December UNSCOM report makes clear, Iraq failed to
provide the full cooperation it promised on 14 November
and thus left UNSCOM unable to conduct the substantive
disarmament work mandated to it by the Council.
By refusing to make available documents and
information requested by UNSCOM within the scope of its
mandate, by imposing new restrictions on the weapons
inspectors and by repeatedly denying access to facilities
which UNSCOM wished to inspect, Iraq once again acted
in flagrant and material breach of resolution 687 (1991).
I should like to pause here to praise the outstanding
professional work of the talented and dedicated staff of
the Special Commission and its Executive Chairman,
Richard Butler. Their efforts from 1991 until today have
reflected the seriousness with which they view their
mandate. Subjected repeatedly to a pattern of harassment
from a legion of Iraqi officials, they have always sought
to perform their duties in an accurate and serious manner,
and they have succeeded.
Iraq fully understood that its actions would be
reported accurately to the Security Council by the Special
Commission. Indeed, the Iraqi Government did not even
wait for the Special Commission’s report before
presenting its own skewed interpretation of events to the
Security Council yesterday, because the Iraqi leadership
understood that the report of the Special Commission
would be factual.
Following Iraq’s repeated, flagrant and material
breaches of its obligations under resolutions 687 (1991),
707 (1991), 715 (1991), 1154 (1998), 1194 (1998), 1205
(1998) and others, in addition to its failure to fulfil its
own commitments, the coalition today exercised the
authority given by Security Council resolution 678 (1990)
for Member States to employ all necessary means to
secure Iraqi compliance with the Council’s resolutions
and restore international peace and security in the area.
Any Iraqi attempt to attack coalition forces or to initiate
aggressive action against a neighbouring State will be met
with a swift response by the coalition.
As President Clinton stated this evening, if we had
delayed for even a matter of days from Chairman Butler’s
report, we would have given Saddam Hussein more time
to disperse his forces and protect his weapons. Also, the
Muslim holy month of Ramadan begins this weekend. For
us to initiate military action during Ramadan would be
profoundly offensive to the Muslim world and therefore
damage our relations with Arab countries and the progress
we have made in the Middle East peace process.
President Clinton also stressed that the decision to
use force is never cost-free. Whenever American forces
are placed in harm’s way, we risk the loss of life. And
while our strikes are focused on Iraq’s military
capabilities, there will be unintended Iraqi casualties.
9
Security Council 3955th meeting
Fifty-third year 16 December 1998
Indeed, in the past, Saddam Hussein has intentionally
placed Iraqi civilians in harm’s way in a cynical bid to
sway international opinion.
Secretary Albright emphasized this evening that our
quarrel is not with the Iraqi people. On the contrary, we
recognize that Iraqis have been the primary victims of
Saddam Hussein’s failure to cooperate internationally and
of his reign of terror domestically. The United States took
the lead in establishing a United Nations programme to
meet the humanitarian needs of Iraqi civilians and
supported the expansion of that programme earlier this year.
Secretary Albright stressed that in carrying out military
action we will do all we can to minimize civilian casualties,
and we will support Iraqis who are working for the day
when the people of their country will be free to choose
their own leaders and shape their own destiny.
Iraq’s policy of unremitting defiance and
non-compliance necessitated the resort to military force.
The United States did not seek a confrontation and did not
undertake this decision lightly. The coalition now looks to
the highest level of the Iraqi leadership for an immediate
demonstration of unconditional compliance with the terms
of the Security Council resolutions.
Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): It is not difficult to say who
is to blame for the crisis between Iraq and the United
Nations, a crisis which has been such a large part of the
entire workload of the Security Council during the two
years that we have sat at this table.
It is the Government of Iraq that again and again has
refused to abide by the clear obligations which a unanimous
Security Council has decided upon. It is also clear that Iraq
has not fulfilled the promise it made to the
Secretary-General only a month ago: to cooperate fully and
without conditions with the United Nations weapons
inspectors.
This has provided a difficult challenge for the Security
Council, because the question of Iraqi compliance is indeed
a matter for this Council to deal with. We around this table
are responsible for ensuring the implementation of the
Council’s resolutions. We are the ones who should decide
the course of action. And I can state tonight, as I have
before, that when Iraq seriously violates its obligations, and
when all diplomatic means have been exhausted, my
Government would even be ready to support a decision in
the Council on military action, as a last resort. But that
would be a decision for the Security Council.
Now, without such a decision, military action was
taken against Iraq a few hours ago. These air strikes were
carried out just as the members of the Council were
meeting in informal consultations, discussing the latest
report from the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) on Iraq’s cooperation and also the Secretary-
General’s letter, which he had sent to us late last night.
The Secretary-General said earlier tonight that this
was a sad day for the United Nations and for the world.
My Government regrets these air attacks and the
consequences they may have for civilians in Iraq. We also
regret the fact that the Security Council has been
presented with a fait accompli — that we did not even get
a chance to conclude our evaluation of the latest
developments before military action was a fact. We fear
that this will not be of much help in getting the
inspections going again, because the Council’s overriding
aim must remain to rid Iraq of its programmes for
developing these awful weapons of mass destruction.
Mr. Amorim (Brazil): The Security Council is
meeting this evening under the impact of a serious turn of
events in the Gulf. Ever since the adoption of resolution
687 (1991) in April 1991, the Council has been grappling
with the difficult task of ensuring the Iraqi regime’s
cooperation with the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) and the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) in the implementation of their mandates.
Although Iraqi cooperation has all along been far from
satisfactory, UNSCOM and IAEA have performed very
valuable work in dispossessing Iraq of its weapons of
mass destruction, as widely recognized. It is regrettable
that just as the Council was preparing to undertake a
comprehensive review of the sanctions regime imposed on
Iraq, as suggested by the Secretary-General, the
international community was confronted with yet another
impasse. Had Iraq demonstrated full cooperation and
complied with its obligations under Security Council
resolutions and the Memorandum of Understanding, we
would not be experiencing the present crisis.
We were informed this afternoon that military action
had been decided upon at the very moment when the
Security Council was gathered to discuss the report
presented by the Executive Chairman of UNSCOM. We
had expected to participate in a discussion of the three
options suggested by the Secretary-General in his letter.
As it turned out, the Security Council did not have the
opportunity to reach its own conclusions.
10
Security Council 3955th meeting
Fifty-third year 16 December 1998
We deplore the fact that circumstances have led to the
use of force. Brazil has always favoured dialogue,
diplomacy and multilateralism in the articulation of
responses to threats to international peace and security. The
use of military force should be considered only as an option
of last resort. When the use of force is indeed
contemplated, this should take place within a multilateral
framework. The Security Council remains the sole body
with legal authority to mandate actions aimed at enforcing
compliance with its own resolutions.
Mr. Konishi (Japan): In line with our Prime
Minister’s comment which was issued today, I would like
the make the following statement.
The letter dated 14 November from the Deputy Prime
Minister of Iraq to the Secretary-General raised hopes that
Iraq would resume full cooperation with the United Nations
Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). The Security Council was
looking forward to a comprehensive review of Iraq’s
compliance with its obligations under all relevant
resolutions, which was to be conducted after confirming the
resumption of full cooperation by Iraq with UNSCOM and
the IAEA. Once full cooperation is resumed, all the
obligations under the relevant Security Council resolutions
can be fulfilled, and the prospect of lifting the sanctions can
be made clearer. Japan has long awaited this in order to
restore its traditional friendship with the people of Iraq.
However, from the letter of the Executive Chairman
of the Special Commission dated 15 December, one has to
conclude, regrettably, that Iraq’s resumption of cooperation
with UNSCOM is not sufficient and that Iraq’s behaviour
constitutes a serious violation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 687 (1991), which
stipulated the conditions for the ceasefire in 1991, as well
as the Memorandum of Understanding signed in February
this year by the Secretary-General and the Deputy Prime
Minister of Iraq.
Up to now the Security Council and many Member
States have worked strenuously to persuade the Government
of Iraq to cooperate fully and unconditionally with
UNSCOM and the IAEA and have made their utmost
diplomatic efforts to ensure Iraq’s full compliance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions. Japan, for its part,
made numerous démarches to the Government of Iraq and
has made various efforts, in cooperation with other States
concerned, in the Security Council and elsewhere in order
to correct Iraq’s behaviour. Regrettably, however, Iraq has
failed to provide full cooperation to UNSCOM, leading to
the consequences we face today.
In view of the course of events as stated above,
Japan supports the action taken by the United States and
the United Kingdom.
Japan strongly urges the Government of Iraq to
comply immediately and unconditionally with all its
obligations under the relevant Security Council
resolutions. By doing so, Iraq will be able to normalize its
relationship with the international community, and
international peace and security will be attained at the
earliest possible date. Japan sincerely hopes that this will
be realized as soon as possible. At the same time, Japan
earnestly hopes that the plight of the Iraqi people will be
alleviated as soon as possible.
Mr. Jagne (Gambia): It is a pity that things have to
be this way. There is, however, no need to cry over spilt
milk. The die is cast. This morning, when we looked at
the options offered by the Secretary-General following the
latest report of the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM), we thought that they constituted a possible
way out of the quandary in which we find ourselves —
not knowing that it was too late already. It is unfortunate
indeed, and very much so, that force had to be used to
deal with the situation.
Where do we go from here? Perhaps when the dust
has settled, we will be in a better position to see more
clearly how best to proceed with normal business. This
would depend, of course, on whether there is any business
left to do. Whatever the outcome, we would like to see
the unity of the Council restored. If it is not, the ability of
the vital organ of the United Nations, which has the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, will be seriously impaired.
Having said that, we still believe that Iraq should
resume full cooperation with UNSCOM and the
International Atomic Energy Agency as required under
the relevant Security Council resolutions. In this way, the
Council can proceed as planned with the comprehensive
review. However, we maintain that any comprehensive
review must take into account the question of Kuwaiti
prisoners of war, archives and other properties removed
illegally from Kuwait during the invasion. We are of the
firm view that the interests of small States must be
protected. This is why we insist so much on this point.
11
Security Council 3955th meeting
Fifty-third year 16 December 1998
We are also mindful of the plight of the innocent
people of Iraq. As far as this issue is concerned, we believe
that there is unanimity in the Council to do everything
possible to alleviate their suffering.
The people in the region also need peace. They have
had so many sleepless nights. The time has now come for
them to have some respite.
Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): My delegation is greatly
concerned about the current turn of events. It is extremely
worrying that while the Council was for the first time
discussing the reports submitted to us today by the United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) — and it had
not concluded its consideration of those reports — a
decision to strike Iraq based on the same reports had been
taken, and, in fact, the strike seems to have already been
under way.
As we have repeatedly said in this Council, any
decision to take further action against Iraq remains the sole
responsibility of the Security Council. We have maintained
that position and ensured that it was reflected in our
resolutions. In our statement on 5 November this year,
during consideration of resolution 1205 (1998), my
delegation stated,
“that the present draft resolution contains nothing that
could open the door in any eventuality for any kind of
action without the clear and precise authority of the
Security Council. In that respect, we are happy to note
that the Security Council, in operative paragraph 6 of
the draft resolution,
Decides, in accordance with its primary
responsibility under the Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security,
to remain actively seized of the matter.'
“It is, inter alia, on the basis of that
understanding that my delegation will vote in favour
of the draft resolution.” (S/PV.3939, p. 7)
We regret that the understanding agreed upon then by
this Council, and on the basis of which we and many
others, on several occasions, joined in a consensus, was not
taken into account when the decision to strike Iraq was
taken today.
We find it even more difficult to understand the
reasons for today’s attack, given the contents of the two
reports and the letter submitted to the Council today. As
the Secretary-General observed in his letter submitting the
IAEA and UNSCOM reports,
“The report from IAEA states that Iraq has
provided the necessary level of cooperation to enable
the above-enumerated activities to be completed
efficiently and effectively'. (S/1998/1172)
With respect to UNSCOM, the Secretary-General
said,
“The report from UNSCOM includes material
that relates to issues prior to 17 November 1998.
With regard to the period since then, the report
presents a mixed picture and concludes that
UNSCOM did not enjoy full cooperation from Iraq.”
(ibid.)
In our reading of the report, this does not in any
way indicate that UNSCOM suffered a total lack of
cooperation, but, on the contrary, indicates that there was
a considerable degree of cooperation extended to it. Given
these two positions, of IAEA and UNSCOM, the
Secretary-General in his wisdom offered three possible
options which, in our view, would have moved the
process of disarming Iraq forward.
Any decision taken to force compliance by Iraq with
resolutions without the Council’s prior authority, in our
view, is contrary to the spirit and purpose of those very
resolutions, because it also deprived the Council of an
opportunity to analyse the reports submitted today and to
take a collective decision on them.
It is for these reasons, in line with our declared
policy on the non-use of force to resolve international
disputes, that we regret today’s air strikes against Iraq and
call for their immediate cessation and a de-escalation of
tension, if the Council is to remain seized of this matter
and to continue fulfilling its mandate under the United
Nations Charter.
Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from
French): I would like to read a communiqué issued this
evening by the French authorities, which is as follows:
“France deplores the chain of events that led to
the American military strikes against Iraq and the
serious human consequences that they may have for
the Iraqi population.
12
Security Council 3955th meeting
Fifty-third year 16 December 1998
“It regrets that the Iraqi leaders were not able to
demonstrate the spirit of full cooperation called for by
the implementation of the Memorandum of
Understanding of 23 February 1998 between the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and Mr. Tariq
Aziz, which would have made possible the
comprehensive review of Iraqi disarmament provided
for in Security Council resolution 1194 (1998).”
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for the
statement that he issued this evening when faced with the
facts while the Security Council was holding consultations.
We have always supported the Secretary-General’s tireless
and persistent actions to ensure that the law prevails,
despite the obstacles and pitfalls encountered.
The Secretary-General reminds us once again today,
a sad day for the United Nations, that the Organization’s
duty will be to play its role.
Mr. Essonghé (Gabon) (interpretation from French):
In my turn, I would like to express my delegation’s regret
over the turn that events have taken since this morning,
despite the numerous diplomatic efforts that have been
made at all levels.
The lengthy crisis that has prevailed between a
Member of the United Nations and the Security Council
could have been avoided in the light of the initiatives
undertaken in February and November this year by the
Secretary-General, who is present here, and by the entire
membership of the Security Council. Those efforts gave
us a glimpse of a possible peaceful resolution of the
misunderstandings and lack of understanding on both
sides.
Unfortunately, we must conclude that the new state
of mind and the hope that emerged on numerous
occasions have now been dashed by the events we have
learned about today. Nevertheless, we would like to
congratulate the Secretary-General on his readiness to
contribute to a new effort to produce a peaceful resolution
of the question.
The President (interpretation from Arabic): The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of
its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.
The meeting rose at 11.25 p.m.
13
