United Nations S/PV.3949
98-86530 (E) This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fifty-third Year
3949th Meeting
Wednesday, 25 November 1998, 1.05 p.m.
New York
President: Mr. Burleigh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (United States of America)
Members: Bahrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Al-Dosari
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Amorim
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Shen Guofang
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Niehaus
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Doutriaux
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Essonghé
Gambia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Jagne
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Kagami
Kenya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mahugu
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Monteiro
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fedotov
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Žbogar
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Skoog
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . Mr. Grainger
Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti (S/1998/796)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti (S/1998/1064)
Security Council 3949th meeting
Fifty-third year 25 November 1998
The meeting was called to order at 1.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti
(S/1998/796)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti
(S/1998/1064)
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Argentina, Canada, Chile, Haiti and Venezuela, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lelong (Haiti)
took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Petrella
(Argentina), Mr. Giroux (Canada), Mr. Larraín
(Chile) and Ms. Kislinger (Venezuela) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them two reports
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Civilian
Police Mission in Haiti (S/1998/796 and S/1998/1064).
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1998/1117, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Argentina, Canada, Chile, Costa
Rica, France, the United States of America and Venezuela.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/1998/1003, which contains the
text of a letter dated 27 October 1998 from the Permanent
Representative of Haiti to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a letter dated 22
October 1998 from the President of the Republic of Haiti
addressed to the Secretary-General.
The President: The first speaker on my is the
representative of Argentina. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (interpretation from
Spanish): Permit me first to convey to you, Mr. President,
my respectful greetings and the most sincere
congratulations of my delegation on the manner in which
you are conducting the work of the Security Council
during November.
Once again the situation in Haiti requires us to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Civilian Police
Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH). We agree with the
Secretary-General that ending the United Nations presence
in Haiti in the present circumstances could mean the loss,
or a threatened reduction, of the investment which the
international community has been making in Haiti’s
political institutions throughout this decade.
We understand, however, the hesitation of some
members of the Council over renewing the mandate. For
various reasons, it has been extended for longer than was
originally foreseen. At the same time, we request those
delegations to understand the particular significance of
maintaining the rule of law and democratic institutions in
the Latin American and Caribbean region. The concepts
of international peace and security should be interpreted
with that understanding and in that context. The Security
Council has shown on a number of occasions that it is
sufficiently sensitive to accommodate the specific needs
of each region, and we hope that this will also be the case
now.
It is up to the Government of Haiti to understand
fully its responsibilities in the current difficult
circumstances. The Haitian leadership must show its
recognition of the international community’s efforts by
taking concrete action aimed at resolving the political
crisis in that country.
Argentina, for its part, remains firmly committed to
the consolidation of Haitian political institutions through
its participation in MIPONUH, to which it contributes
civilian police in both the special police unit and the
civilian police element.
2
Security Council 3949th meeting
Fifty-third year 25 November 1998
Lastly, I wish to thank the Secretary-General, and
particularly his Representative in Haiti, Mr. Julian Harston,
and the officials serving with him for the professional
competence they constantly demonstrate in carrying out
their functions.
The President: I thank the representative of Argentina
for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Chile. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Larraín (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
My country considers that by adopting the draft resolution
extending the mandate of the United Nations Civilian Police
Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH), the Security Council will
have complied with its responsibility under the Charter for
the maintenance of international peace and security. We
believe that the draft resolution extending MIPONUH’s
mandate is the appropriate response to the needs of the
Haitian people and Government. At the same time, it is an
expression of the United Nations commitment to the peace
and security of one of its Members.
My country, as a member of the group of Friends of
the Secretary-General for Haiti, is particularly pleased by
the support given by the members of the Council to a draft
resolution which we consider benefits the Haitian people
and responds to an express request by President Préval. We
also value the contributions which enriched its text, and the
flexibility shown in the negotiations by interested
delegations.
The task of reconciliation in Haiti remains unfinished.
We are aware that there continues to be a need for the
authorities and the political actors in Haiti in general to
make additional efforts to solve the serious political crisis
in the country. Here there is an inescapable, direct
responsibility of the people of Haiti. The international
community, in its role of supporting such efforts, should
continue making its contribution and not abandon the
Haitian people at this time.
Judicial reform should solve shortcomings which are
incompatible with the rule of law and human rights and
fundamental freedoms. There the task is great,
encompassing not only judicial institutions and procedures,
but also the design of a judiciary respectful of the basic
principles of the administration of justice, such as the
principle of due process. The task also includes appropriate
treatment of the prison system, as we can see in the text of
the draft resolution. We welcome the steps in this
direction taken by the Haitian authorities, and in particular
by the Preparatory Commission on Legal and Judicial
Reform, and we urge them to continue on that path. Once
again, in this field as in others, the sustained support of
the international community is essential.
We welcome the progress made by the Haitian
National Police in recent months, reflected in a
professional institution which now enjoys the respect of
the citizenry, as is recognized by independent sources. In
such progress we see that we are not far from the
objective of providing Haiti with an efficient police
respectful of human rights, an objective which underlies
the work of MIPONUH.
In conclusion, I wish to convey the gratitude of my
Government to the personnel of MIPONUH and the 11
countries which have contributed to its composition as
well as to the representative of the Secretary-General. We
urge them to continue their efforts in achieving the
objectives of MIPONUH.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Canada. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Giroux (Canada) (interpretation from French):
I should like first to convey the regrets of Ambassador
Michel Duval, who, unfortunately, cannot be here today.
It is with pleasure that I take the floor today when
the Security Council is considering a draft resolution
extending the present mandate of the United Nations
Civilian Police Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH).
The extension of MIPONUH’s mandate by the
Security Council is further very concrete proof of the
sustained commitment of the international community in
Haiti. I can confirm that Canada will continue its
contribution to MIPONUH at the same level. This police
contingent joins many other Canadian experts assigned to
Haiti within the framework of our bilateral technical
assistance programme.
Canada supports the people and Government of Haiti
in their efforts to consolidate democracy and strengthen
the rule of law. We welcome the progress made by the
Haitian National Police, in particular regarding respect for
the rights of the individual. However, a great deal remains
to be done, particularly regarding reform of the Haitian
justice system.
3
Security Council 3949th meeting
Fifty-third year 25 November 1998
(spoke in English)
Canada remains very concerned at the absence of an
agreement regarding a prime minister, a cabinet and
governmental programme, and at the negative effect this
has on Haiti’s political, economic and social situation. It is
important that this process come to fruition very soon, in
full accord with Haiti’s democratic vocation and the rule of
law.
It is also very important that the people of Haiti soon
be able to fully express their will through free, honest and
transparent elections, in accordance with the Constitution.
We believe that it is timely to reflect with our partners
on how to continue to strengthen the Haitian National
Police and, more broadly, the Haitian justice system after
MIPONUH. We note in this regard that the draft resolution
encourages this process to take place and will lead to
recommendations by the Secretary-General on a viable
transition. We look forward to continuing to pursue this
process with all those concerned.
The President: It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft
resolution before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put
the draft resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Spanish): Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations
confers upon the Security Council the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security. In
the light of the very purposes of our Organization,
established in Article 1, this is a proactive and
comprehensive responsibility, never reactive or limited, for
it states that the United Nations should take effective
collective measures for the prevention and removal of
threats to the peace.
This constitutional foundation would be a sufficient
argument to justify the raison d’être of the multidisciplinary
operations authorized by the Security Council aimed at
promoting peace-building. It has nevertheless been
experience and reality themselves that have been
responsible for promoting this new concept of peacekeeping
that today is part and parcel of the abundant set of values
that the Council has progressively established in carrying
out its primary responsibility under the Charter.
The lessons learned by the international community,
especially from conflicts in developing countries, have
motivated the United Nations to approach these situations
from a larger perspective that facilitates and promotes
solutions to the economic and social problems that are at
the root of most situations that threaten international
peace and security.
The situation in Haiti constitutes a clear example of
the need for organized international participation from the
standpoint of guaranteeing and building peace and thus
preventing a return of conflict and instability. We are all
aware of the statistics on human development in Haiti: a
life expectancy at birth of 54 years; a literacy rate of 44
per cent; a school attendance rate of 39 per cent; and a
real gross domestic product of $896 per capita. These
cold but dramatic numbers show us that there is sufficient
reason to justify the obligation of the international
community to continue comprehensively assisting the
people of Haiti in the laudable effort they have been
carrying out for several years to promote a new political,
economic and social model.
In this context, the role of the United Nations in
Haiti goes beyond the simple and traditional concept of
assistance to development. Its role is to ensure and
promote the establishment and consolidation of efficient
and democratic institutions of judicial security that can
evolve into a stabilizing factor to guarantee that there will
be no regression and that authoritarianism and division —
possibilities that can become odious realities when we
note the lack of will among some sectors of the Haitian
political leadership — will not re-emerge in society.
The report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti points out the
important work that that body is carrying out in that
country and its significant contribution to guaranteeing
and promoting the establishment and consolidation of the
National Police and judicial institutions as professional
democratic institutions entrusted with guaranteeing the
judicial security necessary for the reconciliation of the
Haitian people.
From another standpoint, that report also shows us
the need for all bodies and specialized agencies of the
United Nations to continue to provide their active
cooperation on a multidisciplinary, coordinated and
integrated basis in this major effort at peace-building by
4
Security Council 3949th meeting
Fifty-third year 25 November 1998
establishing efficient democratic institutions and just and
sustainable economic and social conditions.
It is for this reason that Costa Rica, in keeping with
the position jointly stated by the Group of Latin American
and Caribbean States, supports the extension of the
Mission’s mandate on the terms set forth by the Secretary-
General in his report. We will consequently vote in favour
of the draft resolution before us, which we are honoured to
co-sponsor.
Mr. Amorim (Brazil): The Security Council is
meeting today to consider the extension of the mandate and
concept of operations of the United Nations Civilian Police
Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH) for another period of one
year on the basis of the clear assessment of the current
situation in Haiti contained in the latest report of the
Secretary-General.
As my colleague from Costa Rica has already
mentioned — and as all other countries in the Group of
Latin American and Caribbean States expressed in the letter
from the Ambassador of Ecuador — Brazil expects a
positive response today from the Security Council to the
recent appeal addressed by President Préval to the
Secretary-General for the continued cooperation of the
United Nations with Haiti in order to strengthen its National
Police and to assist the Government in establishing a fully
effective judicial system.
As expressed in the report of the Secretary-General,
despite important progress made by MIPONUH since its
establishment one year ago, the consolidation of peace in
Haiti cannot yet be taken for granted. Indeed, the Haitian
police force is not yet self-sustainable and faces new
security challenges. Moreover, judicial reform, which is
crucial to the consolidation of democracy, has been
suffering from regrettable delays. A political stalemate that
dates back to June 1997 continues to undermine national
institutions and to hinder the implementation of reforms
aimed at solving the serious economic and social problems
facing that country. In this regard, we see the extension of
MIPONUH’s mandate as part of a preventive strategy that
has to include other aspects, especially economic assistance
for the reconstruction and development of Haiti.
I would like to note with satisfaction that substantive
activities have been undertaken in Haiti by a number of
agencies of the United Nations system. The renewed
mandate of MIPONUH can provide an opportunity for the
gradual transfer of this Mission to other bodies. Such
transitions have been successfully accomplished before, as
was the case with the United Nations Verification Mission
in Guatemala.
In this connection, I wish to highlight that paragraph
8 of the draft resolution before the Council invites United
Nations bodies and agencies, especially the Economic and
Social Council, to contribute to the design of a long-term
programme of support for the economic rehabilitation and
reconstruction of Haiti. This is a small — but in a certain
sense innovative — step by the Council to revive Article
65 of the Charter, a provision that the Secretary-General
has described as dormant and to which he referred in his
report on the work of the Organization in the part
concerning the prevention of conflicts.
Haiti, but also the system as a whole, can benefit
from that new stress on the role of the Economic and
Social Council. I think that it can actually apply to other
areas as well, but especially to what we call here post-
conflict peace-building. We are sure that the Economic
and Social Council will be up to the challenge contained
in this invitation for the benefit of Haiti and other
countries in future.
Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): The United Nations Civilian
Police Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH) continues to do a
good job in Haiti. The Haitian National Police, which it
assists, also continues to make progress despite several
problems which we hope will ultimately be resolved.
However, the situation in Haiti is marked by the crippling
political institutional crisis that is symbolized by the
absence of a Prime Minister for more than a year. We
therefore share the Secretary-General’s assessment, in his
latest report on the work of the Civilian Police Mission in
Haiti, that the consolidation of democracy continues to be
hampered by this reality. This is the core of the problem.
We therefore endorse the strong appeal, in operative
paragraph 6 of the draft before us, urging the authorities
and political leaders in Haiti to fulfil their responsibilities
and to negotiate urgently an end to the crisis in a spirit of
tolerance and compromise. There is no doubt in our
minds that this is the key that will unlock the door to the
solution to the crisis, and it is therefore also appropriate
that this draft resolution correctly apportions the ultimate
responsibility for national reconciliation and the
reconstruction of Haiti to the Haitians themselves.
We have tried very hard to analyse the crisis in Haiti
in terms of international peace and security, but find
ourselves discussing what increasingly appears to be the
internal political, economic and social situation of Haiti.
5
Security Council 3949th meeting
Fifty-third year 25 November 1998
We recognize that the situation in Haiti is complex and
realize that international attention is critical to its survival.
Continued international engagement by all is therefore
essential.
In this regard, may I warmly commend the Friends
group — comprising Argentina, Canada, Chile, France, the
United States and Venezuela — for continuing to provide
solid assistance to the people and Government of Haiti.
However, this attention may now need to focus more and
more on development activities. We felt it appropriate last
year that a transition from peacekeeping to a policing focus
was necessary. There is a need now to switch mechanisms
of engagement and of assisting Haiti from a policing mode
to one which focuses more on peace-building.
We think that the structure now in place, as spelt out
in paragraphs 23 to 25 of the Secretary-General’s report,
and organized around the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), is quite appropriate. We agree with
the assessment of the Secretary-General that Haiti indeed
affords an excellent example of United Nations agencies
working effectively and economically together. We may
need to explore further how to really entrench this good
work. The road map for this approach, we believe, is
adequately drawn with this draft resolution, which
appropriately stresses the linkage between peace and
development and affirms that future international assistance
should be considered through United Nations specialized
agencies and programmes, in particular UNDP as well as
other international and regional organizations and all States.
My delegation supports the Secretary-General’s
recommendation for a one-year extension of MIPONUH.
We need to put in place a different mechanism that enables
a solid transition into peace-building activities organized
around UNDP. Because this issue continues to entrench
itself as an internal problem, we support the intention
expressed in operative paragraph 11 of the draft resolution
requesting the Secretary-General to make recommendations
on a viable transition to other forms of assistance to Haiti.
My delegation will therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution.
In conclusion, we also hope that the energy with
which we continue to promote the Council’s attention and
focus on Haiti through MIPONUH will also find expression
when appropriate peacekeeping and peace-building
mechanisms are sought to address the problems in the
Democratic Republic of Congo, and indeed other African
problems.
Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): One year ago, Portugal
was one of the sponsors of the resolution before this
Council on the constitution of the United Nations Civilian
Police Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH).
Despite considerable progress, serious problems
persist in Haiti that require the continuation of the
assistance of the United Nations. We are concerned at the
continuation of violence and unrest, the difficult economic
situation, the high level of unemployment, the rising cost
of living and the slow pace of change in Haiti.
Moreover, we are distressed to know that the
parliamentary and local elections due to take place this
month were postponed, prolonging the present political
stalemate. This impasse is having a major impact in terms
of eroding public confidence in the capacity and
willingness of the authorities to solve the pressing
economic and social problems facing the country. We
strongly appeal to the Haitian authorities and political
leaders to embark urgently on a negotiated solution to the
crisis in a spirit of tolerance and compromise. The tasks
ahead will be of crucial importance to the consolidation
of democracy and national reconstruction. For that reason,
we believe that comprehensive and sustained long-term
assistance by the international community is vitally
important.
A continued commitment, in particular from the
international financial institutions and other United
Nations agencies, is necessary to promote a successful
and sustainable development that will underpin political
stability in the country. We want to help Haitians build a
country where democracy and progress will be a reality.
That can be achieved only if the rule of law and respect
for human rights are ensured.
The continued presence of the United Nations
operation in Haiti, and of MIPONUH in particular, has
proved to be an important element for that country’s
transition to democracy by assisting the Government to
form a public force respectful of legality and capable of
maintaining public order and security. The Secretary-
General in its last report underlines that the Haitian
National Police has not yet reached the level of
professionalization required to tackle successfully the
various problems in daily activities. In fact, a self-
sustained and fully functioning police is essential to
ensure a secure and stable environment and the economic
rehabilitation and consolidation of democracy in Haiti.
6
Security Council 3949th meeting
Fifty-third year 25 November 1998
We believe that the maintenance of the presence of the
United Nations, as requested recently by President Préval,
is of the utmost importance. Indeed, the United Nations
should continue to help the Government of Haiti to
professionalize its police force. We urge Haiti’s authorities
to pursue their efforts to form a public force respectful of
legality and also to pursue their efforts to revitalize Haiti’s
justice and penal systems.
For all these reasons, Portugal will vote in favour of
the draft resolution before us today.
Mr. Doutriaux (France) (interpretation from French):
The French delegation supports the draft resolution on
which we are about to vote extending the mandate of the
United Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti
(MIPONUH) until 30 November 1999.
We firmly support this extension for the following
reasons.
MIPONUH, under the impetus of the Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Harston — whose
competence and thoroughness we should like to hail here
once again — has achieved significant technical results in
the field. Unfortunately, however, they are today still
incomplete. Those results, as well as the investment that
has been made by the international community in Haiti for
several years, should be preserved.
The Haitian National Police is today one of the State
institutions that can shoulder its mission. The presence of
MIPONUH, together with actions for bilateral and
multilateral cooperation, represents, in a still-fragile political
context, a significant counterweight to the setbacks that
could still occur. Risks exist in relation to the expansion of
the drug trade, threats of human rights violations or
possible attempts at the recovery of the police forces by
one or another political faction.
France shares the concern expressed by a certain
number of countries that the Council should wind down the
activities of MIPONUH and transfer the management of
this Mission to another framework. It is, however, clear that
this transition must be organized and take place over time
in order not to damage the results obtained to date. We
should not jeopardize the efforts Haiti has made to
strengthen its institutions, and thus should stick to a
pragmatic approach.
We welcome the fact that the draft resolution before
us explicitly requests the Secretary-General to make
recommendations starting in mid-1999 for the
establishment of the mechanism that could replace
MIPONUH.
In order to allow MIPONUH to fulfil its mandate
next year and to put in place an assistance mechanism
supported by other United Nations institutions in Haiti,
we fully associate ourselves with the appeal made by the
Secretary-General to Government officials and Haitian
political leaders to put an end to their futile disputes and
to find a solution to the present political crisis. In this
regard, we can only deplore the fact that the obstruction
of the political process in Haiti continues to impede the
establishment of a genuine development policy, weakens
the Haitian administration, prevents the beginning of a
genuine process of decentralization and slows the
implementation of structural reforms, which remain
indispensable.
Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation
from Russian): The Russian delegation shares the view
that Haiti is continuing to experience an acute need for
assistance from the international community — first and
foremost, economic, financial and technical assistance —
in order to get back on its feet and overcome its
protracted socio-economic crisis. At the same time, we
want to emphasize once again that overcoming the crisis
depends above all on the Haitians themselves, on the
leadership of that Caribbean country and on the carefully
targeted reform efforts to resolve its domestic political
situation by means of constructive dialogue.
From the very beginning — and even less so now —
the situation in Haiti has not posed a threat to peace and
security. What we have is a typical situation: the difficult
transition of a society that lacks a democratic tradition —
a transition that is made even more difficult by chronic
socio-economic difficulties and widespread poverty. We
do not see how the situation in this country differs from
that of many developing countries, which are also
encountering drastic problems in the establishment of
democracy, economic development and the fight against
galloping criminality.
We also understand the importance of the work to
establish, with the active participation of the United
Nations, a new Haitian National Police — although, of
course, even an excellent police force cannot replace the
work of all the other institutions that are necessary for the
normal functioning of a State.
7
Security Council 3949th meeting
Fifty-third year 25 November 1998
We see that the Haitian National Police is still going
to require international assistance for the protracted process
of enhancing its professional training. We gather that such
assistance will be provided bilaterally, by interested States
as well as by international and regional organizations. A
further role in this effort will also have to be played by the
United Nations, through the relevant specialized agencies
and programmes. We are convinced that they will do a
good job of taking the baton from the United Nations
Civilian Police Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH).
The joint United Nations/Organization of American
States International Civilian Mission and the United Nations
Development Programme are already making an important
contribution to the professionalization of Haitian law-
enforcement organs. We believe that it would also be
possible to make use of the institutional experience of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala,
established by the General Assembly, which is carrying out
similar tasks to those of the United Nations Mission in
training Haiti’s National Police. In short, there are many
options.
As for establishing in Haiti United Nations
peacekeeping mechanisms under a Security Council
mandate, this option was long ago exhausted. As is well
known, the first United Nations Mission in Haiti was
deployed more than five years ago, in September 1993.
Several times since then, the Mission has been extended
“for the last time” under various names. In November 1997
the Security Council once again agreed to retain the United
Nations Mission in that country, changing its name for the
fourth time — in that case to the United Nations Civilian
Police Mission in Haiti. Moreover, operative paragraphs 2
and 3 of resolution 1141 (1997) clearly stated that the
Mission’s mandate was
“limited to a single one-year period ending on 30
November 1998”
and that
“further international assistance to the Haitian national
police, should it be needed, should be provided
through United Nations specialized agencies and
programmes, in particular the United Nations
Development Programme, and through international
and regional organizations and by interested Member
States”.
It is precisely that clear understanding that allowed
Russia, despite all its reservations, to support resolution
1141 (1997).
A year has elapsed, and we find ourselves — back
at square one, as they say here. We have had more than
enough time to shift to the aegis of the United Nations
specialized agencies the task of providing assistance to
the Haitian police, and the Security Council is now being
asked for the fifth time to disregard its own previous
decision.
Clearly there is a double standard in the Security
Council’s approach to crisis situations in various regions
of the world. We are convinced that the adoption by the
Security Council of the proposed draft resolution on the
extension for the nth time of the United Nations
peacekeeping operation in Haiti clearly will not enhance
either the Council’s authority or confidence in its
decisions.
Our delegation will not be able to support the draft
resolution the Council is to vote on today.
The President: I shall now put to a vote the draft
resolution contained in document S/1998/1117.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bahrain, Brazil, Costa Rica, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Slovenia, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Against:
None
Abstaining:
China, Russian Federation
The President: The result of the voting is as
follows: 13 votes in favour, none against and 2
abstentions. The draft resolution has been adopted as
resolution 1212 (1998).
I shall now call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements following the voting.
Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): The United Nations peacekeeping operation in
Haiti has been going on for more than five years. In this
8
Security Council 3949th meeting
Fifty-third year 25 November 1998
regard, the Council has adopted many resolutions extending
the mandate of the operation while constantly changing its
name.
China has always supported the United Nations efforts
to provide necessary assistance to the people of Haiti and
has always been in favour of the relevant resolutions. We
still believe that the United Nations should continue to
provide assistance to the people of Haiti to help them
overcome the political crisis and carry out economic
reconstruction.
Not long ago the Permanent Representative of China,
Ambassador Qin Huasun, visited the Republic of Haiti.
Having learned first hand about the situation on the ground,
we believe that of late the situation in Haiti has been
relatively stable and that it does not constitute any threat to
international or regional peace and security. With the help
of the United Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti
(MIPONUH), the establishment of the Haitian National
Police force has also made considerable progress.
The resolution before us stresses that economic
reconstruction is the major task facing the Government and
people of Haiti.
Under these circumstances, China believes that it is
necessary to promote and encourage the relevant
development and financial institutions to play a major role
in Haiti instead of continuing to extend the mandate of
MIPONUH for another year. China understands the
importance of building a highly effective and professional
police force in Haiti. At the same time, we believe that the
stability and development of Haiti not only hinge on the
building of a police force but also involve various other
aspects. Only the restoration of the economic and social
development of Haiti can ensure the maintenance of
stability and lead to a genuine and lasting settlement of the
present difficulties.
We have taken note of the letter from President Préval
and the report of the Secretary-General. We have also taken
note of the wish of the group of Friends of the Secretary-
General for Haiti. In order to seek an appropriate solution
to this question, China has displayed considerable
flexibility, suggesting that the mandate of MIPONUH be
extended for an appropriate period and that the next step be
decided in accordance with the practical situation then. This
suggestion both follows the general practice of the Council
in authorizing the extension of peacekeeping operations and
accommodates the specific situation of Haiti and of
MIPONUH. In particular, it avoids the situation in which
the Council, in dealing with regional hot spots, may adopt
a double standard.
It is regrettable that our major amendment proposals
have not been taken into account and adopted by the co-
sponsors. As a result, my delegation was compelled to
abstain in the voting on this draft resolution.
China undertakes to continue to support the United
Nations presence in Haiti to demonstrate the international
community’s attention to and support for the peace
process and economic reconstruction of Haiti. We hope
that Haiti will get out of the present political impasse as
soon as possible and that the elections will be conducted
smoothly. We believe that with the help of the
international community, the people of Haiti will
eventually reach their goal of long-lasting peace and
security, prosperity and development.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States of
America.
We welcome today’s decision to extend for one year
the United Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti
(MIPONUH). By affirming our commitment, the United
Nations, through MIPONUH’s effective training and
mentoring, will continue to help Haitians construct a
responsive and credible police force.
We remain concerned with the present political
impasse in Haiti, as noted in the present MIPONUH
resolution. We will continue to urge the Haitians to
resolve their differences in the interest of the country’s
immediate and long-term future. Despite the political
obstacles, notable progress has been made towards the
professionalization of the Haitian National Police.
Our work, however, is not complete. Senior and
mid-level managers require further training. By
withdrawing MIPONUH prematurely, before an adequate
transition mechanism is readied, and at a time when
Haitian democracy is fragile, we would have jeopardized
the very real achievements made by the Haitian National
Police. An early withdrawal would also have undermined
the international community’s efforts to sustain Haiti’s
still young democracy.
We must use the time given in this mandate
constructively. In the months ahead, we need to develop
a viable transition mechanism outside the peacekeeping
9
Security Council 3949th meeting
Fifty-third year 25 November 1998
framework to continue support for the professionalization
of the Haitian National Police.
My Government commends all those who have
contributed and continue to contribute to MIPONUH,
particularly the Representative of the Secretary-General,
Julian Harston of the United Kingdom. We acknowledge
his valuable contributions and believe that they have been
essential to the success of the mission. My Government
remains committed to MIPONUH’s success and will
continue to support this important mission.
In April 1995, the United Nations played a crucial role
in restoring a constitutional government to the people of
Haiti. Today’s Security Council vote, extending for one
year the mandate of MIPONUH, reaffirms our commitment
to helping the Haitian people build a foundation for
permanent peace and development.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The Security Council has concluded its voting
procedure.
I now give the floor to the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Lelong (Haiti) (interpretation from French): First
of all, I would like to pay tribute to the expertise you have
demonstrated in guiding the work of the Security Council
during the month of November while serving as President
of this important body. I should like to take this opportunity
also to congratulate your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, who guided the
deliberations of the Council in an outstanding manner
during the month of October.
The resolution which the Council has just adopted is
of considerable importance for the consolidation of the
democratic process in Haiti. By authorizing the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Civilian Police Mission
in Haiti (MIPONUH), the Council not only will allow our
young police force to continue to benefit from assistance
from the international community for its professionalization,
but will also contribute to preserving the progress made up
to now in the building of democracy and the state of law in
Haiti.
On behalf of the Government and people of Haiti, I
would like to extend our warm gratitude to the Secretary-
General for his understanding and leadership on the issue
of Haiti. To the Members of the Security Council — all
of them — and to the group of Friends of the Secretary-
General for Haiti, I would like to voice our gratitude for
their tireless efforts.
As was emphasized by Mr. René Préval, President
of the Republic of Haiti, in his letter dated 22 October
1998 addressed to the Secretary-General, the Haitian
National Police has made outstanding progress, thanks to
the support which it has received from United Nations
missions in Haiti; however, essential steps still remain
ahead which require the continuing assistance of the
international community. This is, in particular, the case
regarding judicial reform, which has not yet achieved a
satisfactory degree of implementation.
Thanks to this resolution, Haiti knows that it can
continue to count on such support of the international
community. In particular, the assistance of international
financial institutions and other United Nations bodies
should promote a concrete and lasting development
designed to strengthen political stability in the primacy of
law and respect for fundamental freedoms.
Haiti is at present facing a continuing institutional
crisis which is testing the political will of all the
protagonists. We are aware of the frustrating nature of
this situation, both for the Haitians and for the
international community. But the rule of democracy
requires that we not force a solution which in fact could
be the origin of serious problems in the future. Serious
negotiations are under way. The Haitian parliament has
had a special session to debate this question and to find
a solution within the framework of our constitution.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the
Representative of the Secretary-General in Haiti, the
personnel of MIPONUH and the contributing countries
for their support to the process of the consolidation of
democracy in Haiti.
The President: I thank the representative of Haiti
for his statement and for his kind words addressed both
to my predecessor and to me.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 2 p.m.
10
