United Nations S/PV.3867
98-85160 (E) This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fifty-third Year
3867th Meeting
Friday, 27 March 1998, 11 a.m.
New York
President: Mr. Sallah . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Gambia)
Members: Bahrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Buallay
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Amorim
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Shen Guofang
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Sáenz Biolley
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dejammet
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dangue Réwaka
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Konishi
Kenya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Amolo
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Soares
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fedotov
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Türk
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dahlgren
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Sir John Weston
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Richardson
Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 1152 (1998) concerning the situation in the
Central African Republic (S/1998/148 and Add.1)
Security Council 3867th meeting
Fifty-third year 27 March 1998
The meeting was called to order at 11.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
resolution 1152 (1998) concerning the situation in
the Central African Republic (S/1998/148 and
Add.1)
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of the
Central African Republic and the Sudan, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Deinde-
Fernandez (Central African Republic) took a seat at
the Council table; Mr. Erwa (Sudan) took the seat
reserved for him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 1152 (1998)
concerning the situation in the Central African Republic,
documents S/1998/148 and addendum 1. Members of the
Council also have before them document S/1998/268, which
contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the course
of the Council's prior consultations.
The first speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Central African Republic, on whom I
now call.
Mr. Deinde-Fernandez (Central African Republic):
This being the first time that I have had the opportunity to
speak before the Security Council since you, Sir, assumed
the presidency of the Council, permit me to take this
opportunity to extend to you my Government's
congratulations, while at the same time expressing our
appreciation for the great task performed so well by your
predecessor.
Today is a great day for us in the Central African
Republic. We are very cognizant of the fact that the
Council has not approved any peacekeeping operation
anywhere in the continent of Africa for some time now.
My Government would like to express our deep
gratitude to the international community for this great
moment. We would like to thank the Secretary-General
and all those in the Secretariat whose effort made this
possible. We would like to thank the Council for its
indulgence, patience and tolerance in giving us the time
to accomplish all that was necessary to make this
possible. We would like to openly express our gratitude
to the French Government for its continued support, a
support that is most vital for the success of this operation.
I should like to reiterate my Government's
determination to cooperate fully with the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINURCA) in
every way possible to ensure the success of its mission
and to fulfil all our commitments according to the letters
of my President to the Secretary-General and to the
Security Council and our obligations under the agreement
of MISAB. My Government is fully determined that
peace, once established, will be monitored and the process
of free and fair elections will be safeguarded.
Members of the Council, my Government thanks
you, my people thank you, and I thank you.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Central African Republic for the kind words he addressed
to me.
Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): I have the
honour to make the following statement on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union —
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania and Slovakia — and the
associated country Cyprus, as well as the European Free
Trade Association (EFTA) country member of the
European Economic Area Norway, align themselves with
this statement.
The European Union welcomes the significant steps
which have been made towards stabilization in the Central
2
Security Council 3867th meeting
Fifty-third year 27 March 1998
African Republic following the breakdown of security and
civil order in 1996. The signing of the Bangui Agreements
represented a major breakthrough in this process, and we
pay tribute to the key role of regional leaders; the
International Mediation Committee, under President Bongo
of Gabon; and the International Monitoring Committee in
this regard.
The European Union also congratulates the Inter-
African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the
Bangui Agreements (MISAB) on the vital contribution it
has made to the improvement in the security situation in the
Central African Republic over the past year. The rapid and
effective deployment of this mission in 1997 is an
important example of a regional response to regional
problems and demonstrates the professionalism and
capabilities of African peacekeepers. Thus the operation
conducted by MISAB was approved and authorized by the
Security Council during the course of last year. In this
context, we commend the contributions of those African
countries that have provided troops to MISAB and the
substantial commitment of one member State of the
European Union, France, in support. We welcome the
continued commitment of these countries to participate in
and support, together with others, the new United Nations
operation, the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINURCA), which will shortly take
over from MISAB. We applaud this new expression of
United Nations readiness to act in the peacekeeping field.
The European Union recognizes that while important
progress has been made in implementing the provisions of
the Bangui Agreements and towards reform in the social,
economic, electoral and security spheres, there remain many
important tasks ahead. In this context we note with
satisfaction President Patassé's commitments to further
reform measures in these areas and to the successful
holding of a National Reconciliation Conference in Bangui
in March. We look forward to continued progress leading
to the holding of free and fair elections later this year.
The European Union warmly welcomes the
establishment of MINURCA to replace MISAB from
mid-April. We recognize that its security, training,
disarmament and electoral assistance responsibilities will
play a key role in the period leading up to elections. We
also welcome the intention of the Secretary-General to
appoint a Special Representative in the Central African
Republic, and fully support the coordination and
cooperation roles assigned to him, in particular his
responsibilities for encouraging assistance from the
international community to the Central African Republic.
In this respect, the European Union will continue to
provide development assistance, especially under the
European Development Fund. This will include substantial
support for the rehabilitation of the transport sector and
assistance to the health sector.
The European Union shares the concerns which have
been expressed over the fragility of the situation in the
Central African Republic. There are many challenges
ahead facing its Government and people which will need
to be met in order to consolidate the progress made over
the past year. The European Union believes the United
Nations, through MINURCA and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, can make a
significant contribution to meeting those challenges and
help build lasting peace, democracy and development in
the Central African Republic.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of the Sudan. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic): It
gives me great pleasure, Sir, to extend to you once again
our congratulations on presiding over the Council. I
should like also to take this opportunity to thank His
Excellency the Ambassador of Gabon on his presidency
of the Council.
The Sudan, thanks to the close neighbourly ties of
kinship and regional integration that characterize our
relationship with our sisterly neighbour the Central
African Republic, had the honour to participate —
represented by the President of the Republic — in the
signing of the historic reconciliation pact in the Central
African Republic. This pact has proved once again that
Africans can shoulder their responsibilities and solve their
problems peacefully.
This pact provides a good example of the African
continent's longstanding tradition of patiently and wisely
settling disputes through tolerance, forgiveness,
consultation, democracy and dialogue. This has proved to
the entire world that Africa has a time-honoured history
and civilization as well as a promising future.
The delegation of the Sudan would like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to the mediation efforts of the
group of Heads of State of the sisterly countries that
make up the family of one African house — the
continent — efforts aimed at restoring peace and stability
to the neighbourly Central African Republic.
3
Security Council 3867th meeting
Fifty-third year 27 March 1998
We cannot but express our admiration for the paternal
role played by His Excellency President Omar Bongo in
guiding the ship to a safe haven. We would like also to pay
tribute to the effective role undertaken by His Excellency
President Amadou Toumani Touré, who played his role
very wisely, competently and sincerely, as did the other
brother Presidents in the Mediation Committee. We would
also like to pay tribute to the important role of the African
States that participated in the Inter-African Mission to
Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements
(MISAB) by establishing the pillars of peace and security
in the country.
We support the draft resolution which is before the
Council today on deploying international forces in the
Central African Republic and salute the sincere efforts of
the Secretary-General and the Council, which made possible
the realization of this important achievement in the
maintenance of peace and security.
We reiterate the importance of peace, stability and
security in all the region so that we can realize our great
objective: regional cooperation and integration and
achieving development for our countries and peoples. Let
us, at this historic moment in which our neighbour, the
Central African Republic, enters a new era, turn the page
on a recent history that was replete with wounds, sadness
and wars. Let us gaze from a new vantage point upon the
twenty-first century — a century in which we will have
been liberated from dependency, backwardness and poverty,
and in which we will step into a new world in which
multilateralism, diversity, and different ethnicities and
cultures will be new sources of riches and in which our
differences will be transformed into conciliation, our
conflicts into amity, and our altercations into a dialogue and
cooperation.
In conclusion, the delegation of the Sudan reiterates
the provisions of the draft resolution, with regard to the
importance of the international community, represented by
Governments and the various institutions, helping the
Central African Republic to proceed towards the economic
development to which it aspires.
The President: It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Amolo (Kenya): Allow me to begin by
expressing my delegation's warm appreciation for the
excellent spirit of cooperation and compromise that
permeated the intensive and lengthy consultations we
have had on this item. The result is this draft resolution,
which we believe achieves a good balance of all positions
laid out during the negotiations. The draft before us today
is in response to the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General's report of 23 February 1998, which we
strongly supported and commended.
In December 1996, during the Summit Meeting of
Heads of State and Government of France and Africa,
Bangui was in the throes of a fratricidal conflict. What
followed was a unique experiment with conflict
management and prevention which, as is evidenced by
today's meeting, has been generally successful. We say
this because many of the goals set by the International
Mediation Committee, the International Monitoring
Committee and the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB) have
been accomplished.
As clearly spelt out in MISAB's third periodic report
in document S/1998/86, the provisions of the Bangui
Agreements relating to the formation of a government of
national union, the adoption of an amnesty law covering
offences in the context of the third rebellion, and the
situation of former heads of State can now be regarded as
having been fully implemented. Since then, the National
Reconciliation Conference has taken place and a National
Reconciliation Pact adopted. We believe that this is a
critical step towards consolidating peace, stability,
security and the future prosperity of the Central African
Republic.
Meanwhile, the process of disarmament, which is
still ongoing, has to a large extent been addressed. Credit
for the improved political and security situation goes to
the people of Central Africa, States contributing troops to
MISAB and the Government of France, which had the
foresight, faith and courage to continue supporting the
peace process in the Central African Republic.
The stage in Bangui is now set for the home stretch.
The situation, however, remains fragile and is not
irreversible. The establishment of a United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINURCA)
will therefore provide the needed assurance to the people
4
Security Council 3867th meeting
Fifty-third year 27 March 1998
of the Central African Republic that we recognize the gains
they have made, seek to assist in consolidating these gains
and are interested in their future stability. At the same time,
the appointment of a Special Representative, who, among
other things, will provide good offices and mediation
between the Government and political parties, will boost
confidence in the process of national reconciliation and help
in the coordination of the United Nations post-conflict
peace-building effort. It is our hope that the establishment
of MINURCA at this point in the peace process confirms
the international community's engagement in the Central
African Republic and will assist in ushering in an era of
national reconciliation, democracy and reconstruction.
In the same vein, it is important and noteworthy that
the draft resolution clearly recognizes that, for long-term
peace and stability in the Central African Republic, a
sustained commitment by the international community in
support of economic, social and institutional development
is indispensable, and in this regard we welcome the
progress achieved in discussions with international financial
institutions and urge our development partners to provide
the necessary support. It is also important that we all
contribute to the Trust Fund established by the Secretary-
General.
In his letter to the Secretary-General of 8 January
1998, His Excellency President Ange-Félix Patassé
expressed his Government's solid commitment to continuing
to carry out political, security and economic reforms. We
expect that the implementation of these reforms will be
accomplished rapidly within a definite time-frame. This, of
course, includes strict adherence to the election timetable
that has been set, as well as recognizing the need to
prioritize the promulgation of an electoral code. We are
greatly encouraged that President Patassé yesterday issued
a decree, No. 98, establishing a committee to follow up on
the National Reconciliation Pact, in accordance with article
7 of that Pact.
The Secretary-General recommended that MINURCA
be established for a limited period and that its mandate end
90 days after the announcement of the election results. We
believe that this is enough time to lay a solid foundation for
the Central African Republic's renaissance. A new
dependency on United Nations peacekeeping operations to
hold our countries together is not one that we would cherish
or want to see nurtured.
Kenya will vote in favour of the draft resolution.
Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from
French): In January 1997, thanks to African mediation led
by the President of Gabon, El Hadj Omar Bongo, the
Bangui Agreements were signed. These Agreements put
an end to the turmoil which had swept the Central
African Republic in 1996 and laid the foundation for
national reconciliation. So that the Agreements would not
be a dead letter, six African countries, with the approval
of all parties in the Central African Republic and the
support of France, deployed the Inter-African Mission to
Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements
(MISAB). This force was entrusted with ensuring security
in Bangui and supervising the collection of weapons that
had been dispersed during the three rebellions of 1996.
This presence in the field was supplemented by the
continued and effective action of the International Follow-
up Committee, presided over by General Touré, former
President of the Republic of Mali, which was mandated
at the political level with following up and assisting in the
implementation of the Bangui Agreements.
In August 1997, the Security Council endorsed the
conduct of operations performed by MISAB. On three
occasions since, it has extended that endorsement as an
expression of its appreciation of MISAB's work. After 14
months, MISAB had, in everyone's opinion, done
tremendous work. Today, it has almost completed its
mandate. Calm reigns in Bangui and the greater share of
weapons has been recovered. As the Secretary-General
notes in his report, “significant progress has been made”
[S/1998/148, para. 15] in the political and economic
spheres and in security.
However, according to the Secretary-General,
“much remains to be done to ensure a lasting peace
in the Central African Republic”. [ibid., para. 16]
The situation is not yet irreversible. That is why the
intervention of the United Nations will make it possible
to maintain security and stability in Bangui and to
consolidate the progress achieved by MISAB and the
International Follow-up Committee. The mandate which
the Security Council is entrusting to the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINURCA) and
to the Secretary-General's Special Representative, who
will lead it, is an appropriate response to this need. This
mandate goes beyond MISAB's capabilities. It involves
continuing to monitor and promote the implementation of
reforms and of commitments made by the Central African
authorities, including those related to the country's
economic recovery. It involves contributing to ensuring
5
Security Council 3867th meeting
Fifty-third year 27 March 1998
security and stability in Bangui, strengthening the capacity
of the Central African police force to maintain order,
assisting in the preparation of legislative elections scheduled
for August/September 1998 and, finally, encouraging and
coordinating the action of United Nations agencies and
programmes. The achievement of these objectives well
justifies recourse to the competence and authority of a
United Nations operation headed by a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.
The draft resolution to be adopted by the Council, the
initiative for which came from the African members of the
Council, particularly Kenya, defines an initial mandate of
three months. This mandate could be extended if it appears
that the efforts made by the United Nations are met by the
efforts the Central African authorities will have to make in
order to fully implement the Bangui Agreements and the
National Reconciliation Pact and to undertake the necessary
reforms to improve the political, economic, financial and
social situation of the country. The authorities of the
Central African Republic have already made a commitment
in that regard, as was stated by the representative of Kenya,
and we welcome this.
At a time when the Secretary-General is preparing to
submit his report on Africa requested by the Security
Council in a ministerial meeting in September 1997, the
establishment of MINURCA seems to us to illustrate the
desire of the United Nations to maintain a presence in
Africa in the service of peace and security. This United
Nations operation is naturally, and as a priority, an African
operation.
The six countries participating in MISAB will keep
their contingents in MINURCA, and two other African
States, Côte d'Ivoire and Ghana, will join them; I think they
deserve our appreciation. This demonstrates that there is no
need to distinguish between the necessary strengthening of
African peacekeeping capacity, in which we are all
interested, and the role of the United Nations: they
complement and reinforce each other. Similarly, the
legitimate commitment of African countries to the
maintenance of peace in Africa does not exclude the
support that States from outside the region or outside the
continent can render in their desire also to contribute, in the
field, to peace and stability in Africa. In this spirit, my
country, for its part, will continue, as it has for more than
a year in the case of MISAB, to provide logistical and
medical support to MINURCA.
MINURCA, finally, is a good example of preventive
diplomacy. These days — when preventive diplomacy is a
subject of much debate, and quite rightly so; when it is
lamented, sometimes very solemnly and emotionally that
the community of nations has not intervened quickly
enough in the past to quell conflicts — we should rejoice
in the fact that after MISAB has done its job, MINURCA
will come, in turn, to offer the Central African Republic
and the subregion the opportunity to make solid and
lasting their refound peace and security.
Mr. Sáenz Biolley (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Spanish): This formal meeting is of special importance
and interest to Costa Rica because since our election as a
member of the Security Council we had not had an
opportunity to participate in the process of considering
and approving a United Nations peacekeeping mission.
Therefore, we are pleased to make our statement at this
meeting in which the Council will approve the
establishment of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic (MINURCA).
From the moment when the crisis in the Central
African Republic became a subject for the Security
Council's consideration, my delegation has consistently
expressed its full support for the regional initiative and
the work done by the Inter-African Mission to Monitor
the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB).
Costa Rica recognizes the important work MISAB
accomplished as the mechanism of conflict management
and prevention that achieved normalcy in that country.
We commend and are grateful to all those who
participated in that Mission, including the International
Mediation Committee and the International Monitoring
Committee, and we take this opportunity to reaffirm our
support for regional initiatives, which, in the case of
Africa, have played and continue to play a crucial role in
conflict resolution. We also take this opportunity to
acknowledge and highlight once again the major
leadership role played by France, as well as the important
efforts made by President Omar Bongo of Gabon.
This does not mean that the situation in the Central
African Republic has been fully resolved or that the
original causes of the crisis of the last two years have
been eliminated. To the contrary, there is general
agreement that fragility is the key characteristic of the
current situation in that country. Indeed, the period of
political and security crisis has been overcome; however,
the new stage of peace-building will determine the
sustainability of the achievements attained. This
presupposes, of course, the continuity of the international
presence in the Central African Republic and the
6
Security Council 3867th meeting
Fifty-third year 27 March 1998
maintenance of international cooperation for the economic
and social reconstruction of the country.
In this connection, my delegation supports the concept
of multifunctional operations and is pleased that MINURCA
will be added to the list of such missions. The Mission we
propose to approve today will serve as an example of
United Nations activities in the area of peace-building.
In its initial mandate, MINURCA will be responsible
for maintaining and improving security and stability in
Bangui and its surrounding areas. This aspect, in our view,
is essential to ensure that, once this condition has been met,
the other work necessary for the development of the Central
African Republic, such as humanitarian assistance and the
work of financial institutions, can proceed uninterrupted.
My country believes that the assistance MINURCA
will provide to the authorities of the Central African
Republic, as set forth in its mandate, in protecting and
monitoring the key installations in Bangui and the weapons
retrieved during the disarmament exercise and in advising
on the restructuring of the national police force and the
special police forces, is of major importance. My country
agrees with the Secretary-General that it is important that
MINURCA be able to offer technical and political advice
to electoral bodies so that legislative elections and, in the
future, presidential elections, which are fundamental in all
sovereign and democratic countries, can be held.
In this regard, my country recognizes and emphasizes
the great importance of the appointment of a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to coordinate all
United Nations activities in the Central African Republic
and to establish direct channels of communication with the
Government of that country.
My delegation trusts that this will constitute an
appropriate management and coordination body for the
work of the various specialized agencies and organs of the
United Nations system, in order to ensure the proper
application and implementation of the measures identified
by the international community to foster peace and
development in the Central African Republic.
As has been stated here, the economic and social
situation in the Central African Republic continues to be of
particular concern and interest to us. Recent statistics show
the figures to be alarming, particularly with regard to social
issues. Some of them show that 75 per cent of children
between the ages of 2 and 12 years are malnourished and
that 65 per cent of adults live in conditions below the
poverty level. Furthermore, the interruption in the
functioning of public institutions and the delay in the
payment of salaries to civil servants have caused many
strikes, which on several occasions resulted in acts of
violence and which, as we all recall, were one of the
causes of the conflict.
That is why, in our firm opinion, and as we have
said on several occasions, it is essential that the
international financial institutions adopt a new vision and
a new attitude with regard to the situation in the Central
African Republic. With the support of the region and of
this Council, that country is carrying out a major political
peace-building effort, and we believe that this requires
exceptional and comprehensive treatment by the
international financial institutions, which should consider
giving clear support for and participating actively in the
process of reconstructing the country. Otherwise,
achievements will be jeopardized and we will run the risk
of losing what has been gained.
We are aware that the Central African Republic is
now at a crucial stage and that the active presence of the
United Nations will help the country move ahead and
become again an active member of the international
community. That is why my delegation will support the
draft resolution before us, which is an essential instrument
for the achievement of these objectives.
Mr. Amorim (Brazil): Persistent signs of instability
in the Central African Republic led a group of African
nations to bring the situation in that country to the
attention of the Security Council. A multinational force
had been put together by these countries, with the
participation of France, to prevent the internal turbulence
from further threatening peace and security in a region
already vulnerable to conflict. While the force deployed
as of January 1997 appears to have effectively contributed
to curbing unrest, an international peacekeeping presence
in the country seems to be required so that progress
achieved so far is not jeopardized.
We are now extending for a final period the
authorization for the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB) to
remain in place up to 15 April. We would like to take
this opportunity to commend the valuable work performed
by MISAB, which placed the Council in a position to take
a decision that we are about to formalize. I would also
like to praise the role played by President Bongo of
Gabon in ensuring the coordinated efforts of the countries
7
Security Council 3867th meeting
Fifty-third year 27 March 1998
of the region in the context of the International Mediation
Committee.
Indeed, there have been positive signs. The political
forces recently signed a National Reconciliation Pact, which
can be considered an encouraging step towards the
stabilization of the country. However, the situation remains
fragile. In order to consolidate an environment required for
the holding of free and fair elections, a special security and
political mechanism has been set up. It will be crucial to
ensure that, during the period leading up to the elections,
conditions are not allowed to deteriorate. The Security
Council should follow events closely in the coming weeks
and months.
The draft resolution that we are considering proposes
the establishment of a peacekeeping operation in the Central
African Republic, the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINURCA). Assurances given by
President Patassé to the effect that he will facilitate national
reconciliation were an important element in allowing for the
establishment of this Mission, and the international
community will be justified in expecting him to fully
honour his commitment.
MINURCA is the first full-fledged peacekeeping
operation authorized by the Security Council in more than
two years. This is something to be reflected upon,
especially as this lull did not coincide with a period of
fewer conflicts, particularly in Africa. A forthcoming report
by the Secretary-General should permit the Council to come
forward with a clearer and more constructive agenda for
Africa on the basis of a balanced assessment of recent
experiences.
The draft before us represents a satisfactory outcome
from the point of view of my delegation. We are glad that
participants in the negotiations leading to it were capable of
ironing out differences, allowing for the operation to be
launched in an effective way. MINURCA will operate
under the explicit consent of the parties, which places it in
the corresponding legal framework under the Charter.
Paragraph 13 of the draft resolution (S/1998/268) affirms
that
“MINURCA may be required to take action to ensure
security and freedom of movement of its personnel in
the discharge of its mandate”.
In our understanding, this rule should apply generally to
peacekeeping operations under Chapter VI.
Apart from its security component, MINURCA has
been entrusted with other tasks linked to the mandate
attributed to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, who will assist in the promotion of the reforms
necessary to achieve national reconciliation and stability
and provide good offices and mediation between the
Government and political parties.
The initial mandate of MINURCA also includes
provisions for advice and technical support to the national
electoral bodies regarding the electoral code and plans for
the conduct of the legislative elections scheduled for
August/September 1998.
The Council's decision to establish a peacekeeping
operation for the Central African Republic is a
meaningful contribution by the international community
and cannot be taken lightly, given the prevailing
budgetary restraints under which the Organization has
been operating. We urge President Patassé and the parties
involved to make the best of this opportunity to ensure
lasting peace in the Central African Republic, thereby
contributing to greater harmony in the entire region.
Mr. Soares (Portugal): At the outset, I would like to
say that Portugal concurs fully with the statement made
earlier by the European Union presidency.
The establishment of the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINURCA) is an example
of the cooperation of the United Nations with an African-
led initiative to promote regional peace and stability.
Portugal strongly believes in such initiatives and supports
the recommendations of the Secretary-General for the
establishment of a peacekeeping operation in the Central
African Republic.
It must be remembered that the current situation of
relative security in the Central African Republic is very
much due to the tireless efforts of regional leaders. We
praise the mediation efforts of President Bongo and the
role of the International Monitoring Committee in the
resolution of this crisis. In addition, the strong
commitment of many African countries and of France to
the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation
of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB) was essential in
promoting stability, often under difficult circumstances.
However, the continued presence of the international
community is required to assist in the important tasks that
remain ahead. The National Reconciliation Pact adopted
by the Reconciliation Conference, which took place in
8
Security Council 3867th meeting
Fifty-third year 27 March 1998
Bangui earlier this month, was an important step in
fostering stability in that country. We harbour great hope
that the holding of free and fair elections in
August/September of this year will help consolidate peace
in the Central African Republic. However, the situation
remains fragile, and we clearly understand that further
reform is required.
In this context, my delegation is pleased to see the
establishment of MINURCA, starting next April. We see it
as a clear example of the willingness of the international
community to cooperate closely with regional efforts in
Africa. Indeed, MINURCA is a peacekeeping force with a
mandate tailor-made to the requirements of the situation in
the Central African Republic. In particular, we would like
to stress MINURCA's future role in maintaining and
enhancing security and stability. Let me also underline that
its mandate will include supporting the national security
forces in matters of law and order, assisting in coordination
with other international efforts in a short-term police
trainers programme and providing advice and technical
support to the national electoral bodies.
We also welcome the appointment by the Secretary-
General of a Special Representative in the Central African
Republic. As head of MINURCA, with overall authority
with regard to United Nations activities in that country, the
Special Representative can play a crucial role in the
stabilization of the present situation. Moreover, we attach
importance to action by the Special Representative to
encourage the provision of assistance by United Nations
agencies and programmes in the areas of development and
economic recovery.
Portugal has always been firm in its support for the
creation of a peacekeeping operation in the Central African
Republic. We see this operation as a meaningful step on the
part of the international community to promote peace and
stability in the Central African Republic. Therefore, we will
vote in favour of the draft resolution before us today.
Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): The decision we are about
to take, to establish a multifunctional United Nations
peacekeeping operation in the Central African Republic, is
an important step for the country, for the region and for the
United Nations. It will give the Central African Republic
much-needed international political and security support in
the crucial process to elections that lies ahead. Partly
through the commendable efforts of the Inter-African
Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui
Agreements (MISAB), conditions in the country have
improved. But the security situation remains fragile.
The presence of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic (MINURCA) will play a
significant role in building security and in strengthening
democracy and the rule of law in the Central African
Republic. It will also, indirectly, have an important
stabilizing effect in the region. The regional security is
precarious, and any deterioration of the situation in the
Central African Republic could have perilous
consequences. It is noteworthy that MINURCA will be
the first entirely new United Nations peace operation in
more than three years. The establishment of MINURCA
will demonstrate the determination of the United Nations
and of the Security Council to assume their
responsibilities with regard to the maintenance of
international peace and security in Africa, as well as
elsewhere. It is, indeed, fundamental that the Security
Council should be ready to decide on actions throughout
the spectrum of conflict resolution: from early warning,
prevention, mediation and other such instruments to
peacekeeping and, if need be, enforcement.
The United Nations presence in the Central African
Republic — the Special Representative and
MINURCA — will be multifunctional. This is an
important result of thorough discussions among the
members of the Security Council: one which Sweden very
much welcomes.
We are looking forward to the appointment of the
Secretary-General's Special Representative, who has been
given a strong political mandate within MINURCA as
well as a key coordinating role for the United Nations in
the Central African Republic.
The success of MINURCA will depend on the
continued cooperation of all parties in the Central African
Republic. President Patassé and his Government have so
far made considerable progress in fulfilling their
commitments to economic, social, security and electoral
reform, as expressed in the letter dated 8 January 1998
from President Patassé addressed to the Secretary-
General. In this context, we note with satisfaction that a
National Reconciliation Conference will take place later
this month. Much remains to be done, however, to
implement outstanding reform measures.
In conclusion, may I express Sweden's gratitude to
the States that participated in MISAB and to France for
their contributions to peace and stability in the Central
African Republic. The task of MINURCA will be to build
upon the success of MISAB.
9
Security Council 3867th meeting
Fifty-third year 27 March 1998
Let me also add that Sweden fully concurs with the
statement made by the representative of the United
Kingdom on behalf of the European Union.
Mr. Konishi (Japan): At the outset, let me express on
behalf of the delegation of Japan my sincere appreciation to
all those involved in efforts to maintain stability in the
Central African Republic. I would like to pay particular
tribute to those who took part in the activities of the Inter-
African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the
Bangui Agreements (MISAB), the International Monitoring
Committee, and the International Mediation Committee, as
well as France, which provided much-needed support for
those activities. My delegation believes that these efforts
have been key in maintaining order in the country, and
thereby in preventing the destabilization of the subregion.
Although significant progress has been achieved thus
far, including the adoption yesterday of the electoral code,
national reconciliation in the Central African Republic
remains a difficult and complex process. Among the tasks
awaiting the people of that country are the holding of
legislative elections, the restructuring and capacity-building
of the security forces, and the introduction of financial and
economic reforms.
These tasks are indeed challenging, and will require
concrete assistance from the international community to
ensure that the necessary conditions of peace and stability
prevail throughout the country. My delegation therefore
supports the establishment of the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINURCA), and will vote in
favour of the draft resolution before us. The establishment
of MINURCA will demonstrate to the world the ongoing
commitment and unique capabilities of the United Nations,
and particularly of the Security Council, with regard to the
maintenance of world peace and security.
In this context, Japan has been and will continue to be
engaged in the effort to devise a comprehensive and
effective strategy for the prevention and early resolution of
conflicts, with a particular focus on Africa at this stage. In
January this year, for example, Japan hosted the Tokyo
International Conference on Preventive Strategy, where
representatives from more than 20 countries and
organizations met and discussed the subject in depth.
Among the main elements of this strategy are an enhanced
early-warning capability for the United Nations, and greater
coordination and cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations such as the Organization of
African Unity. In effect, Japan is exploring how the role
played by the Security Council and the United Nations in
conflict prevention can be strengthened and rendered
more effective.
I feel obliged to reiterate that MINURCA must by
no means be viewed as a panacea for the problems
confronting the Central African Republic. Its mission is
simply to support the efforts of the Government to
overcome those problems. It is the responsibility of the
Central African Republic itself to rebuild the country and
to strive to achieve prosperity. In this regard, I would like
to stress that it is incumbent upon President Patassé, as
the head of the Administration, to fulfil the commitments
he has made to the people of the Central African
Republic.
Finally, I would like to restate that Japan, for its
part, will continue to assist the Central African Republic
in its efforts to maintain stability and to enhance the well-
being of its people.
Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): Ever since the Security Council adopted its
resolution 1125 (1997) last August, the Bangui
Agreements have been implemented comprehensively and
effectively, thanks to the efforts and cooperation of the
Government of the Central African Republic and the
Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of
the Bangui Agreements (MISAB). The situation in the
country has been reasonably stable, and there have been
tangible results in the process of national reconciliation.
China is pleased by this.
At the invitation of the Government of the Central
African Republic, MISAB carried out peacekeeping
activities under a Security Council mandate to monitor
and assist that country in implementing the Bangui
Agreements. The officers and men of MISAB have done
their duty in most difficult circumstances: recovering
weapons, promoting dialogue, maintaining security and
providing humanitarian services. Their excellent
performance has created conditions in which the country
can stabilize the situation and achieve national
reconciliation. China highly appreciates the work of
MISAB, which has shown once again that through efforts
by African countries themselves, and with full and timely
support by the Security Council, the stability and
development of the countries involved can be gradually
secured.
China has always maintained and supported the view
that the Council should pay attention to the problems
faced by Africa. In resolving these problems, the
10
Security Council 3867th meeting
Fifty-third year 27 March 1998
reasonable demands of the African countries should be
respected and the necessary support rendered.
The draft resolution before us will authorize the
establishment of the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINURCA) to replace MISAB, so as to
help the Government and the people of that country realize
their ultimate goal of national reconciliation.
The Chinese Government supports this operation. For
us, the draft resolution before us is a rather good document.
On the one hand, it has accommodated the specific requests
of that country and of other African countries. On the other
hand, it has made reasonable and proper provisions for the
mandate, functions and time-frame for MINURCA.
We believe that MINURCA will follow the good
practices of MISAB, will fully respect the Government of
the Central African Republic, will, responding to the
specific situation in the country, continue to promote
communications and dialogue among all sides and will
accomplish the tasks set forth in the draft resolution.
A journey of 1,000 miles starts with the first step. The
country has already taken its first step on the road towards
national reconciliation and the restoration of the national
economy. Basically, the stability and the progress of the
country depend on its people and its Government. We hope
that the adoption of this draft resolution will actively
promote national reconciliation and economic reconstruction
and help the country move gradually towards peace,
stability, development and prosperity.
For these reasons, the Chinese delegation will vote in
favour of the draft resolution before us.
Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
I should like at the outset to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for the comprehensive and detailed report
contained in document S/1998/148. I should also like to
thank the States participating in the Inter-African Mission
to Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements
(MISAB), as well as the Government of France, the
International Mediation Committee, the International
Monitoring Committee and United Nations programmes and
agencies for their significant efforts to achieve national
reconciliation and stability in the Central African Republic.
My delegation shares the concern of the Secretary-
General regarding the fragile political and security situation
in that country, particularly because light arms remain in
circulation and are obtainable from certain countries. This
situation is also due to the fact that some elements of the
former armed forces have fled to the south of the country,
and also to the presence of local militias to the north.
This makes it essential for the international community,
as represented by the United Nations, to be present in the
Central African Republic in order to restore stability and
security in the country.
Proceeding from the State of Bahrain's concern to
support security and stability in the Central African
Republic in particular, and in the region as a whole, as
well as our concern to see a United Nations presence in
that country, my delegation will support the draft
resolution before us, which pertains to the creation of a
United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINURCA). In this context, my delegation calls on all
parties to ensure the security, safety and freedom of
movement of the members of the Mission and the
protection of the Mission's property.
Mr. Türk (Slovenia): Slovenia supports the draft
resolution submitted to the Security Council for action
today. It is a timely and necessary draft resolution in this
period when decisive action is needed to normalize the
situation in the Central African Republic. We would like
to commend the delegation of Kenya for the excellent
work done in preparing the draft.
We welcome the progress made so far in the efforts
to achieve national reconciliation and sustainable stability
in the Central African Republic. In particular, we
welcome the commitment and the efforts of the Member
States participating in the Inter-African Mission to
Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements
(MISAB). We also welcome the neutral and impartial
way in which they are supporting the improvement of the
security situation in the country.
On the other hand, we realize that the situation in
the Central African Republic remains fragile and that it
continues to constitute a threat to international peace and
security in the region and therefore calls for further
efforts on the part of the international community.
We believe that all the signatories to the Bangui
Agreements and the authorities of the Central African
Republic need an appropriate security environment in
order to take steps to implement political, economic,
social and security reforms, including the establishment of
an electoral code, preparation for the legislative elections
of this year and implementation of the National
Reconciliation Pact. The secure and stable environment
11
Security Council 3867th meeting
Fifty-third year 27 March 1998
that is being created will remain essential, and the
assistance and support of the international community will
therefore continue to be necessary.
Therefore, Slovenia will vote in favour of the present
draft resolution, by which Security Council would decide to
authorize the extension of MISAB's mandate until 15 April
1998 and to establish a United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic (MINURCA) with effect from 15
April 1998 for an initial period of three months.
Slovenia is encouraged by the ability of the Security
Council to act today. The members' grasp of the issues at
hand and the degree of unity among them will undoubtedly
aid in the success of MINURCA.
Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian): We are pleased to note that progress has been
achieved in normalizing the situation in the Central African
Republic. To a significant extent this is due to the vigorous
work of the International Monitoring Committee for the
implementation of the Bangui Agreements and of the Inter-
African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the
Bangui Agreements (MISAB).
At the same time, it remains necessary to continue
international assistance for the consolidation of the process
of national reconciliation in that African country and to
maintain a secure environment conducive to the holding of
free and fair elections. An important factor in establishing
long-term peace and stability is finding a speedy and
effective solution to economic and social problems. Success
in this area is possible only through the united efforts of all
political forces in the Central African Republic.
The effectiveness of the international community's
assistance in achieving a definitive resolution of the crisis
in that country depends on the readiness of its Government
and all parties in the Central African Republic to
demonstrate further political will, implement strictly the
Bangui Agreements and comply strictly with the National
Reconciliation Pact. We consider as optimum the initial
mandate for the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINURCA), as defined in the present
draft resolution, as well as the strength of its military
component. Our understanding is that its full deployment
will be completed by 15 April so as to ensure an orderly
transition from MISAB to MINURCA. The question of the
future role of the United Nations in fostering national
reconciliation, and in particular in preparations for holding
elections, can be decided later in the light of developments
and on the basis of the recommendations in the report of
the Secretary-General, which will be submitted by 20
June 1998.
For all these reasons, the delegation of the Russian
Federation will vote in favour of the draft resolution.
Mr. Richardson (United States of America): We are
pleased to support a limited but essential peacekeeping
mission for the Central African Republic. The Council's
actions today will help consolidate the work of the
multinational force, which we commend for restoring
order to Bangui and initiating an efficient disarmament
programme. The international community owes its
gratitude to the African nations that have participated and
to the Government of France for its support of this
mission. We welcome the continuing support of this
mission's sponsors through personnel, equipment and
voluntary contributions to the United Nations
peacekeeping operation — the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINURCA) — as the
transfer from one command to the other takes place.
The role of this mission, as outlined in this draft
resolution, is to provide security long enough for the
Government of the Central African Republic to undertake
the reforms it has promised and to provide its own
security. This mission is designed as a temporary bridge
to give the Central African Republic time to re-establish
a secure State under good governance.
In Council discussions of this mission, we all agreed
that the United Nations will not assume responsibility for
security in the Central African Republic indefinitely. The
Government must use the opportunity that this mission
provides wisely and well. We have seen more progress by
the Government of the Central African Republic in the
last several weeks, as the threat of MISAB's departure
loomed, than in the previous year. That progress towards
reform must continue — progress towards regular and
complete payment of military and civilian salaries,
towards national reconciliation and towards military
restructuring that will ensure the security and stability of
the country.
We strongly support the initiatives of the Bretton
Woods institutions to assist the Central African Republic's
progress towards financial security, and we will review
the reports of those institutions as a measure of the
Government's dedication to serious economic reform.
We welcome a three-month initial mandate for this
mission. This will allow the Council to review progress
12
Security Council 3867th meeting
Fifty-third year 27 March 1998
made and adjust the mandate of the mission as necessary in
July. If the Government of the Central African Republic
does not make concrete progress towards the necessary
economic, political and security reforms, we will find it
difficult to renew this mission for another period.
The role of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General is critical for this transitional period in
the Central African Republic. We look forward to the
Secretary-General's prompt appointment of a strong
Representative. As this draft resolution stipulates, the
Representative will be in charge of this mission but will
also assist the Government with its reform efforts and
oversee all the United Nations activities in the Central
African Republic. The coordination of United Nations
assistance programmes with other international efforts —
including those of the Bretton Woods institutions and other
multilateral and bilateral donors — is essential for the
ultimate success of this assistance. This mission will
provide the strategic elements of security and a carefully
targeted civilian police training programme to enable the
Government to take over its own security.
Elections are another important part of the Central
African Republic's democratic reform process. We welcome
the news that Parliament has passed the electoral code and
hope that firm dates for legislative elections will be
announced shortly. We hope also that election experts, from
agencies such as the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) or international non-governmental
organizations experienced in election planning, will provide
assistance to the Central African Republic. We welcome the
participation of the Representative of the Secretary-General
in coordinating potential international assistance for the
elections, and look forward to the Secretary-General's
recommendations to the Council in June. We do not think
that election assistance is best placed under the military
command of the peacekeeping operation but rather should
form a separate building-block of the broad programme of
assistance that the Secretary-General will coordinate with
support from other organizations.
The United States also supports the formation of a
“Friends of the Central African Republic” group to help
coordinate international economic assistance for this country
and to advise the nation as well. No one nation can do
alone what the international community can accomplish by
working together and pooling resources.
Finally, I should like to emphasize American support
for this African solution to an African problem. We see
United Nations involvement in this peacekeeping mission
as supporting and extending a regional initiative to help
a neighbour. We hope and expect that this mission, and
other programmes such as election assistance, will
reinforce the Central African Republic's own efforts to
enable the re-establishment of a stable and secure
Government.
The President: I now put to the vote the draft
resolution contained in document S/1998/268.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1159 (1998).
I shall now call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements following the voting.
Mr. Dangue Réwaka (Gabon) (interpretation from
French): Allow me to pay tribute to the Secretary-
General, whose recommendations to establish a
peacekeeping operation to take over from the Inter-
African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the
Bangui Agreements (MISAB) have had a strong impact
on the decision that the Security Council has just taken.
It is appropriate to recall that the turmoil that has
endangered peace and security in the Central African
Republic has been considerably diminished thanks to the
Bangui Agreements of January 1997 and the
establishment of an inter-African force to monitor such
agreements. I should therefore like to commend the
efforts of MISAB as well as those of all the protagonists
who have taken part in the quest for a negotiated solution
to the Central African crisis, particularly the International
Mediation Committee and France.
By authorizing, through the resolution just adopted,
the deployment of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic (MINURCA), the Council has
demonstrated its clear intention to continue the efforts of
the international community definitively to resolve this
crisis. In this connection, we welcome the spirit of
cooperation that has prevailed throughout the negotiations,
13
Security Council 3867th meeting
Fifty-third year 27 March 1998
making it possible to produce the consensus text that we
have just adopted. It goes without saying that this result
could not have been obtained without the cooperation of the
Central African authorities, the parties concerned and the
Central African people as a whole, who have thus shown
that they are truly imbued with the common desire to
achieve national reconciliation and to establish lasting
stability. This desire was reflected, inter alia, in the recent
signing of the reconciliation pact between all segments of
the Central African population.
Having said that, the relative climate of peace and
security that prevails in the country today needs to be
further strengthened.
To that end, my country fully supports the objectives
assigned to MINURCA to strengthen the national
reconciliation process, strictly within the framework of the
Bangui Agreements, and to establish the conditions
necessary for the future legislative elections in a climate of
transparency and with the close cooperation of MINURCA
with regional initiatives, notably those of the International
Mediation Committee, the International Follow-up
Committee and the Organization of African Unity.
We are convinced that MINURCA will play a key role
in the implementation of the provisions of the National
Reconciliation Pact to achieve a lasting peace and to launch
real economic development.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the Gambia.
My delegation wishes to thank the Secretary-General
for his report on the Central African Republic, contained in
document S/1998/148, which apprised us of the recent
developments in the Central African Republic. We are
encouraged to note that significant progress has been made
in the implementation of the Bangui Agreements. We are
more particularly encouraged by the commitment shown by
President Patassé to implement the reforms necessary for
the full implementation of the Agreements.
Although the security situation in the Central African
Republic has improved steadily, it is still a cause for
concern. My delegation would like to congratulate the Inter-
African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the
Bangui Agreements (MISAB) for the role it has played in
restoring calm and normalcy in the Central African
Republic. The security situation is, however, still precarious
and the mandate of MISAB will soon end.
In the light of these two facts, it is imperative that
some intervention be made in order to consolidate and
build upon the gains already made by MISAB. The
intervention required would therefore be a United Nations
peacekeeping mission to the Central African Republic.
The resolution we have just adopted establishes the
necessary intervention, that is, a peacekeeping mission.
From the report of the Secretary-General, we have
learned that substantial economic and financial reforms
need to be undertaken urgently. Otherwise, the present
negative socio-economic conditions in the country are
likely to continue seriously to undermine the overall
security and stability in the country. Due to this fact, my
delegation found it fitting that the resolution calls on
States to contribute to the Trust Fund for the Central
African Republic and also on international organizations
and financial institutions to assist in post-conflict
development in the Central African Republic.
Central to the peacekeeping operation is the request
made to Member States to contribute personnel,
equipment and other resources to the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINURCA).
These provisions are very important to my delegation, and
we hope that States and international organizations will
respond positively.
One other important provision is the request made to
the Secretary-General to report on the progress made by
the Government of the Central African Republic in
adopting an electoral code and developing plans for the
legislative elections. It is the view of my delegation that
such a provision puts some pressure on the Government
of the Central African Republic to act.
On balance, my delegation believes that this
resolution goes in the right direction. We have joined the
consensus with the other delegations in support of it.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of
its consideration of the item on the agenda.
14
Security Council 3867th meeting
Fifty-third year 27 March 1998
The Security Council will remain seized of the matter.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.
15
