United Nations S/PV.4129
00-39541 (E) This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be
incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation
concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fifty-fifth Year
4129th Meeting
Tuesday, 18 April 2000, 11.30 a.m.
New York
President: Mr. Axworthy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Canada)
Members: Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mársico
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ahmed
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wang Yingfan
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Levitte
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Miss Durrant
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Hasmy
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ouane
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Andjaba
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Kooijmans
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ben Mustapha
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Yel’chenko
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Sir Jeremy Greenstock
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Holbrooke
Agenda
The situation in Angola
Letter dated 10 March 2000 from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 864 (1993) concerning the situation in Angola addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2000/203).
Security Council 4129th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
The meeting was called to order at 12.30 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Angola
Letter dated 10 March 2000 from the Chairman of
the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 864 (1993) concerning the
situation in Angola addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2000/203)
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Angola, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Gabon,
Mozambique, New Zealand, Portugal, Rwanda, Spain,
Togo, United Republic of Tanzania and Zimbabwe in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I welcome Mr. João Bernardo de Miranda, Minister
for External Relations of Angola.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Miranda
(Angola) took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Adam
(Belgium), Mr. Fonseca (Brazil), Mr. Sotirov
(Bulgaria), Mr. Ouédraogo (Burkina Faso), Mr.
Dangue Réwaka (Gabon), Mr. Dos Santos
(Mozambique), Mr. Powles (New Zealand), Mr.
Monteiro (Portugal), Mr. Mutaboba (Rwanda), Mr.
Arias (Spain), Mr. Kpotsra (Togo), Mr. Mwakawago
(United Republic of Tanzania), and Mr. Jokonya
(Zimbabwe) took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: The Security Council will now resume
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council’s prior
consultations, which will be issued as document
S/2000/323.
I should like to draw the attention of the Council to
the following other documents: S/2000/225, letter dated
15 March 2000 from Gabon; S/2000/228, letter dated 15
March 2000 from Belgium; S/2000/230, letter dated 17
March 2000 from Portugal; S/2000/240, 267 and 315,
notes verbales dated 22 and 29 March, and 13 April 2000,
respectively, from Bulgaria; S/2000/249, letter dated 24
March from Burkina Faso; S/2000/252, letter dated 24
March 2000 from Uganda; S/2000/256, letter dated 24
March from Togo; and S/2000/283, letter dated 29 March
2000 from Rwanda. Members of the Council have
received photocopies of a letter dated 17 April 2000 from
Togo, which will be issued as document S/2000/326.
I call on Mr. Robert Fowler, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 864 (1993) concerning the situation in Angola.
Mr. Fowler: Mr. President, I should like to thank
you and the members of the Council who have agreed to
this morning’s innovative procedure.
In briefly introducing the draft resolution, which will
shortly be formally issued, I would like to emphasize one
point: the Security Council’s sanctions against the rebel
movement in Angola, UNITA, are now having real
impact. The work of the Panel of Experts has contributed
significantly to this welcome development. Once again,
on behalf of the Council, I thank the Panel of Experts for
the enormous contribution that they have made to our
work. The Security Council’s adoption of this substantial
draft resolution will demonstrate its commitment to
ensuring that the sanctions continue to have impact in
curtailing UNITA’s ability to pursue its objectives
through military means.
The draft resolution would, among its many other
features, put in place a seven-month process, at the end
of which, in mid-November, the Security Council would
consider appropriate action in relation to States it believed
to be continuing to violate the sanctions against UNITA.
During these seven months, interested States, including
those mentioned in the report of the Panel of Experts,
would have ample opportunity to bring relevant
information to the attention of the sanctions Committee
and to demonstrate their adherence to all the exigencies
of the sanctions regime.
2
Security Council 4129th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
The draft resolution would also request the Secretary-
General to establish the monitoring mechanism proposed by
the Panel of Experts. It would be composed of five
monitors whose renewable six-month mandate would be to
collect relevant information, investigate relevant leads and
verify information provided from all sources.
In deciding who had violated the sanctions and what
to do about it, the Council would thus draw on three
substantial bodies of information: first, the report of the
Panel of Experts; secondly, the additional information made
available by States; and thirdly, the reports of the
independent monitoring mechanism.
The draft resolution before us does not name names or
take action against alleged sanctions-busters. This should
not be interpreted as any kind of exoneration of any State
or States referred to in the report of the Panel of Experts.
The purpose of the draft resolution is, instead, to provide
all States with an opportunity to answer the allegations of
the Expert Panel, to end sanctions violations where they
have occurred, and to bring their actions into conformity
with the clearly articulated will of the international
community. Equally clearly, this draft resolution stipulates
that the Council will not continue to stand idly by while its
decisions are flouted.
My own hope is that the Security Council will not
need to adopt such action. That said, the draft resolution
before us makes clear the Council’s willingness to adopt
such measures if necessary.
A generation of Angolans has never known peace. The
purpose of the sanctions against UNITA is to promote a
durable political settlement of the three-decades-long
conflict in Angola by requiring UNITA to comply with its
obligations, which it freely undertook. The adoption of this
draft resolution will constitute a reaffirmation of the
Council’s commitment to peace in Angola and a
demonstration of our determination to use all of the levers
available to us to bring about that peace.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): The fact
that this draft resolution is being adopted today and that this
discussion is taking place today already silently expresses
much of the United Kingdom’s message.
We all want to see an end to the decades of misery
caused by the conflict in Angola. We all believe that the
only way to achieve this is to deprive UNITA of the
practical means to continue to wage war. We have all, in
previous Security Council resolutions, committed
ourselves to sanctions on UNITA in order to achieve that
goal.
When a leader and his organization in civil conflict
reject peace and ignore the will of the majority of
ordinary people, then sanctions are one of the few tools
the United Nations has at its disposal to try to make them
reconsider. Having decided on a sanctions regime, we
must make it work.
I congratulate Canada and thank Ambassador Fowler
for the impetus you, Mr. President, and he have delivered
to implementation of United Nations sanctions on
UNITA. This effort, and the work of the Expert Panel,
both solidly supported in practice by the United Kingdom,
have already sent an important message: that violators of
sanctions will be pursued. UNITA now knows that, even
before the Security Council has taken its decisions,
law-breaking friends are harder to find, illegal supplies
harder to secure and stolen diamonds harder to sell.
Making this draft resolution work will be tough
going. It will require a new level of cooperation among
Member States, and between Governments and the private
sector. It will require technical expertise and political will.
The United Kingdom will play its part. While all Member
States are affected, the draft resolution places a particular
burden on States neighbouring Angola. We very much
welcome the commitment which the States of the
Southern African Development Community have already
expressed to follow up this draft resolution. That is in
their interests, because peace in Angola would make a
significant positive difference to the region. At the same
time, we recognize the burden on them. Some of the
measures needed, such as tightening up controls of
borders and airspace, will not be easy to implement. As
this draft resolution makes clear, the international
community needs to consider how it can help.
Today’s draft resolution addresses more than the
achieving of peace in Angola. The text, the process which
has led to it and, most importantly, the action which must
follow from it, also send a forceful message about the
seriousness of this Council’s business. We must live up
to it.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United Kingdom for the kind words he addressed to me.
3
Security Council 4129th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We are happy to see you, Mr. Minister, once again sitting
in the President’s chair.
The protracted armed conflict in Angola is cause for
very serious concern, for us and for the entire international
community. As a member of the troika of observer States
for the implementation of the Angola peace process, Russia
confirms its consistent position that responsibility for the
continuation of the conflict lies entirely with the leadership
of UNITA, headed by Jonas Savimbi, who is refusing to
comply with his commitments under the Lusaka Protocol
and the demands contained in Security Council resolutions.
Given these circumstances, we must further increase
pressure on the military and political leadership of UNITA
so as to make it comply with the demands of the
international community, first and foremost to halt the
fighting and return to the track of a political settlement.
Furthermore, we sympathize with the position of the
Angolan leadership. We are pleased to welcome the
Minister for External Relations of Angola to the Council
Chamber today, and we sympathize with his position. Jonas
Savimbi has so often broken his promises and agreements
and acted in bad faith that he has now lost the right to
participate in this process and can have no political future.
Jonas Savimbi and his entourage have shown their
indifference to the fate of the Angolan people. Because of
his uncontrollable lust for power, hundreds of thousands
have paid with their lives and borne the full weight of the
humanitarian crisis in the country — a country whose
subsoil could, indeed, yield prosperity for its people.
Foreign citizens have often been victims of his
organization, including those who have gone — some under
the United Nations flag — to help the Angolan people in
their time of trial.
For more than one year, UNITA has been holding
prisoner citizens of the Russian Federation, one of whom
has died. All these facts make clear that, in UNITA, the
Security Council is faced with outright contempt for the
will of the international community. There is a conscious,
carefully premeditated policy to evade the sanctions
introduced by the Council, which were designed to deprive
the UNITA military machine of the financial, material and
technical input that it needs.
Given these circumstances, therefore, it is of
paramount importance to strengthen the effectiveness of
control over the current sanctions regime against UNITA.
The active efforts being made by the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 864 (1993),
and the efforts of the Chairman of that Committee,
Ambassador Fowler, have already had an important
positive impact on ensuring greater respect for the
sanctions against UNITA. We welcome the report to the
Security Council of the Panel of Experts established
pursuant to resolution 1237 (1999), and we participated
actively in drawing up the draft resolution that we will be
adopting today. Based on the recommendations of that
Panel, it will help us to achieve the goals that we have set
for ourselves.
We believe that implementation of the draft
resolution will contribute to improving the effectiveness
of control over the sanctions against UNITA, and it will
help to close off the channels used by the leadership of
that organization to preserve their ability to continue the
war — a war that UNITA has imposed on the people of
Angola.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like warmly to welcome to the Council
table the Minister for External Relations of Angola,
Mr. Miranda.
The draft resolution that we will be adopting today
reaffirms the Security Council’s determination to ensure
effective implementation of the sanctions against UNITA.
Today, through this draft resolution, the Council will once
again send a clear and firm message to Mr. Savimbi and
UNITA to put an immediate end to hostilities and to
finally fulfil their obligations under the Lusaka Protocol.
My country fully endorses that message. Jonas Savimbi’s
overwhelming responsibility for the continuation of civil
conflict in Angola and his refusal to take account of
Council resolutions must be most seriously condemned.
We welcome the fact that, barely a month after the
report of the Panel of Experts was issued, the Council
will adopt a draft resolution taking on board more than
three quarters of the recommendations made by those
experts. The draft resolution covers a particularly wide
range of issues, including the delivery of arms, fuel,
trafficking in diamonds, financial resources and the travel
of UNITA leaders. The recommendations put forward in
this text are addressed first and foremost to Member
States. But they also call for the active cooperation of a
variety of players in a number of different arenas,
including international and regional organizations,
enterprises, professional organizations and experts. This
is especially true for the provisions relating to the
international diamond trade, the monitoring of financial
resources and air transport. The effective implementation
4
Security Council 4129th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
of these measures is the responsibility of Member States,
but they will have to ensure, in exercising their
competency, the cooperation of all the actors concerned.
Each of us will have to support this effort. It will
require not only the will, but the means. In many instances,
the means are lacking. This is particularly the case with
regard to the implementation of certain recommendations of
the Panel of Experts, to be endorsed by the Council today,
which are addressed in particular to the Southern African
Development Community and its member States. The
efforts of the countries concerned, especially those in
Africa, will therefore have to be supported by the
international community. If we are serious in our
determination to ensure respect for sanctions, we must not
confine ourselves to highlighting violations of sanctions.
Naming and shaming is not enough. We must also provide
tangible aid wherever it is needed.
The draft resolution would provide for the
establishment of machinery for monitoring sanctions. It
would also provide for the Council to assess the situation
in six months on the basis of the work of the sanctions
Committee. We hope that the sanctions Committee will
engage in sustained dialogue with the member States in
monitoring the implementation of sanctions, exchanging
information and receiving their comments. Here again, our
goal must be greater efficacy. If the noose around Jonas
Savimbi and UNITA is truly to be tightened, we need
cooperation and information from everyone. Only a united
effort of the international community will allow us to block
UNITA’s revenue resources and supply of arms.
Since the report of the Panel of Experts was published,
several States have announced steps taken to further
investigate shortcomings and, in some cases, correct them.
The French delegation welcomes these initiatives, which
have clearly already begun to bear fruit. We hope that the
Council and the sanctions Committee will be able to
acknowledge these efforts in due course. If the embargo has
been violated in the past, it is indeed essential that these
failings no longer occur and that the sanctions Committee
be apprised in real time of any fresh sanctions busting.
We feel that this constructive, pedagogical and united
approach, built entirely around the central objective of the
full international isolation of Jonas Savimbi and UNITA,
will ultimately prove far more productive than a repressive
one. In this context, it does not appear to us that the
creation of new sanctions against countries that have
allegedly violated the old will provide a real solution. It is
not by increasing the number of pariah States that we will
encourage them to reform their ways, nor would the
exponential growth in the number of existing sanctions
regimes fail to create management problems at the very
moment when we are already having enough trouble
enforcing the nine embargoes currently in place. The
criteria for choosing violator countries could be subject to
numerous challenges. The authority of this Council could
well emerge reduced. The draft resolution before us today
holds out no such prospect, of which we are glad.
Finally, we hope that the sanctions Committee will,
in cooperation with the monitoring machinery, manage to
build on the work of the Panel of Experts and to clarify
certain information contained in the report submitted by
Mr. Mollander. Last March, my delegation raised the
issues that we felt needed to be actualized. It would be
equally useful for the sanctions Committee better to
appreciate the respective importance of UNITA’s various
supply networks. This, again, is in the interests of
achieving efficacy. If we wish to strengthen the
implementation of sanctions, we must do so first and
foremost by identifying the main channels through which
UNITA receives its arms and acquires its resources.
Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): I thank
you once again, Mr. President, for coming from far-away
Canada to chair this important meeting. I am delighted to
see that you have some members of the Canadian
legislature here with you today. We have been lucky
enough to have had many members of the United States
Congress here with us in the past six months. I am
delighted whenever I see members of any national
assembly or legislature here. I think it is the essence of
the strengthening of the United Nations to do this and I
welcome your colleagues from the legislative branch.
The United States will be very pleased to vote in
favour of the important draft resolution before us today.
We commend Ambassador Fowler, his delegation and the
entire Government of Canada for their sustained
dedication to this task. Bob Fowler has proved that one
can be extremely methodical and very careful, and still
accomplish something in the United Nations. I
congratulate him for his diligence, his perseverance and
his persistence. The Canadian delegation and Ambassador
Fowler have set a standard by which other sanctions
regimes against non-state actors will be judged.
Our Government has worked closely with the
sanctions team under Ambassador Fowler. He has briefed
our Government at high levels on this issue in order to
explain to us how we might better assist the sanctions
5
Security Council 4129th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
regime. I can report today that his efforts with the United
States Government directly have been very fruitful.
We also welcome the Foreign Minister of Angola, Mr.
Miranda, back to the Council and we look forward to
hearing his report. I hope that he will report to President
Dos Santos that the Security Council is continuing its
vigorous efforts to honour its commitments to Angola.
In the past, UNITA’s ability to evade the three
sanctions packages allowed it to defy the will of the
majority of the Angolan people and of the international
community. UNITA’s sanctions-busting activities, aided and
abetted by the parties identified in the report of the Panel
of Experts, allowed it to pursue a military option that
brought death and destruction to a long-suffering nation.
The people of Angola have waited too long for
UNITA’s military leadership to forsake armed resistance
and enter into the peaceful democratic life of the country.
The road is littered with UNITA’s broken promises. The
fundamental expectation of the international community
remains the full demilitarization of UNITA, the full
extension of state administration to all areas of the national
territory and the full demobilization of all armed UNITA
personnel. The people of Angola waited four years for
UNITA to accomplish these tasks, only to be deceived once
again.
However, the four years of the Lusaka Protocol
produced a Government of National Unity, integrated armed
forces and a multi-party National Assembly. These gains
should be safeguarded and developed. The United States is
committed to the Lusaka Protocol and its institutions,
including the role of the troika of observer States, and to
the freedoms guaranteed under the Angolan Constitution.
This includes, importantly, the rights of a free press, which
are, unfortunately, under threat in Angola today. The issue
of a free press is of grave concern to my Government and,
despite our support of the sanctions and our efforts to work
closely with the Government of Angola, we do not believe
we can or should ignore this problem.
Our vote today in support of the draft resolution will
underscore the strong Council view that UNITA leader
Jonas Savimbi is in defiance of the will of the people he
claims to help and represent. The primary cause of the
present crisis is Savimbi’s unwillingness to comply with his
obligations under the Lusaka Protocol. Mr. Savimbi should
read the writing on the wall here in this meeting today. The
noose — as one of the previous speakers said — is closing.
He should take action on his own to stop the pain and
suffering he is causing to the people of Angola. If he
does not, he will lose anyway, but at much greater cost to
the people of Angola and to himself.
Since his refusal to accept the results of the 1992
election, he has waged a war against the people of
Angola. He has exercised veto rights over the political,
economic and social life of the country, not because he
possesses a superior ideological vision or an electoral
majority, but because he has fielded a military force.
Security Council sanctions are designed to erode
UNITA’s ability to export diamonds and import military
supplies, and I note the high importance we attach to the
new undertakings by the Government of Belgium in
regard to the diamond issue.
We note the Government of Angola’s call for new
elections and the wide support this proposal has received.
This shows that the Government understands that all
mandates must be periodically reviewed by the people
and that the opposition itself is eager to launch into a new
campaign. As long as the elections are carried out in an
environment of open democratic processes and with
appropriate monitoring, we will support them. If all of
Angola’s parties are given the political space to operate
freely, if the mass media and civil society movements can
speak without fear of reprisal, then Angola will be ready
for new elections, regardless of what Mr. Savimbi
believes or attempts to do.
Keeping sanctions pressure on UNITA will continue
to erode Mr. Savimbi’s military options. Of course, unless
he sees the handwriting on the wall and ends his
performance — his behaviour — it will not happen
overnight. But I think the evidence is already showing
that the dedication that your country, Mr. President, has
brought to this task has made a major contribution. The
additional efforts that have been announced recently, plus
this very important and excellently drafted Security
Council draft resolution, have all made a major
contribution. We continue to support your efforts, Sir, and
we look forward to working together with you over the
next six months, and beyond, in pursuit of the goals the
Security Council, speaking on behalf of the international
community, has articulated here today.
The President: I would like to thank the
representative of the United States for the kind words
addressed to Ambassador Fowler and the Canadian
delegation. We appreciate that.
6
Security Council 4129th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): The Security
Council has for a month now had before it the report of the
Panel of Experts established by resolution 1237 (1999) to
study violations of the sanctions imposed by the Council
against UNITA. The draft resolution before the Council
today endorses three fourths of the recommendations of the
Panel’s report and is aimed at intensifying the work of the
Committee established under Security Council resolution
864 (1993) on Angola, and in particular at enhancing the
effectiveness of current sanctions covered in earlier
resolutions of the Council relating to the illegal supply of
arms, petroleum and petroleum products, the export of
diamonds, the freeze on UNITA’s financial assets and on
the closing of UNITA’s representation offices and other
offices abroad. By adopting the draft resolution, the Council
will be strengthening the United Nations sanctions regime
against UNITA and demonstrating its resolve to make a
positive and concrete contribution to the restoration of
peace and security in Angola. It is for these reasons that the
delegation of Mali will vote in favour of the draft
resolution.
Mali deplores the continuation of the conflict that has
now been taking place in Angola for 25 years, for which
Jonas Savimbi and UNITA are primarily responsible. The
people of Angola have suffered too much from the war; the
time has now come for the international community to
adopt strong measures to put an end to it. The
implementation of the draft resolution we are to adopt at
the end of this meeting will help to dry up the income
UNITA gets from illegal diamond exports and will
substantially limit its acquisition of weapons and munitions,
petroleum and petroleum products.
In this connection, I would like to pay tribute to the
tireless efforts made by Ambassador Robert Fowler, in his
capacity as Chairman of the sanctions Committee on
Angola, to contribute to the achievement of a political
settlement of the Angolan crisis by diminishing UNITA’s
capacity to wage war.
Along the same lines, the establishment for a six-
month period of a new monitoring mechanism for sanctions
violations will make it possible to give effective follow-up
to the results of the report of the Panel of Experts. Those
will have lasting effect only if there is control of and some
pressure on Savimbi and his entourage. This will also make
it possible for the Council to avoid a return to practices of
the past.
For these reasons, Mali, which stands in solidarity
with the people of Angola in their struggle — and I
welcome the presence at this meeting of Mr. Miranda,
Minister for External Relations of Angola — is convinced
that the draft resolution we will adopt today will enable
us to apply more effectively the sanctions regime against
UNITA in order to curb and put an end to sanctions
violations.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Mali for his kind words addressed to the
Canadian delegation.
Mr. Kooijmans (Netherlands): The representative of
Portugal will make a statement on behalf of the European
Union later in this debate. As the Netherlands associates
itself fully with that statement, my delegation will limit
itself to a few brief comments on the issue under
consideration.
The Panel of Experts, in its report on violations of
Security Council sanctions against UNITA, concluded that
the long-suffering people of Angola need and deserve the
support of the international community in the search to
bring peace and political reconciliation to that country.
Rendering that support is indeed in essence what the
Council is doing today by tightening the noose around
UNITA’s capacity to defy the international community
and bring further misery to the Angolan people.
The draft resolution the Council is to adopt today
entails basically two steps that should curtail future
infringements of the UNITA sanctions regime. First, it
puts in place a new monitoring mechanism that could be
an effective instrument in the hands of the Council and
the sanctions Committee to oversee the implementation of
resolutions 864 (1993), 1127 (1997) and 1173 (1998), as
long as that mechanism is allowed to collect, analyse and
submit information independently. Secondly, the draft
resolution sets a deadline for the Council to consider
action vis-à-vis those States considered to be in violation
of the terms of the sanctions regime. We are very grateful
for the important contribution of the Panel of Experts, and
especially that of Ambassador Fowler, to making the
sanctions against UNITA more effective.
Even before adopting this draft resolution, we have
already seen some remedial effects of the report of the
Panel. In this connection, we wish to commend those
countries mentioned in the report for the steps taken so
far, and we call upon the others to follow suit. In our
view, Belgium in particular deserves praise for taking the
Panel’s remarks in stride and addressing its
recommendations expeditiously and in such a transparent
7
Security Council 4129th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
manner. Other countries have got away too easily simply by
ignoring the Panel’s request for information. We expect,
therefore, that the new monitoring mechanism will pick up
where the Panel had to stop and will build upon the
information that has been collected so far. Again, we repeat
that it is essential for the new mechanism’s future
effectiveness that it be able to operate independently. We
look forward to receiving the mechanism’s report six
months from now.
Our ultimate goal in tightening the sanctions is not so
much simply to punish UNITA, but to reduce UNITA’s
capacity to wage war and prevent a peaceful solution to
Angola’s bloody conflict. UNITA deliberately chose to
abandon the road to peace as mapped out by the Lusaka
Protocol and left the Government of Angola no option but
to seize the initiative militarily. The draft resolution before
us is meant to create a situation in which military
offensives will no longer be needed to achieve a peaceful
solution. That solution is what the Council ultimately
should offer to the Angolan people, whose suffering has
gone on for much too long.
However, the fact that we hold UNITA responsible for
the present situation of conflict and humanitarian misery
does not diminish the responsibility of the Government of
Angola to make its own substantial contribution to the well-
being of its own people. In his report of last week on the
operations of the United Nations Office in Angola, the
Secretary-General referred to allegations of grave human
rights violations on both sides and the dire humanitarian
situation in Angola. It proves, in our view, that close
monitoring by the international community of both areas of
concern is still warranted. The Government of Angola owes
that not only to the people of Angola but also to the
international community, which today is going to take
far-reaching steps to assist the Government in its efforts to
pacify the country effectively.
Lastly, our progress in the UNITA sanctions dossier
should not obscure the need for the Council, at a later
stage, to look into the general problem of conflicts fueled
and prolonged by access to minerals.
The President: I thank the representative of
Netherlands for his kind words to me.
Mr. Mársico (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like to thank you, Mr. President and Foreign Minister of
Canada, for having once again honored us with your
presence here. I should also like to thank the Foreign
Minister of Angola, Mr. Miranda, for having once again
joined us here today.
A little more than a month ago we met to consider
the report of the Panel of Experts on violations of
sanctions against UNITA, introduced by Ambassador
Fowler in his capacity as Chairman of the Angola
sanctions Committee.
The submission of that report had significant impact
and we believe it will continue to have positive
repercussions. Not only has it mobilized the States
mentioned in the report, those in the diamond industry
and arms producers, along with neighboring countries and
countries in the sub-region, but it has also, as no other
single event in the past, raised the awareness of the
international community as a whole. For all these reasons,
this is an invaluable report.
More or less in parallel fashion, alongside this
discussion, a series of exchanges of opinion has taken
place on general issues bearing on sanctions which also
benefitted from the specific results emerging from the
Panel’s work. We believe that both initiatives, whereby
formal discussion on sanctions was begun, will enable the
Council to incorporate specific measures in its work to
improve across the board the use of the tool of sanctions.
Today we are here to take a second step, as
important as the first, by adopting a resolution which we
believe will strengthen the sanctions regime against
UNITA. We hope that thereby a political solution to the
conflict in Angola will be promoted.
This draft resolution, which we support in its
entirety, contains a series of innovative elements. It
recognizes the need to monitor sanctions, establishing for
this purpose monitoring machinery with an initial duration
of six months which will pursue the work started by the
Panel. It stipulates that the Council, after review of the
implementation of the measures set out in the resolutions
on sanctions against UNITA — that is to say, resolutions
864 (1993), 1127 (1997) and 1173 (1998) — and on the
basis of the outcome thereof, will be prepared to take
steps against those States that will have violated these
sanctions. Likewise, the draft resolution that we are on
the verge of adopting contains a series of measures and
recommendations aimed at all States relating to diamonds,
petroleum, arms, financial measures and travel and
representational restrictions on UNITA abroad.
8
Security Council 4129th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
We note with satisfaction that the resolution
incorporates a number of different Panel recommendations
on the natural resources of Angola, whose very existence
and abundance have played a significant role in prolonging
the conflict: driving the war and facilitating the buying of
arms and fuel and even of political sympathy. Under
section B, referring to the trade in arms, we consider of
particular importance the appeal to all States to be as
diligent as they possibly can in confirming the end users.
Under section D, referring to the diamond trade, we urge
the imposition of significant penal measures against the
illegal possession of diamonds in contravention of
resolution 1173 (1998). At the same time we welcome the
establishment of a new Certificate of Origin for diamonds
by the Government of Angola, which will facilitate better
monitoring.
For more than twenty years now, the international
community has been striving to achieve a peaceful
resolution of the conflict in Angola. Argentina can identify
itself with these efforts, as in 1989 we despatched units
when the operations of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola got underway. Notwithstanding the
successive efforts of the international community, the
results were inadequate to put an end to the conflict and to
promote compliance with the 1991 "Accordos de Paz" or
with the Lusaka Protocol of 1994.
We acknowledge that the continuation of the conflict
in Angola is not due to any single factor. Notwithstanding
that, we hope that the measures we are adopting today will
make it possible to make greater use of the natural
resources of Angola for the progress of its people and not
for fuelling the conflict, will reaffirm the repudiation by the
international community of the violations of the sanctions
regimes established by the Security Council, and, finally,
will help to move the peace process in Angola forward,
renewing political efforts underway to put an end to the
conflict.
The President: I thank the representative of Argentina
for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes you to New York, Mr.
President, to preside over this open meeting. We would also
like to welcome Foreign Minister Miranda of Angola, who
is attending today’s meeting.
The question of Angola has dragged on for quite a
long time. The twists and turns of the peace process and the
grave security and humanitarian situation have not only
combined to bring enormous sufferings to the Angolan
people but have also seriously affected peace and stability
in the region. As it refused to implement the peace
agreement, UNITA, headed by Jonas Malheiro Savimbi,
should bear the main responsibility for the present
situation in Angola. Since the arms and petroleum
embargo was applied against UNITA by resolution 864
(1993), the Security Council has adopted a number of
resolutions in recent years to expand relevant measures to
travel, finance, the diamond trade and many other areas.
Unfortunately, these measures have not been implemented
effectively, for various reasons. To this day, UNITA has
not yet laid down its weapons to take the path of national
reconciliation.
Ambassador Robert Fowler of Canada, since his
assumption of the chairmanship of the sanctions
Committee, has made unremitting efforts to facilitate
implementation in earnest by the international community
of the sanctions against UNITA. The Security Council
Panel of Experts investigating violations of the embargoes
has done a great deal of work since its establishment and
has submitted a report in this regard, putting forward a
series of recommendations. Despite the different
responses and evaluations made by different sides, the
report undoubtedly played a positive role in enhancing
efforts by the Security Council and the international
community to strengthen the sanctions against UNITA.
Meanwhile, we should also see that much remains to
be done in strengthening sanctions against UNITA. After
the expiration of the mandate of the Expert Panel, the
international community will still need to monitor
violations of the embargoes closely. The Chinese
delegation supports the establishment by the Security
Council of a new monitoring mechanism to continue the
investigation into violations of the embargoes against
UNITA and to submit a report and proposals to the
Security Council in six months. We hope that the
Secretary-General will be able to appoint experts for this
monitoring mechanism at an early date, and we would
like to call upon all countries to give it their full support
and cooperation.
We support Security Council endorsement of some
of the recommendations in the Expert Panel’s report
through the adoption of a draft resolution, and we hope
that this will be truly implemented. We have taken note
of the fact that many of the recommendations involve the
Southern African Development Community (SADC). It
may be said that without the true involvement and
commitment of SADC, it will be impossible to implement
9
Security Council 4129th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
many of the proposals, and sanctions against UNITA could
possibly remain hollow talk. We commend SADC countries
for their determination and for their efforts to implement
the sanctions against UNITA. At the same time, we are
aware of the real difficulties SADC countries face, and we
are therefore of the view that the international community
should continue to provide SADC with necessary assistance
concerning the sanctions against UNITA.
The Chinese delegation strongly appeals to all
countries strictly to abide by relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, to stop supplying UNITA with weapons
or supporting it in any other way and to adopt effective
measures to prevent their own citizens from violating the
sanctions. We sincerely hope that in six months’ time,
when the Security Council next reviews the implementation
of the sanctions against UNITA, we will be able to see real
and effective results. That would be an important
contribution by the international community to the Angolan
peace process.
The President: I thank the representative of China for
the very kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation, Sir, is pleased
to see you presiding over another meeting of the Security
Council. We also welcome the presence at this important
meeting of the Minister for External Relations of Angola,
Mr. Miranda.
We would like to thank the Canadian delegation, in
particular Ambassador Robert Fowler, for its outstanding
efforts to spearhead the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 864 (1993). There has been a
tremendous shift in the international focus following the
commissioning of the Panel of Experts established by the
Security Council pursuant to resolution 1237 (1999), and
the issuance of its report in document S/2000/203 of 10
March 2000.
We commend Ambassador Fowler for his strong
commitment and tireless efforts in transforming the
sanctions Committee into an active and robust body, one
which is very much at the forefront of the Organization’s
attempts to cripple the war-making capability of UNITA.
We once again welcome the report of the Panel of
Experts and take note of the conclusions and
recommendations contained in it. The report puts forward
a set of 39 bold and far-reaching recommendations for the
consideration of the Council.
Following on from our deliberations at the open
meeting of 15 March 2000, substantial work has been put
into the draft resolution before us today, which would
give effect to the large majority of the Panel’s
recommendations. The draft resolution before us is a very
important one. It has the aim of strengthening control of
the sanctions against UNITA. It targets UNITA and
others found to be in violation of the measures imposed
by the Council. In that regard, my delegation fully
supports the proposed establishment of a monitoring
mechanism composed of up to five experts for an initial
period of six months in order to collect additional relevant
information and to investigate relevant leads concerning
violations of the measures contained in resolutions 864
(1993), 1127 (1997) and 1173 (1998). We agree that the
monitoring mechanism should report periodically to the
Angola sanctions Committee, and we look forward to the
submission of a written report by 18 October 2000. It is
our hope that the Secretary-General will be able to
appoint the experts expeditiously.
With regard to the trade in arms, the draft resolution
encourages States to exercise all due diligence in order to
prevent the diversion or trans-shipment of weapons to
unauthorized end-users or unauthorized destinations, if
such diversion or trans-shipment risks resulting in the
violation of measures contained in resolution 864 (1993).
This is particularly important given that the Panel’s report
highlights UNITA’s military ability successfully to
procure weapons with the help of international arms
brokers. We agree that stringent measures with regard to
proper documentation for the export of weapons are
necessary in order to check the flow of illicit arms to
UNITA and to help bring an end to its capacity to wage
war. Further, we also view positively the invitation to
hold conferences of representatives of countries that are
manufacturers or exporters of weapons to develop
proposals to stem the illicit flow of arms into Angola.
In that regard, it is especially important that the
countries of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) be invited to participate in such
meetings. In addition, we believe it is important that
SADC countries be provided with both financial and
technical assistance by the international community in
implementing the relevant recommendations of the Panel
of Experts.
With regard to the trade in diamonds, we support the
call on States hosting diamond markets to impose
significant penalties for the possession of rough diamonds
in contravention of the measures contained in resolution
10
Security Council 4129th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
1173 (1998). My delegation wishes to state that it would
have preferred the inclusion in the draft resolution of
language regarding exploring the lawful seizure of the
rough diamonds in question as well as any collateral assets
used in the transport of such goods; such language is not
included in the draft resolution before us. We would also
express support for a call on States to make dealing in
illegal rough diamonds a criminal offense; this too is not
included in the final text of the draft resolution.
In that connection, we particularly welcome the
introduction by the Government of Angola of new control
arrangements involving redesigned and reconcilable
certificates of origin. Details of this scheme should be
provided to Member States; we look forward to a briefing
by the Government of Angola on this regime in due course.
Diamonds remain a principal source of funding for
UNITA. It is therefore imperative that UNITA’s lifeline be
severed.
While supporting the draft resolution’s aim of giving
teeth and meaning to the Council’s sanctions, my delegation
would like to reiterate its view that any further steps or
measures to be meted out to sanctions-busters should be
considered very carefully and should be weighed against the
seriousness of an alleged breach. We believe that those
named in the Panel’s report should have the right to
respond to the allegations and to clarify their own roles in
the alleged sanctions-busting activities. If those
clarifications are not plausible and are not borne out by the
facts, the international community and the Council will
doubtless draw their own conclusions and take appropriate
action.
Nevertheless, we would like to stress our conviction
that the Council must act only when it has conclusive
evidence of such breaches. We support the 18 November
2000 deadline for an initial Council decision on the matter.
That would give ample time for those named to respond to
the Panel’s allegations.
For far too long, UNITA has been left to its own
devices, violating the measures imposed by this organ with
impunity. Essentially, Savimbi knew that the Council
seriously lacked the will to enforce the sanctions regime.
Those days, we believe, are now gone. With the Panel’s
bold report and robust recommendations, and with the
adoption later today of the draft resolution before us, those
responsible for breaches and transgressions of the sanctions
regime will no longer go back to doing business as usual.
Malaysia will therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution.
The President: I thank the representative of
Malaysia for the kind words he addressed to the Canadian
delegation.
Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Let me at the outset
express my delegation’s appreciation to you, Mr.
President, and to your Government for convening this
important meeting on Angola. The fact that you are
presiding over this meeting is clear testimony to your
Government’s commitment to contribute to finding a
lasting solution to the Angolan conflict. I wish in
particular to commend Ambassador Fowler for his
commitment and his leadership in ensuring that sanctions
against UNITA are enforced. My delegation pledges its
full cooperation in the successful resolution of this issue.
Let me also acknowledge the presence of the
Minister of External Relations of Angola, Mr. Miranda.
We eagerly await his remarks.
The report of the Panel of Experts on violations of
sanctions against UNITA was considered in the open
debate of the Security Council held on 15 March 2000. At
that meeting, we reiterated that Security Council
resolutions on sanctions against UNITA were indeed
being violated by Member States, corporations and
individuals at the expense of the people of Angola, and
hence that UNITA was in a position to augment its
military strength and as a result continued to sow death
and destruction in Angola. In this regard, and in order to
add credibility and seriousness to the sanctions
resolutions, the Council must take the appropriate
measures to curb and destroy UNITA’s capacity to make
war.
The Southern African Development Community
(SADC), the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and
the Movement of the Non-Aligned Countries continue to
play an important role in support of the implementation
of the Council’s resolutions imposed against UNITA.
These organizations have on a number of occasions
expressed their concern at the deteriorating humanitarian
situation resulting from UNITA’s intransigence and
refusal to comply with its obligations under the Lusaka
Protocol. Furthermore, they have declared Mr. Savimbi a
war criminal who has rendered himself an invalid
interlocutor. In particular, we welcome the
pronouncements by the most recent meeting of Foreign
Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Cartagena de
11
Security Council 4129th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
Indias, Colombia. In our view, it is imperative that the
Security Council heed the call made by the Foreign
Ministers of the Non-Aligned Movement in this regard.
Today the Council is going to vote on another historic
draft resolution — one which this time, if implemented,
will help bring peace to Angola and to the region as a
whole. Namibia will vote in favour of this consensus draft,
but first let me comment on some of its key elements.
First, my delegation considers the establishment of the
monitoring mechanism an important factor in this exercise,
and it is our sincere hope that the mechanism will receive
appropriate support from the Member States and the
Secretariat to enable it to accomplish the task ahead of it.
It is important in this regard that adequate technical support
and financial resources be provided to this mechanism so as
to enable it to do its job thoroughly.
Secondly, the Council must stand ready to take
appropriate measures by 18 November this year against
those who it determines have violated sanctions against
UNITA, as stipulated in the draft resolution. It would be
unjust and unfair to the Angolan people, who have suffered
for too long — more than 500,000 lives have been lost —
if this draft resolution became just another resolution.
Taking appropriate action against those States, corporations
and individuals that are in violation of the relevant
resolutions will send a clear message to possible violators
that the Council means business. This is the minimum that
the Council can do for the people of Angola.
Thirdly, my delegation takes note of the steps
announced by the Government of Belgium in support of a
more effective implementation of measures against UNITA
and indeed welcomes the measures taken by the Diamond
High Council in conjunction with the Government of
Angola to render sanctions more effective. We call upon
Member States and other concerned institutions to assist the
Government of Angola in its internal reform process with
a view to improving the effectiveness of the implementation
of sanctions against UNITA. We also take note of the
decisions taken by some Governments, both within and
outside Africa, to bring to justice their nationals found to be
sanctions-busters.
Another critical issue of great concern to my
delegation is the use of mercenaries by UNITA, whose
impact has been significant in sustaining the military war
machinery of the rebel movement. We call upon States to
do their utmost to discourage their citizens from serving in
UNITA ranks at all levels. In this regard, we support the
issuing of arrest warrants to individuals who are playing
key roles in circumventing the Council’s resolutions
against UNITA.
Finally, SADC has played, and continues to play, an
important role in the implementation of the Council’s
resolutions against UNITA. However, it must be stressed
that the SADC countries lack the technical and financial
capacity to carry out its relevant programmes
successfully. Therefore, we appeal to the international
community to provide appropriate technical and financial
assistance to SADC with a view to strengthening the
effectiveness of the sanctions imposed against UNITA.
SADC is more than prepared to play its role. However,
the assistance of the international community is vital in
this regard.
We look forward to continuing to work with the
Chairman of the Committee for the success of the work
of the Committee and for peace and stability in Angola
and in southern Africa in general.
The President: I thank the representative of
Namibia for the kind words he addressed to me.
Miss Durrant (Jamaica): My delegation joins
previous speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting. We also wish to welcome Mr.
Miranda, Minister for External Relations of Angola, to
our deliberations.
My delegation pays tribute to Ambassador Robert
Fowler for his re-energizing of the sanctions Committee
established under resolution 864 (1993) and thanks him
for introducing the draft resolution before us today. We
fully endorse the draft, as we believe that it is important
for us to send a strong message that breaches of the
Council’s sanctions will not go unpunished.
Already the work of the Panel of Experts has borne
fruit, as Governments and others have begun to focus on
what they could do to improve the enforcement of
sanctions and to curtail existing violations. As the report
of the Panel reminded us, the purpose of the sanctions
was to provide a peaceful settlement to the conflict in
Angola by requiring UNITA to comply with the
obligations it undertook and by limiting UNITA’s ability
to pursue its objectives by military means.
The Security Council has given UNITA and Jonas
Savimbi all opportunities to bring peace to the long-
suffering people of Angola. But we must recall that the
12
Security Council 4129th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
leaders of UNITA rejected the results of free and fair
elections held in 1992. They took advantage of the Lusaka
Protocol to regroup their forces, and they were aided and
abetted in evading the arms embargo, the travel and
financial sanctions and the embargo on diamond exports.
Those who aided and abetted UNITA in violating sanctions
are equally culpable, along with UNITA, for the
humanitarian tragedy in Angola. It is reported that over the
past 25 years, some 1.5 million people have lost their lives.
There has been a dramatic increase in infant mortality, food
shortages and starvation, and the number of internally
displaced persons was last year estimated at 1.7 million out
of a total population of 12.6 million.
It is in this context that the Security Council, by its
action today, will clearly indicate that the international
community strongly repudiates the actions of Mr. Savimbi
and is determined to cut off his sources of finance and
arms. But the measures in the draft resolution with regard
to the trade in arms, petroleum and petroleum products and
diamonds, and with regard to travel, representation and
financial measures, can be effective only if all Member
States adhere to the terms of the draft resolution.
The monitoring mechanism is an innovative one, and
we believe that it can provide an example for other
sanctions regimes. We therefore hope that it will be set
up expeditiously in order to allow it to report to the
Council by November 2000. We wish to commend the
Southern African Development Community countries, and
those geographically close to Angola, for the steps they
have already taken to tighten the sanctions.
The draft resolution before us has been carefully
drafted, providing, as it does, an opportunity for those
named in the report to respond before any action is taken
against sanctions busters, while at the same time
reminding States of the mandatory nature of sanctions
imposed by the Security Council. Twenty-five years have
gone by. A whole generation of Angolans has not known
life without war. We owe it to them to seek to ensure that
the riches of their country are used for their economic and
social development, and not to perpetuate conflict.
The meeting was suspended at 1.45 p.m.
13
United Nations S/PV.4129 (Resumption 1)
00-39569 (E) This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be
incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation
concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fifty-fifth Year
4129th Meeting
Tuesday, 18 April 2000, 3 p.m.
New York
President: Mr. Axworthy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Canada)
Members: Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mársico
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ahmed
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wang Yingfan
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Levitte
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Miss Durrant
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Hasmy
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ouane
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Andjaba
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Kooijmans
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ben Mustapha
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Yel’chenko
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Sir Jeremy Greenstock
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Holbrooke
Agenda
The situation in Angola
Letter dated 10 March 2000 from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 864 (1993) concerning the situation in Angola addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2000/203).
Security Council 4129th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
The meeting was resumed at 3.15 p.m.
Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I
would like to say how grateful we are to you, Mr. Minister,
for convening this open meeting of the Security Council on
the situation in Angola. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Fowler, the Chairman of the Council’s
sanctions Committee on Angola, for his constant efforts to
ensure the follow-up to the strict implementation of the
sanctions regime against UNITA. Our meeting today
follows the Council’s very important debate yesterday on
general questions relating to sanctions — which was also
held under your presidency, Sir — and clearly
demonstrates, if there is a need to do so, the resolve of the
Council and, through it, that of the international community
to give its full attention to the question of sanctions
imposed by the Council in accordance with the Charter with
a view to establishing peace and security.
In the case of Angola, sanctions against UNITA have
proved their effectiveness because they have significantly
weakened Mr. Savimbi’s military capability and reduced his
supply sources and the income he utilizes for the war effort.
The Chairman of the Committee and the Panel of Experts
have made laudable efforts to ensure rigorous follow-up to
the implementation of the sanctions regime. Their tenacity
has enabled us to send an unequivocal message as to the
Council’s determination to ensure respect for its resolutions
and to demonstrate to UNITA that it cannot indefinitely
continue to threaten peace and stability in Angola and in
the subregion.
The report of the Panel of Experts is the outcome of
six months of research and investigation. That report, which
we welcome, has been the object of a prior debate within
the Security Council and has raised questions as to some of
its conclusions and recommendations.
Although, as we said earlier, irrefutable evidence is
required, commensurate with the significance of the deeds
reported, we still believe that the report deserves special
attention and serious consideration by many States and
parties.
The official responses addressed to the Security
Council following the publication of the report, and the
measures already taken by some countries that have, inter
alia, established national commissions of inquiry, certainly
demonstrate the serious approach to this question in Africa
and elsewhere. These are important inputs that should be
taken duly into account in order to give a complete picture
of violations of the sanctions regime against UNITA. They
will certainly be helpful to the future monitoring
mechanism as it carries out its tasks.
The six-month period provided for in the resolution
that is to be adopted, which we support, will enable the
Council to have a better grasp of this issue.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Tunisia for his kind words addressed to
the presidency.
Mr. Ahmed (Bangladesh): Let me begin by saying
how pleased the Bangladesh delegation is at seeing you,
Mr. Minister, once again chairing a meeting of the
Security Council. We also welcome in our midst the
Minister for External Relations of Angola. Let me also
begin by commending the delegation of Canada, and
particularly Ambassador Fowler, for convening this
meeting on Angola sanctions. It is right for the Council
to focus on the situation in Angola in general and the
sanctions imposed against UNITA in particular, and the
initiatives of Ambassador Fowler and his colleagues have
the full support of our delegation.
We recall our discussion a little over a month ago on
the report of the Panel of Experts on the sanctions
imposed against Angola. We commended the work done
by the Panel, as we found it useful, not only in the
context of the Angola sanctions, but also for the
implications the recommendations would have on the
current thinking of the Council in terms of general issues
relating to sanctions.
There is no doubt that the sanctions have not been
working, and the Panel, in its report, has pointed out why.
It is for the Council to decide how best it could deal with
the recommendations of the report in order to make the
sanctions more effective. The approach that the Council
took was to implement most of the recommendations. The
draft resolution that we shall adopt later today will be
doing just that. There are other issues raised in the
recommendations that need further study and call for the
collection of information, and perhaps those issues which
may not have been pursued adequately by the Panel for
want of time or other reasons should also be looked into.
We therefore agree that we need a mechanism to meet
this requirement, a mechanism which would be geared to
this purpose. We feel that the mechanism would do well
to look at the working methods of the Panel and improve
them. This would not only result in a better product, it
would spare it some criticism. We would look forward to
2
Security Council 4129th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
its reports, which should provide valuable information to
the work of the Council in this regard.
The Angola situation as it stands today is the result of
complicity, corruption and greed. The country, with a great
potential to develop, is currently rated the most horrific
place on earth for a child. UNITA bears the primary
responsibility for this. There is no military solution for the
problem, and a political dialogue must be started between
the concerned parties. The sanctions are aimed at making
it difficult for UNITA to pursue its military campaign.
However, all-round cooperation is needed to make that
happen.
We welcome the decisions of some of the countries
cited in the Panel report to set up commissions of inquiry
and other mechanisms to investigate the allegations. Others
should follow that example. The results of these inquiries
are valuable tools for the sanctions Committee’s future
work. We hope the Committee will be able to use the
information in its dialogue with the States concerned.
The draft resolution covers most of the
recommendations relating to arms, diamonds, financial
assets, travel restrictions, et cetera. The recommendations
are far-reaching and bold, we know. We have worked out
a draft resolution which goes far enough, within the bounds
of practicability. It is our view that since we now know the
reasons, modalities and mechanism behind the large-scale
flouting of the measures imposed against UNITA, we
should be able to act to stop it. Political will to do so can
overcome many of the impediments that might stand in the
way. The role of diamonds in this continuing war is clearly
known to us today. All concerned, including the industry
and the Government of Angola, should do their part in
putting in place appropriate mechanisms to observe the
sanctions measures. The same holds for the other areas
covered in the draft resolution. We would urge all parties
concerned to extend cooperation for the development of
more effective mechanisms to ensure observance of the
measures imposed.
We are encouraged by the positive response to the
recommendations by the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) countries. We support their resolve to
shoulder their responsibility. It remains for the international
community to support and assist them in their endeavour to
take all steps in containing the situation in Angola in
accordance with all existing Council resolutions in this
regard.
Before concluding, I would like to touch upon the
humanitarian situation in Angola, essentially a product of
the protracted war which has exacerbated the already
precarious humanitarian situation. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s observations in his latest report on the
situation in Angola and agree that the efforts of the
Government of Angola in providing basic social and
economic services to the people should be supported.
In closing, we hope that the draft resolution that we
adopt today will go a long way towards ensuring that the
sanctions are respected and that their purpose is served:
achieving the greater goal of peace and stability in
Angola.
The President: I thank the representative of
Bangladesh for his very kind words addressed to the
Canadian delegation.
Mr. Yel’chenko (Ukraine): Like my colleagues who
spoke before me, I would also like to welcome the
participation of the Minister for External Relations of
Angola, Mr. João Bernardo de Miranda, in this very
important meeting of the Security Council.
The distinctive character of this meeting is certainly
predetermined by the content of the draft resolution
before the Council. Ukraine has been consistent in its
position that decreasing UNITA’s ability to wage war by
strengthening the effectiveness of the measures imposed
by the Security Council against it is a fundamental
prerequisite to restoring peace in Angola. The report by
the Panel of Experts on the violation of Security Council
sanctions against UNITA, presented to the Council a
month ago, has in itself contributed tremendously to a
more serious and responsible attitude to those measures.
The decision that the Council is about to adopt will
produce a much more far-reaching effect.
The direction of this draft resolution is manifold. Its
main purpose consists in improving the implementation of
the existing measures imposed against UNITA. Certainly,
we can differentiate between groups of countries bearing
special responsibility for specific areas, which, for
example, could include Angola’s neighboring countries,
or countries involved in arms manufacture or marketing,
or States closely involved with the diamond industry, as
well as others. It is indeed important that the Council is
attempting to make very distinct recommendations to
those States. At the same time, if we bring together all
those different groups, we will undoubtedly wind up
getting what is called the international community.
3
Security Council 4129th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
Therefore, it is incumbent on all of us to take an
action-oriented approach towards those recommendations.
Furthermore, by taking a decision on the establishment
of a monitoring mechanism to collect information and
investigate allegations of violations of the measures against
UNITA, the Council is making a bold step towards
strengthening its own capacities in relation to this particular
sanctions regime, as well as to its overall sanctions policy.
It is from this standpoint that my delegation attaches
particular importance to the close connection between the
monitoring mechanism and the sanctions Committee on
Angola. It is also from this perspective that we
acknowledge a correlative character between this meeting
and important events both inside and outside the Council
which took place yesterday.
Another specific element of the draft resolution which
my delegation would like to emphasize is a very clear
forewarning of the inevitable repercussions on States
proved to have violated the measures imposed against
UNITA. The relevant provisions of the draft resolution to
that effect provide strong evidence of the Council’s
determination to end the culture of impunity with regard to
this sanctions regime.
I would like to conclude by reiterating my delegation’s
appreciation and strong support for the efforts of
Ambassador Robert Fowler aimed at improving the
effectiveness of the sanctions against UNITA.
The President: I thank the representative of Ukraine
for the kind remarks he addressed to the Canadian
delegation.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Foreign Minister of Canada.
At the outset, I join others around this table who have
welcomed the Minister for External Relations of Angola. I
think it is vital that he be with us as we discuss an issue so
crucial to his country. We appreciate his taking the time
and making the effort to join us in this debate.
Tomorrow, we will be considering the role and
responsibility of the Security Council in protecting civilians
in armed conflict. Today we have the opportunity to take
resolute Council action where the need could not be more
acute. The endless and utterly senseless civil conflict in
Angola has only one enduring certainty: civilians
desperately need protection. Previous speakers have made
plain the dimensions of the threats faced by ordinary
Angolans. Angola is a place where more than a million
souls have perished in the violence; where a complete
humanitarian collapse looms never very far, with people
barely surviving from day to day; where for rural dwellers
it is literally too dangerous to set foot out of the house for
fear of being blown away by a landmine; where children
are in greater peril than anywhere else on earth; where
one in three people have been uprooted from their homes;
and where, quite simply, no one has escaped undamaged
by war in one way or another.
Angola is a very rich land that is very poor in
human security. Indeed, it is ironic and tragic that its very
riches — mineral and petroleum wealth — have been so
cruelly exploited to increase rather than diminish the
suffering of the Angolan people. The renewed violence
that has thwarted the prospects for peace might have been
impossible if UNITA had not been able to misdirect
earnings from those resources into the pursuit of violence.
To its considerable credit, the United Nations has
been engaged from the outset in efforts to resolve the
Angolan war and to establish peace. Thousands of Blue
Berets, civilian and military, have been sent there for that
cause, some paying with their lives; millions of dollars
have been spent in humanitarian assistance and
reconstruction efforts; countless negotiators have worked
for days, weeks and months to obtain commitments by
the parties to stop the fighting for good. However, there
has been little return on this enormous investment.
Lasting peace remains elusive. Yet, until peace prevails,
there is no alternative but to persevere.
Yesterday, the Council agreed to improve the use of
sanctions as an instrument to pursue peace and advance
human security. Today, we can translate that general
commitment into specific action for Angola. We can give
real meaning to the sanctions regime against UNITA as
a way forward. Denying UNITA the means to wage war
would help promote peace. To be sure, that was the
objective when measures to that end were adopted several
years ago. But it is no secret that non-adherence to the
relevant Council decisions, deliberate or otherwise, has
been the rule rather than the exception.
The Security Council took an unprecedented step to
reverse this trend a year ago when it approved the
creation of an independent Panel of Experts to collect
specific information on compliance and non-compliance
with the provisions of the sanctions regime, and to
provide the Council with recommendations on how to
make the sanctions work. The Panel, working
4
Security Council 4129th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
independently of the sanctions Committee and holding itself
to the most stringent of evidentiary standards, has produced
a comprehensive, well-supported and practical report for
which it deserves the Council’s gratitude.
Along with the Panel, the Chairman of the sanctions
Committee, Ambassador Fowler, and his very able staff
also merit our appreciation — which many members have
expressed — for the single-minded determination and
vision with which this challenging initiative was pursued
and completed.
They have done their work, and now the Security
Council must do its work. The draft resolution before the
Council would operationalize many of the Panel’s
recommendations through specific action aimed at stopping
the illicit trade in diamonds, petroleum and arms, while
reinforcing financial and other restrictions on rebel leaders.
Canada will certainly do its part to ensure that these
measures are followed through. We will provide $100,000
to assist the independent monitoring mechanism provided
for in the draft resolution to prepare its report on whether
to impose additional sanctions on parties found to be in
violation of the Angola sanctions.
As many speakers have properly pointed out,
neighbouring countries have a greater responsibility in
implementing sanctions regimes. However, that is not a
burden they can or should be expected to shoulder alone.
To that end, we are ready to give technical and financial
assistance to countries of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) to improve the
effectiveness of their efforts.
Finally, Canada is prepared to sponsor the meeting of
experts on the diamond trade called for in the draft
resolution. This would help devise a system of controls that
would allow for increased transparency and accountability
in the flow of diamonds from the source to the world’s
diamond bourses.
As elsewhere, these new measures will work only if
the sanctions regime itself is linked to a wider process of
negotiation. To that end, we call upon both parties, UNITA
and the Angolan Government, to demonstrate leadership
and to negotiate and fully implement an agreement on the
basis of the Lusaka accord.
After 30 years of civil conflict, the people of Angola
deserve no less than lasting peace and stability. It is to be
hoped that the work of the Angola sanctions Committee
will contribute to reaching that goal. This ground-breaking
effort has, I believe, further and wider application for the
Council’s activities and its efforts to promote human
security.
The Panel’s work underscores the complexity of
imposing and enforcing targeted sanctions. It nevertheless
proposes practical ways of doing so. Without question,
these will require the commitment of considerable will
and resources. Without doubt, there is resistance in some
quarters to making them work. However, if successful,
these measures could serve as a template for focused
action against belligerents in other conflict situations.
The Panel’s efforts have also highlighted the reality
and the impact of the new war economies — the nexus of
parties to armed violence, the exploitation of people and
resources and the commercial interests that profit from
them. In a growing number of conflict situations,
economic agendas coexist with political and military goals
in the perpetuation of violence and the victimization of
people. This highlights the large and growing importance
of non-State actors in conflicts, and as a result
emphasizes the need for the Council and Governments to
come to grips with this reality and to respond effectively.
Addressing the implications of the new war economies for
peace and security merits further reflection and will
involve the development of creative responses by the
Council.
Finally, the Panel’s findings underline that, while the
Council’s decisions reflect the will of the international
community, their implementation depends on the action
of individual Members. In applying targeted sanctions —
financial or arms embargoes, for example — this means
sharing know-how, experience and intelligence in dealing
with other threats, such as money-laundering and the drug
trade, where tactics for confronting them may be similar.
For some countries, Canada included, it may also mean
examining existing legislation and legal tools to determine
whether they could be adapted to better influence the
negative behaviour of actors operating in their or other
jurisdictions.
The Angolan war is a direct and devastating threat
to the security of the Angolan population. The Council is
right to remain involved. The work of the Angola
sanctions Committee and the Council’s commitment today
will, we hope, bring a resolution of this conflict much
closer. In applying the broader lessons of these efforts, it
may also help the Council to protect not just Angolans,
5
Security Council 4129th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
but civilians victimized by armed conflicts wherever they
may occur.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The next speaker is the Minister for External Relations
of Angola, His Excellency Mr. João Bernardo de Miranda,
on whom I now call.
Mr. Miranda (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese; English
text furnished by the delegation): At a time when my
country is going through a difficult period, I am pleased
once again to address the members of the Council. I should
like to begin by congratulating the President this month,
Ambassador Robert Fowler, for the wise and able manner
in which he is conducting the proceedings of the Council.
My special greetings are also extended to the Foreign
Minister of Canada, Mr. Lloyd Axworthy, who is presiding
over today’s meeting on Angola. This fact is an indication
of the commitment and solidarity of the Government of
Canada with the Government of Angola in its efforts to
restore peace.
Seven years ago, when the Council for the first time
imposed sanctions against UNITA rebels in resolution 864
(1993) and in other subsequent resolutions — adopted,
respectively, in 1997 and 1998 — we believed that the
political authority and the means at the disposal of the
Security Council would ensure strict compliance with these
measures by all States.
However, this did not happen. The Security Council
and the United Nations in general were unable to stop the
serious and systematic violation of the sanctions. While it
would be fair to attribute this fact largely to the lack of an
effective mechanism to monitor the sanctions, nevertheless
it was also due to the bad faith of the one person who is
mainly responsible for terrorism in Angola, Mr. Savimbi;
some members of the international community; and
transnational organized crime linked to trafficking in
diamonds and weapons, which finds Angola’s ongoing
crisis to be fertile ground for increasing its profits.
It is no secret to anyone that despite Security Council
resolutions, certain States and individuals continue to
provide all kinds of support to Mr. Savimbi, thus
challenging the authority of the Council. We do not believe
that anything can justify the support provided to a man who
has turned against the Angolan constitutional order, as is
the case of Mr. Jonas Savimbi. In 1992 he rejected with
violence the electoral results, and he is still attempting
obstinately to oust by force a democratically elected
regime. As a result, the Angolan people are being plunged
into misery and deprivation.
We find it difficult to understand the reason why,
despite hard evidence that the sanctions were being
violated, the United Nations has only very recently
decided to investigate the extent of these violations and
the identity of the main perpetrators.
Although the investigation came rather late, it goes
without saying that it does set a precedent in United
Nations history. Its findings and recommendations have
received overwhelming support from the international
community, thus dispelling any doubts as to the
objectivity and transparency of the report presented to the
Council. The fact that the draft resolution contains more
than 80 per cent of the recommendations in the report is
indeed noteworthy.
It is now incumbent upon the Security Council to
assume its responsibilities, to make use of its authority
and to justify the faith placed in it by the States Members
of the United Nations. My Government considers it
imperative that the Council demonstrate a sense of
realism and justice by activating, whenever necessary, the
appropriate mechanisms provided for in the Charter of the
United Nations to ensure that all States unconditionally
abide by its resolutions, particularly resolutions 864
(1993), 1127 (1997) and 1173 (1998).
The draft resolution we will be adopting today
provides a basis for all States to demonstrate their
adherence to the sanctions regime against UNITA. We
want to believe that good sense will prevail and that all
Governments will cooperate with the sanctions Committee
and the United Nations in general, with a view to
preventing Savimbi and his group from obtaining access
to any external support, whether it be political,
diplomatic, military, material or financial.
This action must include prohibition of the use of
the territory of any State to carry out political activities or
propaganda campaigns and the bringing to justice of all
individuals or companies whose practices are in conflict
with Security Council resolutions on Angola.
In this context, we would like here and now to
appeal to regional organizations such as the Organization
of African Unity (OAU), of which my country is a
member, to use their good sense and lend unequivocal
support, as the Southern African Development
6
Security Council 4129th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
Community did through its foreign ministers, to the report
which has been submitted by the sanctions Committee on
Angola, including its recommendations. We would also like
to call on the OAU to make the report a reference
document for all approaches to the prevention, management
and resolution of conflicts.
At its last summit, in Algiers, the OAU declared the
year 2000 to be the year in which all conflict in Africa
should end. To that end, the organization is cooperating
with the mechanisms created by the United Nations to
counter all acts that threaten international security by
politically isolating all those who directly or indirectly
encourage and support subversive wars in our continent.
Finally, I would like to reiterate my Government’s full
support for and recognition of Ambassador Robert Fowler
as Chairman of the sanctions Committee, and I would like
to appeal to members of the Council, to the Secretariat of
the United nations and to the entire international community
to continue to provide all necessary collaboration for the
successful completion of its tasks.
The President: I thank the Minister for External
Relations of Angola for the kind words he addressed to the
Canadian delegation.
The next speaker on my list is the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso, Mr. Youssouf Ouédraogo.
I welcome him, and I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Ouédraogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
During this month of April 2000, Canada is presiding over
the Security Council. You, Mr. Minister, have taken the
opportunity to give the international community a month
devoted to the subject of human security. The end of April
will find you in Accra, Ghana, for the conference on
children affected by war. This programme eloquently
reflects your concern, Sir, and that of Canada, to promote
human security.
Burkina Faso is gratified by your presence, Sir, and by
your commitment, and we welcome the good relations
between our two countries. We would also like to reaffirm
that we hold all the States members of the Security Council
and their representatives in high esteem.
I pay tribute to Ambassador Fowler, who is presiding
over the Security Council this month. Allow me also to pay
tribute to Ambassador Chowdhury of Bangladesh for the
effective and professional way in which he presided over
the Council during the month of March.
Today, the Security Council is continuing its
consideration of the situation in Angola. I should like to
take this opportunity to welcome the presence here today
of the Minister for External Relations of Angola.
The agony and torment of the Angolan people has
lasted for more than 25 years. From the struggle for
decolonization and the intrigues of the cold war to the
current struggle for power, there has been no respite for
our Angolan brothers. They have experienced heroism,
extreme weariness and every form of suffering and pain,
both physical and mental.
Given these conditions, the Security Council’s
involvement in the search for peace in Angola is urgently
required. The creation of a Panel of Experts entrusted
with the task of examining the violation of sanctions
imposed by the Security Council against UNITA is part
of that requirement.
The Government of Burkina Faso thus understands
the situation and offers its support. That is why our
current aim is not to demolish or downgrade the report,
but merely to highlight its weaknesses and shortcomings
in order to better serve the cause of peace through a
rigorous, impartial, transparent, reliable, fair and just
investigation.
In our statement to the Security Council on 15
March 2000, we made our position clear. We do not,
therefore, intend today to reopen the debate on the report
of the Panel of Experts; rather, we wish to reaffirm that
Burkina Faso, in support of the measures decided on by
the Security Council against UNITA, repudiates and
rejects the conclusions in the report of the Panel of
Experts that named the President of Burkina Faso as well
as those implicating Burkina Faso in violations of the
sanctions imposed against UNITA.
Furthermore, we intend to bring before the members
of the Council and the international community the fact
that, in a spirit of straightforward cooperation with the
United Nations on this specific matter, my Government
decided to set up, on 22 March 2000, a inter-ministerial
committee entrusted with the task of following up the
implementation of sanctions against UNITA. The
committee is composed of representatives from the
Departments of Foreign Affairs, Defence, Territorial
7
Security Council 4129th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
Administration, Security, Economic and Financial Affairs,
Trade, Transport and Tourism, Justice and Communication.
The committee’s mission is clear: it must see to the
strict implementation of the sanctions, and in particular
ensure that all necessary measures are taken by the
ministerial departments concerned, and it must carry out a
periodic evaluation of the implementation of the measures
adopted.
Within the framework of its mandate and its mission,
that committee will remain in contact with the United
Nations sanctions Committee. It will also be responsible for
carrying out investigations at the national level to determine
the validity of the evidence provided by the sanctions
Committee. If necessary, it will submit reports to the
Government of Burkina Faso and to the United Nations
sanctions Committee.
My Government has also issued instructions to the
security service to take appropriate measures to strengthen
existing provisions, particularly those prohibiting the entry
into the territory of Burkina Faso of any person targeted by
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council relating to
sanctions against UNITA. The committee has already begun
work and has prepared a memorandum that will be
presented to the Angola sanctions Committee tomorrow.
All of these decisions reflect the determination of the
Government of Burkina Faso to demonstrate once again its
firm resolve to support unreservedly the efforts being made
by the Organization of African Unity, the United Nations
and the international community to effectively implement
the Lusaka Protocol and the relevant Security Council
resolutions on Angola.
The Council will shortly adopt a draft resolution on
the subject under consideration. My delegation is in favour
of the Council’s proposal to create a monitoring body to
pursue investigations and to look into allegations of
sanctions busting in Angola, provided, of course, that the
Panel of Experts works in an atmosphere of transparency
and fairness. Given those conditions, my country would be
prepared to cooperate with that body, because the
Government of Burkina Faso remains open to any honest,
transparent and objective initiative aimed at restoring peace
in Angola.
The way to a solution is not always clear, neither to
the protagonists nor to the observers. Allow me to say,
humbly but firmly, without indulging in hypocrisy or
subterfuge, that it is the conviction of the Government of
Burkina Faso today, as in the past, that only a political
solution can bring about a durable peace in Angola. The
Government of Burkina Faso invites the Security Council
to keep this reality constantly in mind and reaffirms its
full support to the Council in this connection.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Portugal. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Let me again salute your
presence here today, Mr. President — a testimony to the
importance your country attaches to the application and
enforcement of sanctions regimes not only in Angola, but
around the world.
I should like to recognize, too, the presence among
us of the Minister of External Relations of Angola.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union —
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia —
and the associated countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey
align themselves with this statement.
The European Union welcomes the convening of this
meeting immediately following the meeting we held here
yesterday to establish a working group of the Security
Council on sanctions. Indeed, it is most appropriate that
this Council is now taking further decisive action on the
question of sanctions against UNITA following the report
of the Panel of Experts from the sanctions Committee and
the efforts of its Chairman, Ambassador Bob Fowler.
The decision of this Council, with the concurrence
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
the late Maître Beye, to impose sanctions on UNITA has
been a major part of the policy of the international
community to compel Mr. Jonas Savimbi and his
followers to embark on the path of peace and to abide by
their own commitments, as expressed in the Lusaka
Protocol. Resolutions 864 (1993), 1127 (1997) and 1173
(1998) were thus adopted. Sanctions have had a relevant
impact on the situation on the ground, as they have
prevented UNITA’s leaders from travelling abroad freely
and made the procurement of weapons and supplies more
difficult and expensive.
However, and as the report of the Panel of Experts
makes clear in its findings, there have been a number of
8
Security Council 4129th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
significant violations of the sanctions regimes imposed on
UNITA. These violations cannot be accepted and must stop.
We must ensure the full and effective implementation of
the sanctions regimes to prevent UNITA from pursuing the
military option. Indeed, the European Union welcomes fully
the provisions of the draft resolution to be adopted today by
this Council. The present resolution allows for the work
done by the Panel of Experts established pursuant to
resolution 1237 (1999) to be followed up by a monitoring
mechanism. We are looking forward to its findings. We
welcome the Council’s expressed intention to review the
situation with regard to violations of sanctions not later than
18 November 2000.
The European Union remains deeply committed to a
peaceful and political solution to the conflict in Angola and
will continue to make every effort to achieve that objective.
The suffering of the Angolan people after decades of war
and the continued humanitarian disaster that the country is
facing must be ended as soon as possible. The
transformation of UNITA into a genuine political party and
its acceptance of the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol
would go a long way towards ensuring this objective. There
can be only one Administration in Angola and that is the
Government of National Unity and National Reconciliation.
There can be only one army in Angola and that is the
national army.
For its part, the Government of Angola must continue
to make every effort to create the necessary conditions for
a smooth extension of the state administration to the areas
previously controlled by UNITA, in respect for the
principles of democracy, good governance, human rights
and human dignity. The European Union believes that the
United Nations has an important role to play in assisting the
Angolan Government to attain these goals. In this regard,
it is most fitting that this Council adopted just last week a
resolution endorsing the decision of the Secretary-General
to extend the mandate of the United Nations Office in
Angola (UNOA) for a further six months. We support the
work of UNOA in Angola in accordance with resolutions
1268 (1999) and 1294 (2000). Indeed, the European Union
remains ready to consider how to assist the Government of
Angola in facing the challenges of rebuilding and
reconstructing the country within a democratic environment.
Particular attention will continue to be given to
humanitarian assistance in order to alleviate the suffering of
the Angolan population affected by the conflict.
The adoption of the draft resolution before us today
will be a concrete sign of the international community’s
commitment to finding peace in Angola. This is an
endeavour that demands much from a number of countries
and requires the cooperation of all involved. The
European Union urges all Member States to ensure
thorough and consistent application of all the provisions
of the sanctions against UNITA. The European Union is
committed to rigorous enforcement of the sanctions. On
our part, we reaffirm our determination to continue
supporting international efforts to tighten United Nations
sanctions against UNITA. The European Union and its
member States have already instituted a number of
measures specifically designed to improve the
enforcement of the sanctions regimes. In this regard, the
European Union also stands ready to examine what
assistance it might provide to the Southern African
Development Community countries in their efforts to
implement the sanctions regimes.
It is important that decisions of this Council be
respected and be seen to be respected. We must therefore
be creative in finding methods and resources to follow up
and improve the implementation of the sanctions. The
efforts of both the Committee on sanctions against
UNITA and the Panel of Experts have given us a
welcome opportunity to do just that.
The European Union attaches great importance to the
social and economic development of the whole southern
African subregion. For this to be a reality, the peace and
stability of Angola are vital components and we must
continue to strive to attain this elusive goal.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Belgium. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Adam (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for having agreed to preside over this
important meeting of the Security Council and I
congratulate Canada for the eminent role it is playing and
in particular Ambassador Fowler for the delicate task he
is discharging with honour. I also welcome most
particularly the presence among us of the Minister of
External Affairs of Angola. I subscribe fully to the
statement that has just been made by the representative of
Portugal on behalf of the European Union.
Belgium unreservedly supports the aims pursued by
the sanctions Committee and believes that the report of
the Panel of Experts constitutes a significant stage in the
search for solutions that would allow Security Council
sanctions against UNITA to be effectively applied.
9
Security Council 4129th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
The report that was submitted to the Council on 10
March is innovative, and it attests to the will to tackle the
causes of and the real responsibility for the violations of the
sanctions. This is why the international community has the
right to expect that the quality of the report measures up to
the expectations it created and that the recommendations
resulting from it will allow for a genuine improvement in
the effectiveness of the sanctions.
Belgium attaches all the more importance to these
problems since in recent months it itself has engaged in
significant deliberations and consultations aimed at
examining the various actions that can be undertaken to
contribute to peace and stability on the African continent,
in particular in Central Africa. The recent missions to the
region by several members of the Belgian Government are
a concrete illustration of this. Their main purpose was to
encourage all the parties directly involved to implement the
Lusaka agreements and to support the restoration of peace
in the Great Lakes region. All steps aimed at reducing the
suffering of the populations of African countries affected by
wars, such as Angola and Sierra Leone, will therefore
receive Belgium’s firmest support.
It is from this perspective that Belgium took a great
number of measures aimed at ensuring the application of
the sanctions of the Security Council, actions that
unfortunately were not mentioned in the report of the Panel
of Experts that was the subject of the debate in the Security
Council on 15 March. I made this point on that occasion,
and I would appreciate it if the Council would take note of
those measures.
First of all, I want to stress that Belgium cooperated
from the beginning, and without reservation, with the
sanctions Committee and with the Panel of Experts.
An inter-ministerial working group, referred to as the
task force, was set up, and it includes all the ministries and
Belgian services concerned. The group has met seven times
since the beginning of the year and has studied and adopted
several measures to improve control over the origin of
diamonds. This task force led to a reinforcement of customs
controls and to the start of judicial inquiries against people
suspected of illegally trafficking in diamonds.
I wish to recall that Belgium is the only European
Union country that has a licensing system for the import
and export of diamonds. Besides the customs controls, a
second, physical inspection of all imports and exports is
carried out by sworn experts. Our country is also
considering the adoption of a law on extraterritoriality for
crimes in the diamonds sector.
The control of the provenance and the origin of
diamonds, which the Panel of Experts took up in
paragraphs 92 and 95 of its report, constitute a key
element of a problem whose complexity cannot be
underestimated. The possibility of identifying with
certainty the origin of a diamond through a physical
examination is for the moment considered by specialists
to be an almost impossible endeavour. The number of
diamonds of small size dealt with each year is in the
hundreds of millions. Moreover, it remains difficult to
distinguish between diamonds coming from different
mining areas that extend beyond borders. Lastly,
determining the origin of a diamond is not enough to
establish when it was extracted from a given deposit;
moreover, that deposit may even have passed from the
control of the Government to that of Savimbi. Belgium
nevertheless remains convinced that effective procedures
intended to control the diamond trade can be developed
and continues actively to encourage research undertaken
in this field. Furthermore, Belgium is the only country to
have detailed statistics in this area that make it possible
to identify trends. These data are at the disposal of all
interested parties.
The Diamond High Council of Antwerp, a body that
represents the private diamond sector, took into account
the recommendations of the Chairman of the sanctions
Committee. It took steps intended to lead to a better
application of the sanctions, inter alia, through the
establishment of a task force on Angola. Together with
Angolan authorities, it has set up a system of issuing
more reliable certificates of origin. At the request of the
Government, it is also engaged in reviewing its
procedures. Let me also mention that another working
group that includes representatives of the Belgian
Government and the Diamond High Council was created
with the mission of drafting a programme of measures to
be taken. This group met for the first time in September
1999.
The Diamond High Council also signed an
agreement with the relevant judicial authorities, by virtue
of which it is committed to centralize and to communicate
all information that comes to its attention having to do
with criminals or criminal activities. A study is being
carried out within the High Council, and preliminary
contacts have been made to examine to what extent a
system of control comparable to that in place for Angola
is also possible for Sierra Leone.
10
Security Council 4129th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
The physical control of the arrival or dispatch of
diamonds is done in Antwerp by sworn experts. Since the
introduction of sanctions against UNITA, no case of
embezzlement has been noted. However, it was judged that
the administrative statute relating to these experts should be
reformed, and currently the competent governmental
authorities and the Diamond High Council are discussing a
new statute. When those deliberations are concluded, the
sanctions Committee will be informed of their results.
Belgian expertise in diamonds is recognized and
long-standing. Belgium will always put this expertise at the
disposal of the international community, inter alia, within
the framework of the conferences of experts on this subject.
An international conference of representatives of all the
diamond centres will be convened in Antwerp in July, in
which Ambassador Fowler will participate.
The report of the Panel of Experts on violations of
Security Council sanctions against UNITA constitutes, in
the eyes of our country, a significant instrument
contributing to the resolution of the problem arising from
the illicit financing of groups that perpetuate wars in which
the first to suffer are civilians.
Belgium reiterates its complete willingness to continue
to work in close collaboration with the sanctions Committee
and with its Chairman, Ambassador Fowler.
The President: I would like to thank the
representative of Belgium for his very detailed presentation.
I am also grateful that the senior representative of the
Diamond High Council could also be with us today.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Bulgaria. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Sotirov (Bulgaria): May I say how pleased we
are to see you, Sir, presiding over this important meeting of
the Security Council. We would also like to welcome the
participation of the Minister for External Relations of
Angola in this debate.
On behalf of the Bulgarian Government, I would like
to welcome the forthcoming adoption of the Security
Council’s draft resolution on Angola. We believe that this
draft resolution will further strengthen the effectiveness of
the sanctions regime against UNITA and will contribute to
putting an end to the bloody civil war in Angola. We are
confident that the role of the Security Council is
instrumental in bringing peace and reconciliation to that
country, as well as more stability to the whole African
continent.
Allow me also, through you, Mr. President, to
congratulate Ambassador Robert Fowler, Chairman of the
sanctions Committee established pursuant to resolution
864 (1993) concerning the situation in Angola, for his
ability to guide the Council towards final agreement on
what appeared to be a complex and multifaceted text by
accommodating a large number of views and proposals.
Bulgaria very much hopes that this balanced and realistic
document will be diligently implemented and will serve
as an efficient tool for improving the implementation of
sanctions and curtailing violations of relevant Security
Council resolutions.
My delegation aligned itself with the statement made
by the representative of Portugal on behalf of the
European Union, and fully subscribes to the positions
expressed therein on the situation in Angola. Therefore,
I will confine my intervention today to some issues of
particular importance to my country.
Let me reiterate that Bulgaria entirely shares the
noble motives and goals that inspired the Council’s
decision to entrust qualitatively new tasks to the Panel of
Experts created by resolution 1237 (1999). The Panel
succeeded in increasing the awareness of United Nations
Member States about the urgent need to curb illegal arms
transfers and other support to UNITA. In fact, today’s
session demonstrates that following the Panel’s report the
international community is stronger and more united in its
will to achieve compliance with the sanctions and to hold
violators accountable.
My Government on several occasions had the
opportunity to express its comments and observations,
particularly on the parts of the Panel’s report pertaining
to Bulgaria. It is worth mentioning that serious doubts
were raised not only by Bulgaria but by a number of
delegations, including Security Council members, about
the working methods and credibility of sources used by
the Panel, as well as its objectivity and ability to
substantiate its findings by concrete evidence. Now I
would like to offer some additional comments to the
views already put forward on this matter.
We are of the opinion that when there are grounds
to suppose that a Member State could be involved in
sanctions violation, all relevant evidence should be made
available to the that Government for consideration and
reply. We are not satisfied by the explanation given to our
11
Security Council 4129th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
written request submitted in this respect that the Panel’s
report is “a self-contained document”. Such an argument
simply does not and cannot suffice, especially when a
country’s good name is, without foundation, unfairly
damaged.
We believe that only an impartial and balanced
approach could contribute to putting an end to the
violations of United Nations sanctions, not against UNITA
only but in a global context as well. It seems that such an
approach has gradually evolved as a result of the recent
deliberations in the Security Council and on the application
of the sanctions against UNITA. The established six-month
period will allow for additional analysis and monitoring of
the implementation of the sanctions and, hopefully, for
more precise conclusions.
Despite its reservations and rejection of the
unsubstantiated accusations against Bulgaria, my
Government has given serious consideration to the Panel’s
report. A governmental commission was promptly
established to investigate all circumstances related to
possible involvement of Bulgarian institutions and
individuals in activities that might constitute violations of
Security Council sanctions against UNITA. A number of
preliminary results of its ongoing investigation have been
made available and duly communicated to the Council
members with a view to facilitating their work.
Having already cooperated in good faith with the
Panel of Experts, Bulgaria is now ready to offer its full
cooperation and support to the future monitoring
mechanism. Needless to say, we shall provide it with all
relevant information available to us in order to facilitate its
work and further clarify the facts related to the conclusions
and recommendations of the former Panel’s report. Bulgaria
is confident that such a transparent and responsible
approach will be duly appreciated and will help consolidate
its reputation as a reliable member of the United Nations
community.
At the same time we very much hope that a number
of lessons learned from the former Panel’s report will be
taken into account in the activities of the new monitoring
mechanism. We expect it to work by combining
transparency with confidentiality and using only trustworthy
and verified information from reliable sources. We also
expect it to pursue its mandate in close cooperation and
consultation with the Governments concerned. Furthermore,
the established procedure should be strictly observed so as
not to allow any irresponsible and untimely “leakage” to the
media.
The composition and activities of the future
monitoring body should also reflect the principles of
objectivity, impartiality and non-selectivity, which we
deem to be essential for the final outcome of its work. It
is our view that none of the countries referred to in the
report should be represented in the new body. Given the
serious reservations shared by various delegations, we
even doubt whether it would be appropriate for experts
who participated in the former Panel to be included into
the new one.
We fully share and support the provisions of the
draft resolution on measures to be taken at the national,
regional and international levels in order to curb illicit
arms supplies to UNITA. However, the tasks we are
facing not only in Angola but in Africa as a whole are
obviously of broader magnitude. Alleged violations of
UNITA sanctions have once again brought up the
challenging issue of illicit arms brokering. In view of its
complexity and global nature, this challenge cannot be
addressed by a single country but should be tackled
comprehensively through the concerted efforts of the
entire international community. In this respect the present
resolution will contribute to strengthening national and
international control over conventional and small arms
and their proliferation to Angola/UNITA and other
African States. We are looking forward to the major input
of the United Nations conference on illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons to be held in 2001.
In concluding, let me assure you, Mr. President, of
my Government’s willingness to continue its cooperation
with the Security Council and its subsidiary bodies on
monitoring sanctions against UNITA and to contribute to
the collective efforts of the international community for
preventing illicit arms trafficking, including through
measures at national, subregional and regional levels.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Mozambique. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and make his statement.
Mr. Dos Santos (Mozambique): Allow me to begin,
Mr. President, by expressing my delegation’s sincere
appreciation and congratulations on your deserved
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of April. The leadership you have already
displayed assures us of success in the deliberations of the
Council.
I would also like to extend our appreciation to your
predecessor, Ambassador Anwarul Chowdury of
12
Security Council 4129th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
Bangladesh, for the excellent manner in which he
conducted the affairs of the Council last month.
It is only fitting that you should be chairing this
particular Council meeting. The contributions of your
Permanent Representative to the question of Angola have
been remarkable, particularly in his capacity as the
Chairman of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 864 (1993). In that capacity on
March 10 he presented the unprecedented report of the
Panel of Experts on violations of Security Council sanctions
against UNITA. I wish to convey my delegation’s great
appreciation to Ambassador Fowler and to the Panel of
Experts for outstanding service on behalf of the Security
Council.
The report is an important and valuable instrument that
will help the Security Council and the international
community to act credibly and forcefully against the
UNITA of Jonas Savimbi as well as against his supporters.
On the basis of information and evidence available to it, the
Panel of Experts clearly identifies who is violating
sanctions against UNITA, and how, and who is contributing
to prolonging the suffering of the people of Angola. The
Panel also offers suggestions on measures to be taken in
order to curtail the situation.
The 39 recommendations contained in the report
represent a well-thought-out strategy to make Security
Council sanctions more effective, thus forcing UNITA to
abide by the commitments it undertook when it signed the
Lusaka Protocol in 1994. The recommendations provide
also for measures against those supporting UNITA in
flagrant violation of Security Council sanctions. Because we
believe in the merit of those recommendations, we wish to
take this opportunity to express our support to all
recommendations contained in the report of the Panel of
Experts.
We applaud all members of the Council for their
decision to establish the Panel of Experts with such a
remarkable mandate. Now that the result of the Panel’s
work is before them, it is the responsibility of Council
members to see to it that the exercise is worthwhile and to
take the next step.
The report clearly states, inter alia, that in order to
add credibility and seriousness to the sanctions against
UNITA appropriate measures must be taken against those
who are violating them. The report emphasizes the need for
stricter control on the flow of illicit arms and petroleum
products to UNITA-controlled areas. It also recommends
that traders and other individuals or companies found to
be breaking sanctions relating to UNITA-held diamond
should lose their registration, be placed on an industry
blacklist and be barred from any involvement in the
diamond industry. Diamonds should bring prosperity, not
impose continued suffering on the Angolan people.
Sanctions violators are increasing the ability of UNITA to
wage war and are consequently prolonging the suffering
of our brothers and sisters in Angola and the destruction
of that country’s infrastructure and resources.
It is reported that as a result of the work of the
Panel of Experts and the release of the report on sanctions
against UNITA, it has become harder for Savimbi to sell
diamonds and buy weapons. That positive development
shows the real impact of sanctions when they are strictly
applied.
We are encouraged by the information that several
States are establishing, at the national level, commissions
and other mechanisms to investigate allegations of
sanctions violations. We hope that they will work
expeditiously and produce results that will be made
known to the international community. Any delay in that
process could mean that another life is lost in Angola.
A number of paragraphs of the report make
reference to the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) and to the important role that SADC
countries should play in implementing measures to
strengthen sanctions against UNITA. Those measures are
related to inspecting and monitoring petroleum products
supplies and the introduction of mobile radar systems
with the objective of detecting illegal flight activity,
among other measures. We in SADC support all measures
aimed at strengthening the sanctions regime against
UNITA and those which will bring peace and stability to
Angola, which is a member of our regional organization.
While SADC countries will study existing capacities
within the region, it is clear that to implement the
measures mentioned in the report they will need
substantial technical and financial support from the
international community so that they are not found
wanting. We would therefore appeal to those in a position
to do so to support SADC countries in carrying out this
task. We welcome pledges of support from members of
the Council, including your own Government’s pledge,
Mr. President.
13
Security Council 4129th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
Humanitarian assistance is also required for the
Angolan populations that have fallen victim to this
senseless war imposed by Jonas Savimbi.
We believe that the Council’s credibility is at stake,
for it has taken a bold decision which should be realized —
a decision that represents a real shift in the way the Council
enforces its decisions and conducts its business. There is a
real opportunity for the Council to make significant
progress and to reassert its authority as a guarantor of
international peace and security. We believe that a
resolution commensurate with the task at hand would do
justice to the excellent work done by Ambassador Fowler
and the Panel of Experts.
We believe that this is the least that the Council can
do for the Angolan people, whose Government has shown
the necessary commitment, flexibility, accommodation and
desire for peace in our sister country. The presence here of
His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Relations of
Angola is yet another demonstration of his Government’s
commitment to peace in Angola.
The President: I thank the representative of
Mozambique for his very kind words.
The next speaker is the representative of New Zealand.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Powles (New Zealand): Let me congratulate you,
Mr. President, on bringing this important matter to the
Council in this open format. I would like also to
acknowledge the significance of the presence here today of
the Foreign Minister of Angola.
One of the key findings of the study entitled “The
Sanctions Decade”, which was launched yesterday morning
by the International Peace Academy, is that the most
important element in the success of sanctions is the degree
to which they are enforced. My Government believes that
Ambassador Fowler, by his leadership and his energetic
chairing of the Angola sanctions Committee, and the Panel
of Experts, which has reported specifically on violations of
the Angola sanctions regime, have done the people of
Angola and the United Nations a tremendous service.
We cannot forget that an estimated 1 million people
have died in the fighting in Angola over the past 25 years.
That is despite successive United Nations peacekeeping and
mine-clearance operations to which my own country
contributed throughout much of the last decade. Nor can we
forget the callous shooting down of two United Nations
aircraft, in December 1998 and in January 1999; the
perpetrators of those acts have still to be brought to
justice.
The Panel’s report casts some sunlight on the
subterranean world of sanctions-busting in diamonds,
arms and military equipment and other means of support
for UNITA’s continued war against the legitimate
Government of Angola. That war continues to take the
lives of 200 persons each day. UNITA must be deprived
of the means to wage war. It is essential that all Member
States respect their obligation to comply fully with the
measures imposed against UNITA contained in
resolutions 864 (1993), 1127 (1997) and 1173 (1998).
The Panel’s report points the way towards the more
effective use of the sanctions tool by the Council in the
future. For sanctions to remain credible, the Council must
act when violations are brought to its attention, as they
have been in the case of Angola. We therefore strongly
endorse positive action on today’s draft resolution, which
contains a comprehensive range of measures to ensure the
cessation of the violations identified in the report of the
Panel of Experts.
The President: I thank the representative of New
Zealand for the kind words he addressed to my
delegation.
The next speaker is the representative of the United
Republic of Tanzania. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania):
My delegation welcomes with pleasure this opportunity to
address the Security Council. It is a greater pleasure to do
so under the Canadian presidency — especially under
your own leadership, Sir — when addressing a subject in
which Canada, under the chairmanship of Ambassador
Robert Fowler, has invested so much. We are particularly
honoured that you, Minister Axworthy, have taken time
from your other ministerial functions to chair these
discussions. The presence of a delegation from the
Canadian House of Commons is clear proof of your
Government’s commitment to the establishment of a
sanctions regime which not only works but also produces
the intended results.
We want to commend the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 864 (1993)
concerning the situation in Angola, and the Panel of
14
Security Council 4129th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
Experts on violations of Security Council sanctions against
UNITA established by Council resolution 1237 (1999),
chaired by Ambassador Möllander, for the report on
violations of Security Council sanctions against UNITA.
We do not and must not underestimate the boldness
required to produce such a compelling report.
It has been noted that the recent record of sanctions is
an account of successes and failures. The Panel of Experts’
report on UNITA sanctions is clear proof that these
sanctions have been allowed to fall into the latter category.
Indeed, the state of failure appears so pervasive and
pertinent that it is only legitimate to undertake a
comprehensive re-examination of the circumstances and
procedures regarding the application of Security Council-
mandated sanctions. In this regard, we must welcome the
Council’s decision yesterday to establish, on a temporary
basis, an informal working group of the Council to develop
general recommendations on how to improve the
effectiveness of United Nations sanctions.
We must nonetheless caution that the more effective
use of sanctions by the Council will also depend on how
well the Council deals with the violations put forward by
the Panel of Experts. UNITA sanctions were imposed to
secure specific objectives. They were imposed to counter
not only perceptions of impunity on the part of UNITA
leadership, but also as a tool to end the suffering of the
people of Angola. If those who could be proved to have
aided and abetted Mr. Savimbi do not suffer any
consequences, the legitimacy of sanctions as an effective
tool available to the Council will be severely undermined.
There is no denying that the people of Angola have
suffered enormously. In spite of the enormity of their pain,
it might not be too late to reassess what can now be done
differently to bring their torment to an end. What the report
of the Panel of Experts can achieve in the short term is to
focus our attention on strengthening the framework against
which sanctions on UNITA were imposed.
The Panel of Experts makes useful recommendations,
which, if acted upon promptly, will bring Savimbi’s roof
tumbling down. We should not, however, lose sight of the
fact that the implementation of some of these quite apt
recommendations relies on the capabilities of countries that
are severely constrained in that regard. Our collective
partnership in enhancing their necessary capabilities will
therefore remain critical. At this juncture, I welcome the
assurance of support and assistance to the Southern African
Development Community (SADC), of which we are a
member.
UNITA has taken the Council for a ride for too
long. Reports that it has not been doing so alone are
cause for great concern. We therefore also welcome and
support the establishment of a mechanism which would
seek additional information concerning the serious
allegations in the report. We urge and support stern
measures by the Council against proven violations.
We recognize that others may want to avoid the
political consequences of such an outcome. We also
realize that the report raises serious questions regarding
the conduct of certain political leaders. It is gratifying to
remember, however, that the grave charges against those
who have proclaimed their innocence can be lessened
only through a fair process. In the end, it would be fair to
let the chips fall where they may. Those who are culpable
must bear the responsibility.
We have welcomed the report of the Panel of
Experts. Above all, we have welcomed it because it
provides us with the added benefit of increasing our
knowledge base and experience in developing a more
systematic approach for dealing with sanctions violations.
We therefore also welcome the Canadian proposal to
convene a conference of experts to develop a regime to
govern the use of sanctions. It is our hope that it will be
inclusive of a broad range of perspectives.
Mr. President, you have succinctly observed that
“Sanctions are economic statecraft in action. When
purposefully used and implemented to prevent or
stop aggression, violence and abuse, this is statecraft
in the service of people.” (S/PV.4128)
Regrettably, this statecraft has so far failed the
people of Angola.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United Republic of Tanzania for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Gabon. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and
to make his statement.
Mr. Dangue Réwaka (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to express my satisfaction and
that of the delegation of Gabon at seeing you, Sir, preside
over this meeting of the Security Council on Angola, a
country that has suffered through almost 30 years of war.
15
Security Council 4129th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
Your presence here at this Council meeting attests to the
importance that you and your country, Canada, attach to the
restoration of peace and security in Angola. I should like
also to thank your predecessor, Mr. Anwarul Karim
Chowdhury, the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh,
for his excellent work as President last month.
The Gabonese authorities have long been greatly
concerned over the conflict situation in the sister Republic
of Angola. In 1988 and 1989, President Omar Bongo
himself deployed every effort in support of peace and
national reconciliation in Angola. At that time, he and his
peers — Mr. Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe, Mr. Kenneth
Kaunda of Zambia, Mr. Dos Santos of Angola, Mr. Sassou
Nguesso of Congo, the late Mr. Mobutu of the former
Zaire, Mr. Chissano of Mozambique and Mr. Pinto da
Costa of Sao Tome and Principe — were seeking together
a solution to the Angolan conflict.
In that spirit, and in seeking implementation of the
Bicesse peace Accords, the Lusaka Protocol and the
relevant Security Council resolutions, the President of the
Republic of Angola, Mr. José Eduardo dos Santos, and Mr.
Jonas Savimbi met on 10 August 1995 in Franceville and
then on 1 March 1996 in Libreville. Those two meetings
were organized following agreement with the Angolan
authorities and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General at the time, the late Maître Alioune Blondin Beye.
May his soul rest in peace.
Following UNITA’s refusal to comply with the
commitments entered into, including those in the Lusaka
Protocol, the Gabonese and Angolan authorities agreed to
work together closely to encourage UNITA to comply with
its obligations under all relevant agreements.
I should also like to recall that, within the context of
the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa, in 1993 a non-
aggression pact was signed among countries of the
subregion. Under the terms of that pact, and as a matter of
principle, Gabon does not allow or encourage any
destabilizing actions against other States, least of all from
its own territory.
It is thus clear that Gabon has always supported, and
will continue to support, the efforts of the Government of
Angola to restore a lasting peace there.
The report of the Panel of Experts of 10 March 2000,
contained in document S/2000/203, refers to sanctions
violations in the area of weapons, military equipment,
diamonds, UNITA’s material and financial assets and
petroleum and petroleum products, as well as travel and
representation abroad by UNITA members.
According to the Panel of Experts, Gabon delivered
150,000 litres of fuel to UNITA, aircraft coming from
UNITA-controlled areas often refuelled in Libreville
before returning to Eastern Europe, and UNITA had
“unofficial” representation in Gabon, headed by a certain
Francisco Camalata who was active on UNITA’s behalf
but kept a low profile.
Following the publication of the report of the Panel
of Experts on 15 March 2000, upon instructions from my
Government, I sent a letter to the President of the
Security Council and the Chairman of the sanctions
Committee established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 864 (1993). In that letter, we requested
information about, for example, the precise dates and the
type and registration of the aircraft in question. We also
inquired by what means — by air or by sea — the
150,000 litres of fuel were supposedly delivered to
UNITA, given that the State of Gabon does not have such
transport facilities available to it.
It is regrettable that the Panel of Experts, which
supposedly had information about the accusations made
against us — the delivery of 150,000 litres of fuel to
UNITA, the refuelling of aircraft coming from UNITA-
controlled areas and the hosting in Gabon of an unofficial
UNITA representative — not only failed to provide any
tangible evidence, but did not even reply to our letter.
It is also regrettable that the Panel of Experts did not
take the trouble to visit Gabon. According to paragraph
6 (a) of resolution 1237 (1999), which was adopted by
the Security Council under the Gabonese presidency, the
mandate of the Panel of Experts is
“To collect information and investigate reports,
including through visits to the countries concerned,
relating to the violation of the measures imposed
against UNITA”.
Is it sufficient for the Security Council or its
committees simply to make a statement of fact without
providing any evidence or for the parties accused to be
held responsible for the actions alleged? Were such a
practice to continue, would it not risk destroying the
credibility and authority of this important United Nations
body? Does not this represent a lack of transparency?
16
Security Council 4129th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
Gabon has nothing to be ashamed of. Nevertheless, we
carried out initial investigations, working with the Angolan
Embassy in Libreville, in an attempt to locate
Mr. Francisco Camalata. Our initial investigations have not
been conclusive, but we shall continue to pursue them. My
Government has sent the Council a detailed report to this
effect. Pursuant to paragraph 6 (a) of resolution
1237 (1999), we would like to be able to count on the
cooperation of the Panel of Experts in helping us to identify
those who might be responsible for such actions, in case we
have missed them, so that we can not only punish those
responsible, but prevent any recurrence of such actions.
The President: I thank the representative of Gabon
for the kind words he addressed to my delegation.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Brazil. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): The Security Council is
honoured today to have been presided over by the Foreign
Minister of Canada. Canada is widely recognized within the
Organization for its outstanding actions in favour of peace
and humanitarian causes. Brazil also warmly welcomes the
presence of Mr. João Bernardo de Miranda, the Angolan
Minister for External Relations, during the Council’s
deliberations.
This meeting opens new and promising perspectives
for Angola. We remember that in the closing days of
February 1999, the expiration of the mandate of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola occurred amid a deep
sense of frustration over the fact that the resources applied
by the international community and the people of Angola
in the peacekeeping process were not bearing fruit.
UNITA’s responsibility for the frustration of the peace
process was clear and indisputable. Today, in resuming
consideration of the follow-up to the report of the Panel of
Experts on violations of Security Council sanctions against
UNITA, the circumstances are very different, and hopeful.
The Angolan Government has been able to muster its forces
and break UNITA’s capacity to wage conventional warfare,
and the Security Council and the United Nations have
re-established working links with Luanda.
The adoption on 13 April of Security Council
resolution 1294 (2000) illustrates this improved relationship.
We understand that the Special Adviser of the Secretary-
General for Special Assignments in Africa, Ibrahim
Gambari, an able and talented diplomat, will soon visit
Angola. We are certain his mission will succeed.
This new situation is welcome. Brazil has always
underlined the important role that the United Nations
should play in Angola. The draft resolution about to be
adopted will strengthen the United Nations presence and
again brings hope for peace.
In this, the role of the Canadian Ambassador to the
United Nations has been decisive. His leadership,
determination, genuine belief in United Nations principles
and clear understanding of the difference a determined
action by the Security Council can make allowed for the
elaboration of the comprehensive and innovative draft
resolution now under consideration in the Council. The
report upon which the draft resolution is based, prepared
by the team led by Ambassador Fowler and
Ambassador Anders Möllander, imposes upon us the
challenge of working seriously and effectively to stop
disrespect for the decisions of this Council.
It is a milestone in the effort to strengthen the ability
of the United Nations to solve regional conflicts and
promote peace, development and democracy. The Fowler
report is a model of such a role, as recognized by the
majority of the Members of our Organization. In this
regard, Brazil would like to stress the decision of the
recent Ministerial Conference of the Non-Aligned
Movement, held in Cartagena, which urges the Security
Council to “adopt the report and pass a resolution on the
recommendations contained therein”.
That resolution should provide a further legal basis
for outlawing any support for Mr. Savimbi’s UNITA and
send a clear signal that he is no longer an acceptable
interlocutor for the peace process. Of great importance is
the establishment of a follow-up and monitoring
mechanism, as mentioned in recommendation 39 of the
report. The report demonstrates in detail the procedures
used by UNITA to finance its activities, purchase
weapons and involve third parties to avoid compliance
with the obligations it undertook with the “Acordos de
Paz” and the Lusaka Protocol.
Brazil has always favoured dialogue and the peaceful
settlement of conflicts and will continue to do so in
Angola. We advocate, however, that a clear message
should be sent to Savimbi — now declared a war
criminal by the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) and the Organization of African
Unity — and his supporters. Brazil wants peace in
17
Security Council 4129th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
Angola and is ready to contribute to that end. We know
that the most difficult tasks are yet to come. They are to
rebuild the country, provide millions of destitute citizens
with a minimum level of well-being and the fruition of
their rights as human beings.
Brazil wishes to commend the Angolan Government
for announcing its intention to hold general elections in late
2001 and the beginning of consultations on a draft new
constitution for the country. The next step will be devising
measures to complete the construction of a fully democratic
State based on the full enjoyment of human rights for all
Angolans. The United Nations Office in Angola, through its
capacity-building arm, has an important role to play. We
hope that it will soon be operational.
That will be possible only if sanctions are enforced
and respected so as to ensure disarmament and the
complete military demobilization of UNITA. Savimbi must
be prevented from completing any financial transaction and
from continuing to pursue the diamond trade. His
representatives must lose the ability to travel and to work
on UNITA’s behalf abroad. Those who persist in offering
support to UNITA should be convinced that they are
extending the suffering of the Angolan people and that they
will face public exposure and shame.
The implementation of the measures envisaged in the
draft resolution will require additional efforts from the
SADC countries and other neighbours of Angola. It is
important that the international community extend to them
the necessary assistance to shoulder those new tasks.
I wish to reiterate the position Brazil has long
defended in this body. The Security Council has to be firm
on UNITA and its supporters. This is the only way to bring
about the peace that for so long has eluded the brotherly
people of Angola.
Peace in Angola will have decisive consequences for
the conflict that has been tormenting the region for years.
We want Angola to have an important regional and
international role commensurate with its economic potential
and with the courage displayed by its people.
The President: I thank the representative of Brazil for
his extremely kind words addressed to our delegation.
Brazil was an inspiration to Canada on the Security Council
and I thank the Ambassador of Brazil for his participation
here today.
The next speaker is the representative of Spain. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I am gratified
above all that, given the importance of the topic under
consideration, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Canada
has presided over this meeting. I am also pleased to see
the Minister of External Affairs of Angola here with us
today.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Portugal on
behalf of the European Union.
Spain is convinced of the necessity, usefulness and
effectiveness of the sanctions regime imposed by the
Security Council on UNITA. We believe that the
sanctions are working and we wish to stress the
remarkable and indispensable role that has been played in
this respect by Ambassador Robert Fowler, the Chairman
of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 864 (1993) concerning the situation in
Angola. He has given decisive impetus to this issue,
demonstrating yet again his professionalism, effectiveness
and diplomatic know-how.
Furthermore, my country welcomes the report of the
Panel of Experts established by the Security Council
pursuant to resolution 1237 (1999). We believe that the
report’s contents and imaginative and bold
recommendations represent a qualitative step forward with
regard to sanctions and an indispensable contribution to
a peaceful solution to the situation in Angola. In this
context, we congratulate Ambassador Mollander, the
Chairman of the Panel of Experts.
We are convinced that all Member States must
cooperate to implement these sanctions and remain
vigilant in order to ensure their enforcement. The Security
Council must be in a position to respond appropriately to
sanctions busting.
The President: I thank the representative of Spain
for his very kind words addressed to our delegation.
The next speaker is the representative of Togo. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Kpotsra (Togo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to express my pleasure that Mr. Lloyd
18
Security Council 4129th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
Axworthy, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Canada, has
come here yet again to preside personally over this
important meeting of the Security Council. I also wish to
welcome the participation in this debate of Mr. João
Bernardo de Miranda, the Minister of External Affairs of
Angola.
About one month ago, the Security Council met
openly to consider the report of the Panel of Experts
established pursuant to resolution 1237 (1999) to investigate
violations of sanctions imposed against UNITA. In the
course of its statement, the delegation of Togo decried the
fact that the report had been released first to the media, to
the detriment of the States Members of the United Nations,
particularly those that it implicated. At the same time, we
deplored the frivolous and entirely unprofessional method
followed by the Experts, as well as the lack of consistency
of the allegations raised against Togo.
Nevertheless, and in order to make an in-depth study
of the substance of these allegations, the Government of
Togo decided on 22 March to establish an interministerial
commission of inquiry composed of six members, who
were later joined by the President of the Constitutional
Court, the First Vice-President of the National Assembly
and the President of the Supreme Court of Togo. Yesterday,
I sent the report drafted by the commission to the President
of the Security Council and we expect that it will soon be
published as an official document of the Council.
As I stressed in my letter of 24 March 2000, contained
in document S/2000/256, it goes without saying that certain
allegations can be verified by members of the national
commission of inquiry only on the basis of the detailed
information requested by my Government. This includes
details concerning the type and registration of the aircraft
alleged to be involved in the violations of sanctions, as well
as the dates and places connected with their refueling in
Togo. It is in this context that I would like to reaffirm the
willingness of the Government of Togo to cooperate closely
with the sanctions Committee.
My delegation is also gratified that the draft resolution
soon to be voted on by the members of the Council
provides for setting up a monitoring mechanism composed
of up to five experts entrusted with the follow-up of the
work carried out by the Panel of Experts established
pursuant to resolution 1237 (1999). My delegation truly
hopes that the observations and comments made during the
examination of the report of the Panel of Experts will be
taken into consideration, particularly those regarding the
working methods followed by the Panel of Experts.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the
commitment of the Government of Togo to respect
resolutions of the Security Council, particularly those
imposing sanctions on UNITA. I would like to emphasize
my Government’s determination to shed full light on the
allegations contained in the report of the Panel of Experts
and, more generally, to contribute to efforts to improve
the effectiveness of embargo measures.
It is in this context that the Government of Togo is
planning to establish a body to follow up and monitor the
rigorous implementation of various Security Council
resolutions on sanctions against UNITA. We have already
decided to invite to Togo the United Nations experts
whose previous mission did not lead to a constructive
dialogue.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Zimbabwe. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Jokonya (Zimbabwe): We would like to
recognize the presence here of Minister Axworthy, and of
Minister de Miranda of Angola.
My delegation joins those who have spoken before
me in extending congratulations to you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April.
Zimbabwe enthusiastically welcomes the report of
the Panel of Experts on violations of Security Council
sanctions against UNITA and regards it as a privilege to
pronounce itself before this body on an issue of such
importance.
It is a shame that for more than 20 years now the
aspirations of the Angolan people for peace, stability and
development have remained thwarted by a handful of
reckless adventurers and misguided zealots who in any
civilized country would be rejected and disowned as the
lunatic fringe of the political spectrum. The report of the
Panel of Experts correctly identifies greed, and not
grievance, as the rationale for UNITA’s declared war on
the Government and people of Angola. Furthermore, in
the process of establishing the symbiotic nature of
UNITA’s relations with Rwanda and Uganda and their
surrogates in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
report also situates the pursuit of economic goals by
UNITA, Rwanda, Uganda, the Congolese Rally for
Democracy (RCD) and the Movement for the Liberation
of Congo (MLC) as the motivation for what we all along
19
Security Council 4129th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
regarded as being senseless civil war. Because the report of
the Panel of Experts has identified both the economic
agendas and the beneficiaries in the armed conflicts that
characterize Central Africa’s security landscape, my
delegation now calls upon the Security Council to
immediately raise the opportunity costs of pursuing those
agendas through warfare.
Just last week, the head of planning of the United
Nations Mission in Kinshasa, Colonel Steve Canyon,
reported that Rwanda had deployed fresh troops numbering
in the thousands for what could be a decisive force
designed to seize central Congo and pave the way for the
final march on Kinshasa. The deployment of Rwandese
forces in the Kasai province has been facilitated by
large-scale UNITA operations in that province. In March
this year, the Government forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo lost the town of Lueza to UNITA.
While embracing unreservedly the measures
recommended for the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) region in the Security Council draft
resolution on Angola sanctions, my delegation submits that
as long as Rwanda continues to occupy Congolese territory,
UNITA will have a lifeline, since that territory provides the
much-needed conduit for its arms and diamonds trade.
Against a background where Rwanda has introduced
UNITA to some of its arms brokers and contacts, as has
been reported by the Panel of Experts, it can be anticipated
that as soon as the sanctions begin to take effect UNITA
will expect Rwanda to come to its rescue in its hour of
need, as was the case in August 1998 when two Rwandese
battalions stranded in the western part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo found sanctuary in UNITA-held
areas of northern Angola and were eventually flown back
to Rwanda courtesy of Savimbi’s contraband-running cargo
planes. The report of the Panel of Experts having
established that Kigali is fast becoming a nerve centre for
UNITA’s external operations, it is only fair to surmise that
the Kigali-eastern Congo arms smuggling route offers
possibilities for UNITA.
The SADC region has always recognised that the
successful implementation of Security Council sanctions
against UNITA depends on the capacity and commitment
of the member States to deny UNITA the use of the
subregion’s land routes, airports and airspace. In
recognition of the importance of cooperation in
implementing the sanctions regime against UNITA, SADC
set up a subcommittee in 1997 that recommended the
creation of an interdepartmental liaison mechanism within
its member States to ensure effective sharing of
information between the civil aviation authorities, the
immigration and intelligence services and the defence and
police forces, as well as the establishment of a
mechanism for regional liaison.
The ad hoc committee of ministers met in Harare on
19 November 1997 and set up a task force comprised of
personnel from civil aviation, immigration, intelligence,
the army and police forces. The task force’s terms of
reference were defined as monitoring all suspicious
aircraft trafficking the subregion’s airspace; monitoring all
border posts and checking for materiél and goods likely
to be destined for UNITA-controlled areas; investigating
all allegations of UNITA’s activities in the subregion,
including companies and individuals providing logistical
support to UNITA; investigating all allegations of
violations of Angolan airspace, airports and airstrips
located in the subregion, which were to be placed under
24-hour surveillance; and ensuring that sanctions imposed
on UNITA by the United Nations were not violated by
member States.
That task force recommended the establishment of
national information centres that would coordinate the
collection of data in accordance with task force terms of
reference. The task force also recommended that a
regional information centre, which would process
information received from the national information
centres, be established in Harare. The regional
information centre was to submit monthly status reports
to the national information centres.
Our experience in SADC has shown that the sharing
among member States of both strategic and tactical
information is an effective method of reducing UNITA’s
war-making capacity. Zimbabwe, as coordinator of the
regional information centre, submitted detailed operational
procedures for the control and monitoring of flights
within the SADC region which, when put to use by the
member States, resulted in the interception of some of the
cargo planes that supplied UNITA with weapons, such as
Johannes Parreira’s Interstate Airways, which is
mentioned in the report of the Panel of Experts. From
information gathered by the national information centres,
the regional information centre compiled a comprehensive
dossier of companies and individuals that engaged in
commercial transactions with UNITA. All this
information was made available to the Panel of Experts
when they visited Harare.
20
Security Council 4129th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
Experience has also taught us that resources are
critical if operational information is to be disseminated in
a timely manner. In view of the sensitive nature of some of
the information that is transmitted between the national
information centres and the regional information centre, the
immediate relevance of some of that information could be
lost if there is no secure means of communication. While
SADC is ready to implement the recommendations in the
draft resolution, we appeal to the international community
to make available the requisite resources, including
communications and other monitoring equipment, so that
we can resuscitate and improve on the infrastructure that
was established three years ago.
We expect the whole world to applaud the sanctions
Committee’s report and to cooperate with the Security
Council in passing and implementing the resolution before
it. The postures of those who want to adopt the ostrich
policy of burying their heads in the sand and pretending
that there is no storm reflect the destructive bravado of the
defenders of evil.
There are moral imperatives that dictate that the
Council must now act decisively to adopt the resolution
under consideration. The United Nations has for some time
now elevated the concept of justice and transparency to the
level of global ethics. This Council would desecrate its
commitment and diminish itself by any accommodation that
it makes with Savimbi and those who sup with him. Any
act of tolerance would tarnish the Council. Any passivity in
the face of what has become in Angola an onslaught on
humanity would be a terrible indictment on the United
Nations and on the Security Council in particular. The time
to act is now.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Rwanda. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and make his statement.
Mr. Mutaboba (Rwanda): Once again we wish to
congratulate Canada for putting on the Security Council
agenda the consideration of important issues which Africa
wants to see addressed, namely the situation in Angola
under consideration today and the Carlsson report, which
this body examined last Friday. I offer my thanks and
appreciation to you all.
It is a coincidence that I am speaking after the
representative of Zimbabwe, from whom I was expecting an
update on the situation in the region and in his country in
particular. But I do not wish to divert you from today’s
topic. May I, with your permission, Sir, welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Angola and wish him
well.
Knowing what Rwanda has gone through, we know
very well how hard the situation in Angola has been. It
has been a cause of concern to us all for long enough,
and the Security Council’s decisive action under Canada’s
leadership looks more focused than it has been so far. My
delegation wishes to commend this body and Canada for
that change for the better, as far as Africa is concerned.
We hope that this sign of change will be guided all along
by appropriate research methodology principles and
practices and the rigor they call for. However, nothing
will work if we lose momentum.
Further to, and with reference to, our statements of
15 March and our letter of 29 March, which is a Security
Council document (S/2000/283) dated 4 April containing
my delegation’s comments on the report, we wish to
share with the Council that we lost no time in following
up on the allegations made against my country and
President Kagame, including those repeated by the
representative of Zimbabwe tonight. As stipulated in the
penultimate paragraph of our comments in that document,
our authorities and specialized services have thoroughly
investigated the allegations time and again and have come
to the same conclusions: our statements are still valid and
the allegations are false, especially those just made by
Zimbabwe, to include the most recent ones.
That is why, in the spirit of the new draft resolution,
we wish to suggest that further investigations be made
and subsequent updated reporting carried out to supercede
previous ones. Today’s draft resolution indeed refers to
recent findings and input from States mentioned in the
report, while calling for more of them in order to gather
more information and comments. We welcome this
reference meant to balance the otherwise biased
reporting — as we said in the document I have mentioned
before. In the same vein, my delegation has no problem
with the establishment of a new team of experts as
proposed in the report, but our reservations are along the
line of our comments: we wish to see the team more
independent, more representative and professionally
unquestionable than the previous team, especially when
Zimbabwe is included.
This inclusive approach will give us all more
chances of objectively knowing the truth and allowing us
to double-check the evidence provided, as compared to
receiving just some repeated allegations as erroneous as
the ones that would mislead this Council in its
21
Security Council 4129th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 18 April 2000
deliberations. Rwanda wishes to reiterate its commitment to
collaborating with the Security Council and Angola in
finding lasting solutions to the problem of reinforcing the
sanctions against UNITA. We hope that the return of peace
and security to Angola and to the region will at last be
forged through this body’s wise deliberations, and we thank
you.
The President: I thank the representative of Rwanda
for his kind words.
It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/2000/323) before it. If I hear no objection, I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Bangladesh, Canada, China, France,
Jamaica, Malaysia, Mali, Namibia, Netherlands,
Russian Federation, Tunisia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1295 (2000).
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.
22
