United Nations S/PV.4194
Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
4194th meeting
Thursday, 7 September 2000, 1.30 pm
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.
00-63409 (E)
`````````
President: Mr. Konaré . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Mali)
Members: Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. De la Rúa
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Sheikh Hasina
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Chrétien
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Jiang Zemin
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Chirac
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Patterson
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Datuk Albar
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Nujoma
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Kok
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Putin
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ben Ali
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Kuchma
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . Mr. Blair
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Clinton
Agenda
Ensuring an effective role of the Security Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security, particularly in Africa.
2
S/PV.4194
The meeting was called to order at 1.45 p.m.
Tribute to the memory of United Nations personnel
The President (spoke in French): May I ask
representatives to stand and observe a minute of silence
in tribute to the memory of the United Nations
personnel who were killed in Timor, as well as in deep
solidarity with all United Nations personnel in the field
and all humanitarian personnel in the field everywhere.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The President (spoke in French): Members of
the Security Council will recall that the date and
agenda for this meeting of the Council were agreed
upon by members of the Council in its prior
consultations.
The agenda was adopted.
Ensuring an effective role of the Security Council in
the maintenance of international peace and security,
particularly in Africa
The President (spoke in French): I am pleased to
acknowledge that at this Summit meeting of the
Security Council Argentina, China, France, Mali,
Namibia, the Russian Federation, Tunisia, Ukraine and
the United States of America are represented by their
Presidents; Bangladesh, Canada, Jamaica, the
Netherlands and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland are represented by their Prime
Ministers; and Malaysia is represented by its Minister
for Foreign Affairs.
I should like to acknowledge and welcome the
presence of other heads of State or Government, as
well as Ministers for Foreign Affairs, together with
their respective delegations, in the Council Chamber
today. Their presence is an affirmation of the
importance of the subject matter to be addressed.
The spirit of cooperation demonstrated by all
those present here, which has made this very important
meeting possible, is greatly appreciated by all of us.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is today holding a Summit
meeting on the question of ensuring an effective role of
the Security Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security, particularly in Africa.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2000/845, which contains the text of a
draft resolution, and annexed Declaration, prepared in
the course of the Council's prior consultations.
With the consent of my colleagues, I should like
to make a few introductory comments to our meeting
today.
I believe that it is both a great honour and a great
responsibility, for Africa and for Mali, for me to have
the privilege of presiding over a meeting of the
Security Council at the level of head of State or
Government, the second of its type in the history of our
Organization.
Allow me to welcome all of you and to express to
you the gratitude of all of Africa. Your presence here
today attests to your commitment and to your faith in
the missions and the role of the United Nations. This is
a special moment, since, at the dawn of the new
millennium, the entire world — with good reason — is
wondering when peace and security will prevail on our
earth, and in particular in Africa.
One could ask if the Council, since our first
historic meeting in 1992, has effectively discharged its
primary responsibility in the area of the maintenance of
international peace and security. Since peace and
prosperity, and security and development go hand in
hand, has the international community done enough to
eradicate poverty and to create the conditions for a
better life for all?
United Nations Development Programme
indicators show how far we are from eliminating
poverty and creating the conditions for a better life for
all, and behind these cold figures is the misery of
millions of men, women and children. Conflicts have
not ceased but have now become internal, particularly
in the form of civil wars — violent and bloody
conflicts that take a heavy toll on civilians in particular
and especially on vulnerable individuals, such as
women and children, conflicts that are characterized by
atrocities that are repugnant to the conscience of
humankind.
To be sure, our Organization has made progress,
but we also must recognize that there have been some
failures over the last 10 years which in some ways have
3
S/PV.4194
affected its credibility. Africa, my continent,
unfortunately is all too good an illustration of this.
The tragic events that took place in Sierra Leone,
the need to better protect communities and individuals,
including United Nations and humanitarian personnel,
and the need therefore to better meet the new security
challenges are not in conflict with our shared
determination to fine-tune the actions of the Council to
enhance its ability to prevent crises and to respond to
them in an appropriate fashion.
Africa, which has just adopted a Declaration and
Plan of Action following the Conference on Security,
Stability, Development and Cooperation in Africa,
intends to shoulder its share of responsibility in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts. It expects from
the international community the necessary support,
and, from the United Nations, which bears
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, it expects an increased commitment
and specific attention to the promotion of lasting peace
and security in Africa.
Africa has the means to extricate itself from this
situation. It needs to feel that it is not alone. Have
confidence in Africa.
At a time when the world is scrutinizing the role
of the United Nations in the twenty-first century, we
need more than ever to send strong and clear signals to
peoples and States of the determination and ability of
the United Nations to carry out effective peacekeeping
operations in accordance with its principles.
In renewing our commitment to the ideals and
objectives of the Charter and our firm commitment to
make genuine progress in the area of international
peace and security, we need to provide the United
Nations the means to achieve peace.
There are special moments in history when
peoples and individuals can be active or passive. This
extraordinary meeting is an opportunity for us to make
history. We must take advantage of it to build a world
of peace in which future generations will be free from
wars and from poverty. We need to lay the foundations
for that world, and that means providing the human,
financial and material resources necessary for our
Organization more effectively to deal with conflict
situations and shoulder its incomparable responsibility
to ensure and guarantee world peace.
That is the point of our meeting today, and I wish
every success to the work of the Council.
We shall now begin our debate.
I call on the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General (spoke in French): It is
an honour for me to welcome you to the United
Nations for this historic meeting of the Security
Council. You have come to New York to participate in
the Millennium Summit, during which we will
endeavour to give fresh impetus to the United Nations
Organization for the century that is now beginning.
(spoke in English)
To say that the eyes of the world are upon us is
both too little and too much. Too little, because the fate
of future generations could be affected by the decisions
of this Security Council Summit. Too much, because
many in the present generation are losing confidence in
the ability of the United Nations to make the difference
between war and peace.
This contradiction reflects what I believe to be a
crisis of credibility facing the Council and the
Organization in discharging its gravest responsibility:
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Too many vulnerable communities in too many regions
of the world now hesitate to look to the United Nations
to assist them in their hour of need. No amount of
resolutions or statements can change that reality; only
action can: prompt, united, effective action pursued
with skill and discipline to halt conflict and to restore
the peace. Only such determined action can restore the
reputation of the United Nations as a credible force for
peace and justice.
Nowhere, members of the Council, is your
commitment more urgently needed than on the
continent of Africa, where millions are suffering daily
from the ravages of war. I am therefore pleased that
Africa will be a focus of your deliberations today.
Whenever possible, we must summon the will to
act preventively, before a crisis reaches the point of no
return. When that fails and the Council resorts to
sanctions, it must summon the will and the wisdom to
ensure, on the one hand, that those sanctions are
effectively enforced and, on the other, that they reach
their intended target without inflicting unnecessary
hardship on innocent people.
4
S/PV.4194
When we are asked to deploy a peacekeeping
operation, we must ensure that it has a clear, achievable
mandate and the strength and authority to defend itself
and its mandate.
When all else fails and only armed intervention
can save large numbers of people from genocide or
crimes against humanity, there too the Council must
summon the will and the wisdom to confront the
agonizing dilemma which such cases pose to the
world’s conscience.
Yet, in all these cases, summoning the will to act
is only the essential first step; having the ability to act,
and to act effectively and decisively, is the other
imperative. We all recognize that too often in the
peacekeeping operations of the past the path to failure
was paved with good intentions and inadequate
mandates. We all agree that, often, peacekeepers were
asked to take on complex missions without the training,
equipment, force structure or authority necessary to
succeed.
We all know that the time has come to truly
enable the United Nations to succeed in its missions for
peace. Last March, I asked a Panel of distinguished
veterans of peacekeeping and peace-building missions
to provide frank and realistic recommendations to
assist the Council and the larger membership in
fulfilling that urgent task. Their report is before the
Council in document S/2000/809, and I have already
committed myself to implementing those changes for
which I am responsible. It is my sincere hope that the
Council will do the same.
The United Nations and its peacekeepers cannot
be the answer to every crisis, and every conflict, and
every threat to human life. Nor can United Nations
peacekeeping be a substitute for the political will of the
parties to achieve a peaceful settlement. But where we
are the answer, where only our unique universality and
legitimacy can help a wounded and abandoned people
return to a life of peace and dignity, we must be given
the means to make the difference between life and
death. The world looks to you, members of the
Council, for an answer.
Allow me to close by reiterating to the Council
what I told the larger membership yesterday: that the
safety of United Nations personnel, in both
peacekeeping and humanitarian missions, is a matter of
vital concern. Yesterday’s fatal attacks on United
Nations staff working in West Timor highlight again
the dangers faced by men and women, military and
civilian, who venture into the field for the United
Nations, that is, on assignments and missions decided
upon by the Council. I would like to stress the
responsibility of the Council to focus on this matter.
Let us together ensure that staff have the safety and
security they need to do their jobs.
The President (spoke in French): I wish to
welcome the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity and the representatives of a number of
African regional organizations.
With a view to making the best use of our time,
when a speaker has reached the agreed five-minute
time-limit, I shall tap my gavel as a courteous
reminder.
I now give the floor to the President of the United
States of America, His Excellency Mr. William
Jefferson Clinton.
President Clinton: We come together in this
historic meeting to discuss the role of the United
Nations in maintaining peace and security.
I thank President Konaré for the minute of silence
for the United Nations workers who died in West
Timor yesterday, and I ask the Indonesian authorities to
bring those responsible to justice, to disarm and
disband the militias and to take all necessary steps to
ensure the safety of those continuing to work towards
humanitarian goals there.
Today, I would like to focus my peacekeeping
remarks on Africa, where prosperity and freedom have
advanced, but where conflict still holds back progress.
I cannot help noting that this historic meeting in this
historic Chamber is led by a President and a Secretary-
General who are both outstanding Africans. Africa’s
achievements and the strengths of the United Nations
are evident. Mozambique and Namibia are just two
success stories.
But we ask the United Nations to act under
increasingly complex conditions. We see it in Sierra
Leone, where United Nations action saved lives but
could not preserve the peace. Now we are working to
strengthen the mission. In the Horn of Africa, United
Nations peacekeeping will monitor the separation of
forces so recently engaged in brutal combat. In Congo,
civil strife still threatens the lives of thousands of
people, and warring parties prevent the United Nations
from implementing its mandate.
5
S/PV.4194
We must do more to equip the United Nations to
do what we ask it to do. It needs to be able to have
peacekeepers who can be rapidly deployed, properly
trained and equipped, and able to project credible
force. That, of course, is the thrust of the report on
peacekeeping reform transmitted to the Council by the
Secretary-General. The United States strongly supports
that report. It should define the goal of our assistance
for West African forces now going into Sierra Leone.
Let me also say a word, however, beyond
peacekeeping. It seems to me that, both for Africa and
for the entire world, we will be forced increasingly to
define security more broadly. The United Nations was
created to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war. War kills massively, crosses borders,
destabilizes whole regions. Today, we face other
problems that kill massively, cross borders and
destabilize whole regions: a quarter of all the deaths on
the planet now are caused by infectious diseases such
as malaria, tuberculosis and AIDS. Because of AIDS
alone, life expectancy in some African nations is
plummeting by as much as 30 years. Without
aggressive prevention, the epicentre of the epidemic
likely will move to Asia by 2010, with very rapid
growth rates in the new independent States.
The affected nations must do more on prevention,
but the rest of us must do more too — not just with
AIDS, but also with malaria and tuberculosis. We must
invest in the basics: clean water, safe food, good
sanitation and health education. We must make sure
that the advancements in science work for all people.
The United States is investing $2 billion a year in
AIDS research, including $210 million for an AIDS
vaccine, and I have asked our Congress to give a tax
credit of $1 billion to speed the development in the
private sector of vaccines against AIDS, malaria and
tuberculosis. We have to give a tax credit because the
people who need the medicine cannot afford to pay for
it as it is. We have worked to make drugs more
affordable and we will do more. We have doubled our
global assistance for AIDS prevention and care over
the last two years.
Unfortunately, the United Nations has estimated
that to meet our goals we will collectively need to
provide an additional $4 billion a year. We must join
together to help close that gap. And we must advance
the larger agenda to fight the poverty that breeds
conflict and war. I strongly support the goal of
universal access to primary education by 2015. We are
helping to move towards that goal in part through our
effort to provide school lunches to 9 million boys and
girls in developing nations. For about $3 billion a year
collectively we could provide a nutritious meal to
every child in every developing country in a school in
the world. That would dramatically change the future
for a lot of poor nations today.
We have agreed to triple the scale of debt relief
for the poorest countries, but we should do more. This
idea of relieving debt, if the savings will be invested in
the human needs of the people, is an idea whose time
came long ago, and I hope we will do much more.
Finally, Mr. Secretary-General, you have called
on us to support the millennium ecosystem assessment.
We have to meet the challenge of climate change. I
predict that within a decade, or maybe even a little less,
this will become as large an obstacle to the
development of poor nations as disease is today. The
United States will contribute the first complete set of
detailed satellite images of the world’s threatened
forests to this project. We will continue to support
aggressive efforts to implement the Kyoto Protocol and
other objectives that will reduce the environmental
threats we face.
Now let me just say in closing that some people
will listen to this discussion and say, “Well,
peacekeeping has something to do with security, but
these other issues do not have anything to do with
security and do not belong in the Security Council.”
This is my last meeting, and I just have to say that I
respectfully disagree. These issues will increasingly be
considered by the Security Council.
Until we confront the iron link between
deprivation, disease and war, we will never be able to
create the peace that the founders of the United Nations
dreamed of. I hope the United States will always be
willing to do its part, and I hope that the Security
Council increasingly will have a twenty-first century
vision of security that we can all embrace and pursue.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
President of the United States of America for his
statement and for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the President of the Argentine
Republic, His Excellency Mr. Fernando de la Rúa.
President De la Rúa (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to express the satisfaction of the Argentine
Republic at seeing you, Sir, presiding over our
6
S/PV.4194
deliberations. Argentina would like also to express its
satisfaction at having been able to contribute to peace
as part of the Security Council.
Preserving international peace and security is a
primary responsibility of the Security Council and it
must be strengthened. If this responsibility is not fully
exercised, none of the remaining activities of the
United Nations can be successfully implemented.
The end of the cold war has not changed the role
of the Council as established by the Charter, but it has
confronted the Council with a reality that entails new
challenges: international security now also includes
human security.
Since the beginning of the last decade, most
conflicts considered by the Security Council have been
essentially of an internal nature — even when they had
international repercussions. In these conflicts the target
has also been civilian populations, which have
repeatedly been victims of serious and systematic
violations of human rights and humanitarian
international law. One of the greatest contemporary
dilemmas is whether the United Nations can remain
indifferent to these violations, committed within the
borders of a State, when at the same time it advocates
the defence of those very rights and freedoms? There is
no simple answer to this question, because it is linked
to values such as the sovereignty of States and to the
principle of non-intervention.
We believe that the principle of non-intervention
must be respected, but at the same time we believe that
a complementary value should be added: the principle
of non-indifference. This non-indifference also means
that the perpetrators of crimes that offend the common
conscience of humankind cannot be left unpunished.
Thus the creation of the International Criminal Court
and the tribunals for Rwanda, the former Yugoslavia
and Sierra Leone are important deterrents and
indispensable components of stable, lasting and fair
peace.
Peacekeeping operations must also be adapted to
the new realities. Sometimes their mandates will go
beyond the observance of the ceasefire. As in the case
of East Timor, a mandate may even include
contributing to organizing the creation of a new State.
When necessary the mandate should include rules on
the protection of civilians. Srebrenica and Rwanda
taught us that a false notion of impartiality cannot
prevail in cases of genocide or crimes against
humanity. In all cases, the mandate must be clear,
realistic and adapted to the mission’s goals.
These mandates will only be effectively
implemented if they are backed by political will
concretely expressed through the contribution of
adequate financial and human resources. The financing
of peacekeeping operations should be sufficient, and
the permanent Members of this Council have a special
responsibility in this regard. The need for a gradual
approach and the situation of developing countries
should also be taken into account when reviewing the
financing of these operations.
The most recent conflicts have shown us that
troops and civilian personnel should be efficiently
trained. The experience gained by Argentina through
42 years of participating in these operations was
reflected in the creation of the Argentine centre for
joint training for peacekeeping operations, which has
been operating since 1995 with the participation of
personnel from other Member States, and the training
centre for security forces on overseas missions.
Argentina, which is the major troop-contributing
country in the region and currently participates in nine
peacekeeping operations, will continue, in accordance
with international law, to provide armed troops and
security and civilian personnel to the operations
mandated by the Security Council.
We recognize the valuable contribution made by
the report of the Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations, dated 21 August 2000, and we consider
that this report should be promptly considered.
The painful conflicts in Africa have diverse
causes that require integrated responses which combine
the essential elements of peace and security with
sustainable development, representative democracy and
the rule of law. These conflicts should be examined by
the Security Council with special sensitivity, which can
only be reached through direct knowledge of the reality
and greater coordination with regional organizations
and other United Nations organs.
Consistent with this perspective, Argentina has
been present in Africa. It has supported the
maintenance of peace by participating in operations in
Angola, Mozambique and Western Sahara. It has
provided humanitarian assistance either directly or
through the White Helmets. It has contributed electoral
observers to South Africa, Eritrea and Algeria, and has
7
S/PV.4194
promoted cooperation for development through the
cooperation funds.
In the multilateral area, together with our African
partners we have emphasized the importance of the
nuclear-weapon-free zones established by the
Tlatelolco and Pelindaba treaties.
Finally, I wish to underscore that in October 1998
Argentina hosted the last ministerial meeting of the
Zone of Peace and Cooperation of the South Atlantic.
On that occasion, for the first time a plan of action was
adopted to enhance cooperation and ties between the
African and South American countries of the South
Atlantic.
I cannot conclude without expressing my
gratitude to Africa, without whose substantial
contribution and firm commitment to the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter progress in
areas such as decolonization, disarmament, human
rights and development could not have been achieved.
I wish to reaffirm Argentina’s ongoing
commitment to support the safety and security of
United Nations personnel and of associated and
humanitarian personnel. This is all the more relevant in
the light of the assassination yesterday of staff
members of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in West Timor, which we
strongly condemn. We extend our condolences to the
family of those selfless servers of humanity and to the
entire United Nations family.
The President (spoke in French): I thank you, Mr
President, for your kind words.
I call on His Excellency Mr. Jiang Zemin,
President of the People’s Republic of China.
President Jiang Zemin (spoke in Chinese): It is
my great pleasure to attend today’s Security Council
summit meeting and to congratulate you Sir, President
Alpha Oumar Konaré of the Republic of Mali, on your
assumption of the presidency of this important
meeting.
Fifty-five years ago the United Nations was
founded, an event which has influenced in a most
profound manner the direction in which post-war
international relations have developed. Over those 55
years, the United Nations has made contributions to
international peace and security, to increased
exchanges and cooperation among the countries of the
world and to world development and progress. We
should treasure and build upon this asset to the benefit
of mankind.
At the turn of the century, the international
situation is undergoing profound changes, and the
world is not all at peace. Various factors which threaten
world peace and security still exist. Regional conflicts,
triggered by ethnic, religious or territorial disputes,
have increased, instead of having decreased. The
common development of all countries is being hindered
by complicated problems and conflicts. People all over
the world are calling, more strongly than ever, for
peace, stability and development. How to enable the
United Nations to more effectively maintain
international peace and security and create a favourable
environment for the development of all countries has
become a pressing task.
What we are confronted with are unprecedented
challenges and complex problems. In order to dissolve
contradictions and conflicts effectively and achieve a
lasting peace and common security, the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter must be
strictly complied with. Disputes, if any, must be settled
through dialogue, negotiation and consultation. Wilful
use of force and interference in the internal affairs of
other countries in the name of humanitarianism not
only run counter to the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter, but will also cause severe
negative consequences. Under the United Nations
Charter, the Security Council is entrusted with the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. It is at the core of the
international collective security mechanism. It is
against the will of the vast number of United Nations
Member States to act however one likes and bypass the
Security Council on major issues pertaining to
international peace and security. We must work
together to maintain, rather than weaken, the authority
of the Security Council, and to strengthen, rather than
weaken, its role.
Peacekeeping operations are one of the major
means by which the United Nations fulfils its
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Facts have proved that the success
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations depends
on the observance of the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter, particularly the principles of
respect for State sovereignty, non-interference in the
internal affairs of recipient countries, seeking prior
8
S/PV.4194
consent of the parties concerned, neutrality and the
non-use of force except for self-defence. The United
Nations should sum up its past experience and lessons.
It is true that the peacekeeping operations have
contributed to international peace and security, but they
are not a panacea. In order to enable United Nations
peacekeeping operations to work better, it is essential
to treat symptoms and remove the root causes that lead
to conflicts at the same time.
To meet the needs of the times, it is imperative
for the Security Council to reform itself where
necessary so as to strengthen its role, maintain its
authority and improve its efficiency. The expansion of
the Security Council should be based on the principle
of equitable geographical distribution and should first
of all address the under-representation of the
developing countries in the Council. Any reform of the
Security Council should adequately reflect the will of
the majority of the United Nations Member States.
Only then can the reform stand the test of history. To
this end, all Member States must have detailed and
patient discussions in order to reach consensus on this
issue.
It is undoubtedly very important to give priority
to the African question at this Summit. Looking around
the African continent, we have seen incessant turmoil
and raging wars plaguing many countries and regions,
which have not only displaced innocent people and
plunged them into poverty, but have also hindered the
social and economic development of Africa. Africa is
an important member of the world community. Without
African stability and development, there is no world
peace and prosperity to speak of. The current poor and
backward situation of Africa is due to the long-term
competition and plundering of old colonialism. Africa,
whose countries have realized their national
independence, should not be reduced to a neglected
corner. The United Nations and its Security Council
should pay greater attention to Africa and increase their
input into that continent. In dealing with problems
facing Africa, they should fully respect the sovereignty
of African countries, pay close attention to the opinions
of African countries and regional organizations, such
as the Organization of African Unity, take effective
measures to keep African countries away from poverty
and warfare and help African peoples onto the road to
tranquillity, development and rejuvenation.
China is a permanent member of the Security
Council and a developing country as well. We are
ready to work together with other United Nations
Member States to strengthen the role of the Security
Council in maintaining international peace and
security, support its continued efforts to resolve
regional conflicts and encourage the Council to
increase its support for Africa. So long as we are firm
in determination and persistent in action, the lofty ideal
of peace and development that people all over the
world have longed for will surely come true.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
President of the People’s Republic of China for his
kind words.
I call on His Excellency Mr. Jacques Chirac,
President of the French Republic.
President Chirac (spoke in French): Peace is our
primary objective and it is here, within the Security
Council, that it must be ensured. Now that the cold war
is over the conditions are right for our Council to fulfil
its role. Yet, despite intense activities over the last 10
years, its results have been mixed. Along with its
indisputable successes, the United Nations has been
haunted by failures and by the image of peacekeepers
taken hostage and humiliated. The Security Council has
come under criticism and the assessment of
peacekeeping operations has been harsh, but, it must be
said, fair.
What can we do and what must we do to enable
the Security Council to better assume its primary
responsibility under the United Nations Charter for
maintaining international peace and security? I see four
orientations.
The first is that we must take on board all the
consequences of the changing nature of conflicts,
which are increasingly internal in origin. All too often,
massive violations of human rights and humanitarian
disasters hit entire regions. The Council must be able
to respond.
How can we prevent conflicts? The world
community needs to tackle the causes, and when the
causes are underdevelopment and lack of democracy,
of the rule of law and of respect for human rights, the
Secretary-General should be able to bring them to the
Security Council’s attention and use his power of
mobilization.
We must also tackle everything that finances and
fuels conflicts, such as the illegal exploitation of
natural resources, as we see in the Great Lakes region;
9
S/PV.4194
drug trafficking; and small arms accumulations. It has
also become necessary to make embargoes more
effective. More specifically, we need to set up a
permanent body within the Secretariat to control
diamond trafficking and probably trafficking in rare
precious metals.
Finally, we need to be concerned with
consolidating peace in the long run. This means that
the application of peace agreements will have to be
based on strategies to rebuild the State and the
economy, to be implemented by multilateral
institutions.
The second orientation is that we must improve
the Security Council’s means of action. In the 1990s
the Security Council made unprecedented use of
sanctions. But we must face the facts: the results have
not been conclusive. The lesson is that we must make
better use of these restrictive measures, using them
only in exceptional situations, defining our objectives
more clearly and setting time-limits, open to renewal.
Furthermore, sanctions must be proportionate to their
objective and not carry morally unacceptable
humanitarian costs, as we sometimes see today. They
must be implemented rigorously, without creating
inhumane and unacceptable side effects.
The Security Council also decided on a large
number of peacekeeping operations during the 1990s.
Such operations tackled a substantially more
diversified range of problems and tasks. Most ran into
a great many difficulties. Like Mr. Brahimi, whose
report I entirely endorse, I see four lessons to be
learned.
First of all, budget concerns must not be a
paralysing constraint from the outset. The United
Nations finances need to be consolidated. All countries
must pay what they owe, and expenses should be
shared fairly.
Then, we need to make sure that objectives are in
line with the operating mandate and the resources
provided. This means organizing consultations very
early on between the Security Council, the Secretariat
and the countries that contribute troops.
Furthermore, States must provide the United
Nations with the right quality and quantity of personnel
and equipment. When developing countries help by
sending troops, they should be able to get support from
the developed countries that have resources for training
and equipment.
Finally, we increasingly have to deal with
warlords or States that refuse to keep the commitments
that they have made in peace agreements. Credible and
respected peace agreements are the key to the
effectiveness of the United Nations action. It is
inadmissible for our Organization to be held hostage to
conflicts, and it is not right that those who do not keep
their word should continue to receive international aid.
Here again, I am thinking of the Great Lakes region.
The third orientation is strengthening the
partnership between the Security Council, the
Secretariat and regional organizations and initiatives.
Some progress has been made. But, closer
consultations at an earlier stage are critical when
planning to call on the United Nations to facilitate
implementation of an agreement or to take over a
regional action.
The fourth and last orientation is reforming the
Security Council. In order to maintain its full authority,
the Council must be more representative of the real
world. France supports an enlargement of the Council
in both permanent and non-permanent membership,
and also greater representation of the countries of the
South.
By deciding today to reform peacekeeping
operations, the Security Council is also paying homage
to all those who have given their lives for peace. I am
thinking in particular of the three United Nations staff
members that were killed in Timor yesterday. I am also
thinking of all the soldiers who have fallen under the
blue flag, the French soldiers in particular, and those
who serve or have served the United Nations in Bosnia,
Kosovo, Lebanon and elsewhere. We are committing
the United Nations to a necessary and long-term task.
France supports this effort. It will assume its full
responsibilities for peace.
We have frequently spoken of the problem of
globalization. I myself referred this morning to this
problem and its tragic consequences of excluding a
growing number of men, women and children and
countries from the prosperity or from the dignity of
being able to live in today’s world. This can only be
aggravated if we do not all together take the reins of
globalization, which must be controlled and
humanized.
10
S/PV.4194
The twentieth century was the century of regained
independence, and the twenty-first must be the century
of reaffirmed dignity, shared prosperity and secured
peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the President of Republic of Namibia, His
Excellency Mr. Sam Nujoma.
President Nujoma: Mr. President, I wish to
congratulate you on convening this important first
Summit of the Security Council in the new millennium.
Today many of the items on Council’s agenda concern
Africa, and I am therefore grateful to participate in this
meeting chaired by you, my brother and colleague.
I would also like to reiterate here the pride and
confidence that Namibia continues to have in our
Secretary-General, another son of Africa. I commend
him for his tireless efforts in the interest of peace and
conflict resolution in the world. That is why the
thoughtful report of the Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations is so important and timely.
The topic on our agenda today has further
significance for my delegation. It was exactly 10 years
ago that Namibia attained independence, which was
preceded by a long and protracted liberation struggle
against apartheid colonialism. Our independence was
assisted by a very successful peacekeeping operation,
the United Nations Transition Assistance Group
(UNTAG). UNTAG succeeded, by and large, because
our people were ready for independence and change for
a better future.
There were, however, some failures. It is
therefore significant that the Council consider
constructive ways and means to further strengthen its
role in the maintenance of international peace and
security. Given the situation today, it is imperative that
special attention be given to Africa’s many conflicts
and needs.
In the view of my delegation, the following are
some of the important matters that the Council should
pay close attention to.
First, the Council should, at all times, uphold the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. It should attach equal importance to and
undertake swift responses to breaches of international
peace and security in all regions of the world, and not
treat Africa only as an afterthought.
Secondly, recent events have demonstrated the
invaluable role that regional and subregional
organizations such as the Organization of African
Unity, the Southern African Development Community
and the Economic Community of West African States
can play in maintaining or restoring international peace
and security. The efforts of these organizations should
be supported on the basis of ensuring regular
consultations and cooperation.
Thirdly, the use of sanctions has had varied
success in maintaining or restoring international peace
and security. Their appropriateness should be
thoroughly reviewed for each situation. Sanctions
regimes should not be open-ended. However, they
remain a valuable tool to use in various situations
where wars and rebel atrocities are fuelled by the
illegal trade in diamonds and other natural resources.
The situations in Angola, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Sierra Leone are cases in
point. Sanctions can be used in the same way to curb
illicit arms flows to and in Africa, which endanger
lives and threaten peace and security as well as
seriously hampering development on the continent.
Fourthly, when peacekeeping operations are
approved, they should be provided with appropriate
mandates and adequate resources.
Fifthly, due attention should be given to the root
causes of conflict, such as poverty and
underdevelopment. The Council should join other
United Nations bodies in developing comprehensive
and integrated strategies to address the root causes.
There are many other issues that require attention,
but time does not permit us to discuss all of them here.
However, the reform and enlargement of the Security
Council should be expedited. An early decision on this
matter will greatly enhance the effectiveness,
transparency and democratic character of the Security
Council.
In conclusion, the Security Council, together with
the other bodies of the United Nations, can
undoubtedly achieve many more successes in the future
if it is properly reformed in line with the changing
times and the new demands for the United Nations.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
President of Namibia for his kind words addressed to
me.
11
S/PV.4194
The next speaker is the President of the Russian
Federation, His Excellency Mr. Vladimir Putin.
President Putin (spoke in Russian): All of us are
participants in a truly historic and precedent-setting
meeting of the Security Council. The previous few
months of this millennium remind us of our
responsibility and obligations to our peoples and the
whole world.
The key United Nations body — the Security
Council — has done all it can to safeguard the world
from a new global military catastrophe, and to
safeguard politicians from the temptation to use any
advantage to pursue objectives unworthy of mankind.
When the Security Council acts in solidarity and
unity, the most complicated problems are resolved.
This only serves to enhance the authority of the
Council. In my opinion, in the new century it might be
well to make more frequent use of high-level summit
meetings — and not only at United Nations
Headquarters in New York, but also at locations closer
to the events the Council is dealing with.
Before our eyes and with our direct participation,
a new epoch is being shaped. It does not matter that we
have different ideas about the specifics of this epoch.
We are firmly united in our principal beliefs. This
epoch must become one of equitable security and just
peace. In this connection, I would like to emphasize
that the principles laid down in the Charter of the
United Nations have passed more than one durability
test and proved their effectiveness.
The most important of these principles is the
supremacy of international law. Secondly, we have a
common responsibility to promote global stability and
to take a collective approach to settling disputes and
conflicts. Recent history vividly teaches that
approaches and measures that ignore international law
inevitably undermine both regional and global stability.
I would like to stress that only the Security
Council has the right to sanction such an extreme
measure as the use of force in a crisis situation. It does
so on behalf and in the interests of the whole world
community. When so acting the Security Council has a
special responsibility to clearly define the mandate and
rules for conducting a peacekeeping operation. In
particular, in accordance with Chapter VII of the
Charter, the self-serving interests of any party should
not be allowed to become part of any such operation.
In recent years the peacemaking efforts of the
Security Council have made it possible to extinguish a
few major regional conflagrations — in Cambodia,
Mozambique and Central America. The settlement of
the conflict in Tajikistan is the latest and one of the
most interesting examples of such efforts. United
Nations support for the process of national
reconciliation has returned Tajikistan to normal life. I
am convinced that such an approach could achieve a
just solution to the problem of Iraq and secure peace
and stability in the Balkans.
The relevant resolutions of the Security Council
already contain the necessary political and legal
conditions for such action. They need only to be
implemented conscientiously and fully.
One of the most acute problems of the
contemporary world is the incessant conflicts in Africa.
This issue has already been discussed today. The future
of the continent depends to a great degree on the
speedy and effective settlement of these conflicts. If in
the twentieth century Africa became free from
colonialism, the twenty-first century should rid it of
poverty and military confrontation.
In order to solve this major problem the United
Nations and its Security Council must most closely
coordinate their activities with the peacekeeping efforts
of the African nations themselves. The most important
task is to improve the United Nations anti-crisis
potential. In this regard, we believe that the Brahimi
report is a useful document. We should jointly develop
a culture of crisis prevention and devote greater efforts
to forestall crises. Of special importance is bringing to
light the deep-rooted reasons for conflicts, including
economic and social ones.
Russia has played and, on the basis of the
foregoing, intends to continue to play an active role in
peacekeeping operations. Today my country is
participating in 10 out of the 15 United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We share the sorrow of the
United Nations in connection with the deaths of the
peacekeepers in West Timor, and we condemn any
aggressive actions towards United Nations personnel.
Sons of Russia are among those who at various times
have given their lives while protecting and defending
the lofty ideals of the United Nations.
In conclusion, from this lofty rostrum I would
like to thank Secretary-General Kofi Annan and his
staff for the superb organization of our work and for
12
S/PV.4194
the preparation of this meeting. I hope that the
implementation of its results will be as productive as
these discussions.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker is the President of the Republic of Tunisia, His
Excellency Mr. Zine El Abidine Ben Ali.
President Ben Ali (spoke in Arabic): At the start
of my address to this historic summit of the Security
Council, I am pleased to extend my sincere wishes for
the success of its proceedings, which focus on an issue
of critical importance to the future of all mankind:
international peace and security, especially on the
African continent.
Our summit is convening at a time when the need
for a qualitative change in international relations has
become more pressing than ever. Notwithstanding the
scientific and technological achievements that have
changed the face of the world in such a short span of
time, a large portion of mankind in many parts of the
world, and on our African continent in particular, is
still suffering from the scourges of war,
overpopulation, poverty, famine, disease and
marginalization. This state of affairs requires that the
international community formulate a joint, objective
vision of certain concepts such as solidarity,
intervention for humanitarian purposes, the protection
of human rights and how to address development
issues. This should also lead to ensuring that areas of
collective action can be defined so that cooperation
among our States and our peoples may become an
inexorable bond to which we exhort one another by our
deeds and by which we refute the voices of pessimism
that allege that the clash of cultures, civilizations and
societies is inevitable.
The increasing gravity of conflicts and wars,
particularly on the African continent, calls for
combined efforts on the part of the international
community to eliminate the causes of tension and to
find appropriate peaceful, just and lasting solutions to
them.
In this context, I should like to recall the efforts
we have made since 1994 within the framework of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) to improve the
capabilities of our continent in this field through the
OAU Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management
and Resolution. However, the success of our regional
initiatives continues to depend on the complementary
efforts of the international community, since the
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security remains essentially one of the functions of the
Security Council.
For this body to shoulder its huge responsibilities
in a fair and equitable manner, I renew our call today
for the support of the position expressed by the Group
of Non-Aligned countries and by the African Group
regarding developing the Council’s functions and
working methods and expanding its structure. The aim
of this proposal is to ensure that the Security Council
becomes more representative, that it is able to keep
pace with the different developments on the world
scene, and that its resolutions assume greater
effectiveness and credibility, while avoiding any form
of double standards.
While noting with deep satisfaction the decline in
the use of the right of veto and the effort to seek
consensus in most cases, we hope that this trend is
adopted permanently for the sake of carrying out
consultations before taking decisions.
Since its election as member of the Security
Council, Tunisia has sought to reconcile points of
view; to press for the adoption of resolutions based on
broad consensus; to settle disputes through peaceful
means; to apply the principles enshrined in the United
Nations Charter; and to respect international law.
International peacekeeping operations are still in
need of considerable efforts to ensure that Member
States are able to organize, prepare, deploy, finance and
participate in them.
Tunisia, which since its independence in the
1960s began to contribute to peace and security
contingents in many parts of the world, believes that
our States are called upon to assume their role in
maintaining international peace and security, regardless
of their size or ability. Accordingly, Tunisia today
reaffirms its determination to continue to shoulder its
responsibility in furtherance of peace, solidarity and
development in the world.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
President of Tunisia for his important statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Leonid
D. Kuchma, President of Ukraine.
President Kuchma (spoke in Ukrainian; English
text furnished by the delegation): At the outset, let me
thank you, Mr. President, for your personal
13
S/PV.4194
contribution to the successful realization of the
initiative to convene this meeting. I consider this
meeting to be a confirmation by the Security Council
of its willingness to assume the primary responsibility
for ensuring the effective functioning of the collective
security system in the twenty-first century.
The exclusive purview of the Security Council to
authorize the use of force in international relations —
except in cases where the right to self-defence is being
exercised — as well to employ effective collective
measures for the prevention and removal of threats to
peace and to suppress acts of aggression should remain
the major foundation of this system. It is absolutely
essential that this veritable nerve centre of world
politics preserve its undeniable authority and enhance
its legitimacy and effectiveness in the coming century.
That goal should be attained by raising confidence in
the Security Council by improving the peacekeeping
instruments at its disposal and by achieving its
comprehensive reform.
In pursuing efforts aimed at resolving conflicts,
the Security Council should necessarily address their
root causes in order to reveal the real sources of
confrontation. Social and economic factors are the
leading causes for the outbreak of violence.
Significant opportunities could be offered by
better developing the under-utilized potential for
cooperation that exists between the Security Council
and other organs and institutions of the United Nations,
starting with the General Assembly. There is a pressing
need for appropriate implementation of the provisions
of Article 65 of the Charter, which governs cooperation
with the Economic and Social Council.
In my address to the Millennium Summit of the
United Nations today, I spoke in favour of developing a
comprehensive conflict prevention strategy. One of the
key components of such a strategy could be the
establishment of United Nations regional centres for
conflict prevention. It is also important to expand
further the range of instruments required for the
maintenance of peace and security. In this context,
conflict prevention operations should gain prominence
as a qualitatively new model of peacekeeping
activities. I am confident that, together with
peacekeeping and peace-enforcement operations, this
instrument will substantially strengthen the capacity of
the Security Council to discharge its responsibilities.
The founding fathers of the United Nations could
not have imagined how acute the difficulties related to
the application of enforcement measures imposed by
the Security Council would become. Sanctions were
designed as an important tool to ensure the
implementation of the Council’s decisions. However,
they were eventually turned into ineffective and
sometimes even harmful instruments. It is therefore
indispensable to develop a clear and coherent
methodology for the imposition and lifting of sanctions
that takes into consideration the concerns of innocent
civilian populations and the interests of third countries.
I find it necessary to draw the attention of the
Council to the so-called frozen conflicts in the post-
Soviet region. It has been almost a decade that tensions
in Abkhazia, Georgia and Nagorny Karabakh have
been destabilizing the situation in this vast region and
posing the threat of wide-scale humanitarian
catastrophe. There is also an urgent need to resolve the
Transdniester conflict. Postponing a final settlement of
such crises might lead to irreversible consequences.
The poverty and sufferings of civilians in these
conflicts make active peacekeeping efforts absolutely
indispensable.
Ukraine has already put forward an initiative to
hold at Yalta in the near future the next round of
negotiations aimed at confidence-building between the
Georgian and Abkhaz sides. It is now the turn of the
other members of the Security Council.
We are also concerned with the fact that the tough
knot of problems in the Balkans has yet to be untied.
The ability to provide adequate responses to threats to
peace and security in every region of the world will
always constitute the major prerequisite to relying on
the Security Council. Today, this principle should be
upheld by giving special attention to the problems of
the African continent.
The challenges in Africa should be given utmost
consideration. Leaving the long-suffering continent to
solve all its difficult problems alone is absolutely
unacceptable. Ukraine is determined to make a
practical contribution to the United Nations peace
efforts aimed at resolving conflicts in Africa. This
determination is reinforced by our aspiration to expand
economic cooperation with African countries. Ukraine
looks forward to a century of African renaissance and
stands ready to hasten its arrival.
14
S/PV.4194
We have every reason to consider this historic
Summit of the Security Council as an encouraging and
promising beginning that will be followed by more
successful and productive efforts in the new century.
Whether it is a member of the Security Council or not,
Ukraine will always actively contribute to the effective
accomplishment of its honourable and responsible
mission.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
President of Ukraine for his important statement.
I now give the floor to Her Excellency Sheikh
Hasina, Prime Minister of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh.
Sheikh Hasina (spoke in Bengali; English text
furnished by the delegation): Today, as I address this
Summit of the Security Council, I remember the day 26
years ago when the Father of the Nation Bangabandhu
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman addressed the General
Assembly immediately after Bangladesh was admitted
to membership in the United Nations. In his speech,
Bangabandhu pledged our full adherence to the
principles of the United Nations Charter. We have
remained faithful to that pledge, and we continue to
serve the United Nations by taking a proactive role.
As a member of the Security Council, Bangladesh
has been contributing to the preservation and
maintenance of international peace and security. This is
a reflection of Bangabandhu’s commitment to peace,
security and harmony among nations.
We are here at a time of changing realities and
increasing challenges. the maintenance of international
peace and security in a globalized world is a major
responsibility. The Security Council, as the only body
devoted exclusively to the maintenance of international
peace and security, can do better in a world of civil
conflicts.
It is encouraging to note that the Security Council
is giving more attention to situations of humanitarian
crisis involving the civilian population. For the first
time, peace operations are being provided with child
protection advisers. These are promising beginnings.
Bangladesh appreciates Secretary-General Kofi
Annan’s report, prepared by Ambassador Brahimi, on
improving United Nations peace operations. The
recommendations contained in the report should
receive our serious consideration. The Security Council
mandates should enable operations to address root
causes of conflicts. In this context, this Summit should
express strong support for poverty eradication,
sustainable development, democracy, good governance,
rule of law and human rights as foundations of durable
peace.
During the Bangladesh’s 1971 war of liberation,
we acquired experience of the harmful effects of wars
and conflicts wrought on humanity at large. Two
hundred thousand women were raped, and hundreds of
thousands were victims of mass murders. Our freedom-
loving people fought valiantly at the call of our great
leader, the Father of the Nation, Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman, and were victorious. But the
vanquished forces killed the Father of the Nation,
along with most of the members of my family, on 15
August 1975. This conspiracy has not ended yet.
Several attempts were made to kill me.
International peace and security must be
understood in terms of human security. We should put
emphasis on mitigating the effects of war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide on the civilian
population. The Security Council has to focus on the
prevention of armed conflicts by building a culture of
peace.
Women should not be seen as mere victims of
war; they should be allowed to play their rightful role
in resolving conflicts. The women of Burundi, the
Congo and Somalia have demonstrated great
commitment in establishing peace and democracy and
in the reconstruction of war-ravaged countries.
Similarly, special efforts are needed to address the
needs of children affected by armed conflicts. Here I
would invite the Council’s attention to Bangladesh’s
proposal for child-soldier-free zones in various parts of
the world.
Striving for general and complete disarmament is
our constitutional commitment. Yesterday, we
deposited our instrument of ratification for the
Convention banning anti-personnel mines and our
instrument of accession for the Convention on Certain
Conventional Weapons.
Necessary action must be taken against those who
capture power by illegally overthrowing any
constitutionally elected Government. I feel that the
United Nations can take action on this subject. This is a
prerequisite for peace, democracy, human rights and
economic advancement.
15
S/PV.4194
I therefore propose that this supreme
Organization of the peoples take a decision to choose
and sustain government of the people, by the people
and for the people as a universal system of governance,
and never to recognize illegal military takeovers of
power achieved by trampling constitutional systems.
Bangladesh resolved major outstanding issues
with neighbours by means of peaceful negotiations,
paving the way for greater cooperation among our
peoples. In our national context, we have found that,
given the political will and respect for human rights,
peace is possible. It is by demonstrating respect for
these values and principles that, through peaceful
dialogue, we have been able to resolve decades of civil
strife in the Chittagong Hill Tracts in south-eastern
Bangladesh.
Given the enormous challenges ahead, we believe
that the Security Council should meet more often at the
summit level than it has in the past. The world looks up
to its leaders for making history. History demands of
us — as a generation taking human civilization into the
new millennium — that we live up to our solemn
pledge of a world free of wars, a world where the
culture of peace has taken deep, deep root.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Prime Minister of Canada, The Right
Honourable Jean Chrétien.
Mr. Chrétien (Canada): I will begin by
expressing Canada’ s outrage at the murder of
innocent, unarmed humanitarian personnel in West
Timor. Those who attack United Nations staff attack
this Organization and undermine the purposes and
principles we have all come here to reaffirm. It is
incumbent on the Indonesian Government to bring the
perpetrators to justice.
It is fitting that the Security Council is meeting
during the Millennium Assembly of the United
Nations, an occasion when Member States have come
together at the highest level to reaffirm their
commitment to our shared principles and purposes.
More importantly, it is an opportunity for us to affirm
our common resolve to make the United Nations work
better, to be partners in its renewal and reform.
Nowhere is this more critical than in the Security
Council, the body mandated to preserve and protect
international peace and security. Canada joined the
Council with precisely that goal in mind.
(spoke in French)
In the brief time given an elected member, we
have worked to make the Council more responsive to
the security challenges and political imperatives we
face at the turn of the century. We have tried to make
the Council a more effective instrument for ensuring
human security and more open and democratic. We
have pressed it to demonstrate leadership in building a
world of peace. In order to exercise that leadership, we
must restore the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations. The Brahimi report reminds us that
peacekeeping mandates must be consistent with
realities on the ground and that adequate resources
must be provided. In Srebrenica and Rwanda, we failed
these tests. It is our duty to do better.
In the twenty-first century, peace depends no
longer solely on securing borders, but also on securing
people. They must be protected from diverse threats:
armed conflict, gross human rights violations, breaches
of international humanitarian law and terrorism. The
security of States is certainly essential, but it is not
sufficient to ensure the safety and well-being of people.
Indeed, as we have seen to our dismay in recent years,
the security of a given State has been invoked in the
name of ethnic nationalism as a justification for the
worst kind of atrocities.
(spoke in English)
Canada has worked to broaden the Council’ s
definition of security to encompass new human
security challenges. We have argued that humanitarian
principles and human rights must be given greater
weight when the Council decides when to act. We will
continue to make this case because, if the Security
Council is unable to adapt, that will seriously
undermine its credibility as a guarantor of peace —
credibility that is essential to maintaining the moral
authority of the United Nations as a whole.
I have no doubt that we are up to this task. The
world is watching. People everywhere are counting on
us.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Prime Minister of Jamaica, The Right
Honourable Percival James Patterson.
Mr. Patterson (Jamaica): The United Nations is
today facing its most crucial test, that of fulfilling its
essential role in a brand new world. To fulfil its charge
to maintain international peace and security, this
16
S/PV.4194
Council must impact on the lives of people, changing
their despair to hope and liberating them from conflict.
The global landscape is littered with gloom,
instability and devastation occasioned by the increasing
number of unresolved conflicts, but the Security
Council has made significant strides in maintaining
stability in some areas of conflict while defusing
hostilities in others. The impact of United Nations
missions has been felt on almost every continent of the
world.
And yet, the flagrant violations of international
norms and of the rights of individuals continue
unabated in many places. The alarming increase in the
number of refugees and internally displaced persons,
and the inadequately financed operations of the
Organization in response to these threats, demand our
serious and immediate attention. Nowhere is this more
of an imperative than in Africa. Poverty and social
injustice constitute the greatest threat to global peace
and international security, and perhaps nowhere more
evidently so than in Africa.
There is now, consequently, a greater burden on
the Security Council to prove itself capable of
protecting the most vulnerable. We have to stem the
rising tide of refugees and internally displaced persons.
In so doing, we will spend less on humanitarian
assistance and more on development.
Breaches of international humanitarian and
human rights laws must not go unchallenged. The
resource needs of the United Nations must be adequate
to demonstrate the necessary political will for taking
action as and when required. Rightful concerns over
sovereignty cannot allow us to turn a blind eye to the
forces of evil, but the speed and yardstick for collective
action cannot be determined purely by strategic
geopolitical considerations.
Measures taken by the Security Council to effect
behavioural changes among those who perpetuate
conflict situations must be enforced. Such measures
must be targeted and achievable. When applied, they
must be time-bound, clear and concise. Conflict
prevention is of paramount importance in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
In July, the Security Council, under Jamaica’ s
presidency, reaffirmed that the United Nations system
must manage a comprehensive and coordinated
strategy to address the root causes of conflict. We
recognized the capacity given by the Charter to the
Secretary-General for a range of action in conflict
prevention. I commend him for his efforts in the face of
uncertain mandates and limited resources.
Long-term sustainable peace within the context of
conflict resolution requires that peace-building
mandates create mechanisms which foster confidence-
building between the parties and create an environment
conducive to social, economic and political
development.
Regional institutions such as the Organization of
African Unity, and some regional institutions working
in tandem with the Security Council, are essential to
this united effort for lasting peace and allow people to
develop their full potential for participating in
sustainable socio-economic advancement.
It may sound like heresy in this hallowed and
privileged Chamber, but we cannot conceive of an
effectively pursued peace and security mandate in the
absence of reform of the Security Council itself. The
Council must have the benefit of the credibility and
legitimacy derived from its Charter-given authority, the
transparency of its decision-making process and a truly
representative membership.
The existence of a veto power is anachronistic
and undemocratic.
By failing to take note of changes in the relative
standing of States in the past half century and the
expansion of United Nations membership, the Security
Council has allowed its representative character to be
diminished and its democratic legitimacy to suffer. The
Council must become more representative of the world
as it is today.
It is high time to move forward with the reform
process. Let us build now on areas of agreement and
work with determination towards early adoption of
those measures which are essential to the effective
performance of the Council’s mandate in this new
millennium. By so doing, we can ensure an even more
effective role for the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
Prime Minister of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, His
Excellency Mr. Wim Kok.
Mr. Kok: We started our meeting today with the
minute of silence to remember the victims of militia
17
S/PV.4194
violence in Timor. The Council through its President
called upon Indonesia to live up to its responsibilities. I
appeal to the Indonesian Government to exert its
authority in Timor as in the Maluccas, or wherever a
need may arise, to prevent a recurrence of such
violence.
The Millennium Assembly has brought us
together here in New York, marking a renewed effort to
bring prosperity, social justice and full respect for
human rights to all the citizens of the world. It also
signals our continuing determination to free this world
from the scourges of conflict and destruction.
This is what the Members of the United Nations
decided over half a century ago to be the main task for
the Security Council. What does this mean for our
responsibility with regard to the numerous local
conflicts of today and the havoc they bring to millions
of people and to our development agenda?
A major shift has occurred from global big-Power
confrontation to internal conflicts, often based on
ethnic and religious divisions, particularly in Africa.
This requires a change in the way the Security Council
deals with international peace and security. The
Netherlands welcomes the recommendations in the
Brahimi report on how to improve the way the Council
handles today’s conflicts. Let the Council draw lessons
from past experiences and step up its efforts to do
better.
Enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations
peace operations requires political courage. If and
when necessary, the Member States should allow the
United Nations to deploy rapidly and under a robust
mandate. The Member States should be prepared to
make sufficient resources available. They should
provide adequate support to peace-building strategies
that work and take another look at the application of
the principle of impartiality when dealing with local
parties to a conflict.
Let us fulfil our moral obligation to future
generations by eliminating the causes of conflict and
sparing them the man-made humanitarian calamities
that plague our world today.
Improving the quality of peace operations will
contribute towards realizing those ambitions. But more
is needed, more in the way of conflict prevention to
avoid human suffering and to save the enormous cost
of military action and of rebuilding societies. I agree
with the Secretary-General that prevention is a
challenge of political leadership. Member States should
enable the Secretary-General to initiate actions in this
regard, including the dispatch of fact-finding missions
and the establishment of an effective early-warning
capacity.
Most armed conflicts today are between the poor.
Broad-based economic growth helps to reduce poverty
as a root cause of conflict and must, therefore, be part
of conflict prevention strategies.
Effective integration in the world economy is
needed. African countries must be enabled to benefit
more from the opportunities that globalization
provides. Only then will the people of Africa be able to
escape from the extreme poverty afflicting it. Likewise,
African Governments should be willing and able to
confront the magnitude of the HIV/AIDS pandemic in
sub-Sahara Africa, which the Council has rightly
recognized as a risk to stability and security.
So let us work together towards achieving peace
and prosperity for the peoples and countries of Africa
and elsewhere. We must join hands to improve respect
for human rights, protect minorities, establish truly
representative and participatory political systems and
improve health and education standards. Through
strength and solidarity, the Security Council can help
us in making our common dream of worldwide peace
and prosperity come true.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, the Right Honourable
Tony Blair.
Mr. Blair: First of all, Mr. President, our
congratulations to you on hosting this meeting.
I join in the expressions of outrage at the murder
of United Nations staff in West Timor. I pay tribute to
all our personnel, both military and civilian, who are
under the banner of the United Nations around the
world and who are good and brave people. Many of
them, I am proud to say, are from my own country.
I also support fully the cause for reform of the
Security Council itself.
In focusing on conflict resolution and prevention,
I want to make four brief points.
First, peacekeeping today is a lot tougher and
more difficult than before. We are putting our people
18
S/PV.4194
into situations of far greater difficulty than traditionally
was the case, situations not often well defined and
where the hazards from local militia or other people are
far greater than before.
Secondly, at the same time, however, the need for
peacekeeping has never been greater. Indeed, in certain
of the circumstances we can all think of, it is utterly
determinative of the difference between anarchy and
some form of stability in the countries concerned.
Sierra Leone is an obvious example. East Timor,
Bosnia — all are areas where these peacekeepers are
having to perform a hard task, but it has never been
more important.
The conclusion from these two points is that the
Brahimi reforms are absolutely essential. We need to
be better organized, better resourced and better
disciplined to carry out the tougher but more important
work.
The third point is this. I think we all recognize
now that we cannot deal with these problems of
security and conflict without dealing with the causes of
conflict too. Whether it is poverty, debt, aid and
development, infectious diseases or Governments and
the rule of law, we need a far broader concept of how
we deal with these security issues for today’s world.
We cannot isolate a conflict from its root causes.
Fourthly, of course we all have our own interests
as countries around this table. But I think there’s a big
difference between the type of debate we will have
today and what it might have been 15, 20, or 30 years
ago. Let us be clear there were real, competing spheres
of influence that people clung to very tenaciously.
Today, I think we have a very important common
interest, and that is in the maintenance of order and
stability — not order so that change does not happen,
for change is necessary, but order so that change
happens without chaos.
I think that many of the things that we will face
today in these conflicts are things like fundamentalism,
extremism, terrorism — things that 30 or 40 years ago
we would not have recognized as requiring quite the
priority they do today.
It is a changing pattern, therefore, of context in
which we look at conflict resolution and prevention.
What -does this lead to? It leads surely to this. We have
in the Secretary-General a man who has put forward a
plan and programme for reform of the way that we
work. I think that what we have got to do is to match
the vigour of his ambition with our response and carry
this through. If we do, we will end up not with just a
modernized Security Council but a far better, more
effective way of dealing with these problems of
conflict in the world today.
The final point we all really acknowledge is that
in today’s world it is not just technology and the
economy that are global. We are interdependent in a
way we have never been before, so it means that we
must change our own perspective in thinking to face up
to that modern reality.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Malaysia, His
Excellency Datuk Seri Syed Hamid Albar.
Mr. Albar (Malaysia): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, for convening this
Summit. I am privileged to participate in this historic
Summit of the Security Council on ensuring an
effective role of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security,
particularly in Africa, coinciding with the Millennium
Summit. The consideration of this important subject is
most timely in the context of the many challenges
confronting the Security Council in the twenty-first
century.
Clearly, for the Council to be more effective in
discharging its responsibilities, there must be the
necessary political will on the part of members.
Measures undertaken in conflict resolution around the
world, particularly in Africa, given the number and
intensity of armed conflicts in the region, must be
concerted and comprehensive. Such political will
should be manifested irrespective of where the conflict
occurs. Each conflict situation must be treated in an
even-handed manner, lest the Council be accused of
being selective in its approach. It is particularly
pertinent on the part of the permanent members of the
Council to manifest this political will, without which
the Council will be rendered ineffective. A paralysis in
the Council must be avoided at all costs if it is to fulfil
its Charter-mandated responsibilities. For this purpose,
members of the Council, especially the permanent
members, who can block a consensus, must put aside
their narrow political interests and join the consensus,
in the larger interests of the international community.
There is also a need for strong and sustained
support on the part of the members of the international
19
S/PV.4194
community for the actions of the Council. This is
particularly relevant when sanctioning peacekeeping
operations, whose success is predicated on the
willingness of Member States to contribute troops and
other personnel as well as equipment. My country has
done its part in this regard and will continue to do so.
The Council and the Secretariat should make every
effort to engage Member States, particularly potential
troop contributors, at the planning stage and at every
subsequent phase of the operation. Indeed,
peacekeeping operations should be established only
when there is assurance of adequate and well-trained
and equipped personnel from Member States.
Dispatching peacekeeping missions at less than
required strength and with inadequate equipment can
result in tragic consequences, as was demonstrated in
the early phase of the peacekeeping operation in Sierra
Leone.
Undoubtedly, continued and sustained financial
and material support by Member States is essential in
ensuring the operational success of peacekeeping.
What should not happen is for the effectiveness of
peacekeeping missions to be jeopardized on account of
a lack of necessary funding. At the same time, every
effort should be made for the early reimbursement of
the costs of peacekeeping operations borne by
developing countries. Delayed reimbursement, which
has often lasted a number of years, may have a
negative impact on Member States’ ability and
willingness to participate in future peacekeeping
operations.
Another challenge that must be addressed is the
lack of institutional capacity on the part of the United
Nations Secretariat, both in planning and managing
peacekeeping missions. It is imperative that the
Secretariat, particularly the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, which is seriously
understaffed, be further strengthened, commensurate
with its enormous tasks. Immediate attention should be
given to information-gathering and analysis, planning
for future operations, and operational support for
ongoing peacekeeping.
The need for quality staff in order to ensure high
standards of professionalism, upon which much of the
success of peacekeeping missions depends, should not
be understated. Clearly, sound decisions can be made
by the Council only on the basis of prompt and quality
information and analysis by the Secretariat. The
Council should be presented with information and
analysis in an objective and clear manner.
Briefings on the military aspects of peacekeeping
operations should be given whenever possible by the
commander of the operation. This would be of
tremendous value to Council members and troop-
contributing countries in understanding the effect of
their commitments.
Beyond the deployment of peacekeeping
missions, there is a need for the Council and the United
Nations as a whole to develop strategies for
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, including those for
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants. This will go a long way in efforts to
implement post-conflict measures to consolidate and
sustain peace.
There is a need to develop strategies for conflict
prevention in close coordination with regional or
subregional organizations. In this regard, the
Secretary-General’s recommendations on conflict
prevention contained in his Millennium report and in
his statement to the Council’s debate on conflict
prevention in July 2000 are most pertinent and should
be given serious consideration. My delegation also
commends the bold recommendations of the Brahimi
Panel on United Nations Peace Operations, which
deserve early consideration.
My delegation fully supports the views expressed
by a number of Council members on the need to ensure
that the sanctions regimes are reviewed, eased or lifted
so as not to prolong the agony of the affected peoples.
The Council has to face the challenge of translating its
pronouncements into concrete action. This unique and
historic meeting of the Council would be best served if,
following this Summit, focused and prompt follow-up
measures were taken. This would result in a positive
and tangible contribution by the Council to the
objectives of the Millennium Summit.
The President (spoke in French): With the
Council’s permission, I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the President of the Republic of Mali.
The difficulties encountered in Sierra Leone; the
difficulties with deployment in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; the threat of conflict on the
African continent and in other regions of the world; the
increased number of internal crises; and the need to
protect communities, United Nations personnel and the
20
S/PV.4194
personnel of aid organizations against violence are
today prompting our Council to adapt and make more
effective its response capacity.
I should like here to welcome the Secretary-
General’s initiative, since the report submitted by Mr.
Lakhdar Brahimi is part of the process that will make
the United Nations a truly credible force for peace.
I would like to congratulate the Secretary-General
for the follow-up he has already given to this important
report, whose recommendations have our backing
because they are designed to allow us to better respond
to present and future threats. Within the framework of
the principles of our Organization, let us not fear
change. Let us finally dare to give the United Nations
the means to achieve peace.
In this context, there are several important issues
on which I wish to dwell.
First of all, how can we save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, when children,
who are the future, are handed over to senseless
conflicts as both victims and executioners?
We need to put an end to the sorry sight of child
soldiers by unequivocally condemning and by taking
energetic measures against all of those who make use
of children, who instil in them a culture of violence and
thus sow the seeds for the perpetuation of violence and
conflicts.
Secondly, efforts in the disarmament field, in
particular as concerns weapons of mass destruction,
must be pursued and stepped up to free our world from
this terrible threat and to put an end to the arms race in
all its aspects.
But for regions such as Africa, it is light weapons
that are our weapons of mass destruction. Efforts to
date have been largely inadequate. My colleagues
know as well as I do that most of the conventional
weapons that are produced are circulating in
developing countries, and especially in Africa. Those
weapons are sometimes provided free of charge;
sometimes at cash prices that quash all competition;
and sometimes on credit against our raw materials: the
share belonging to future generations has been
mortgaged and is being badly managed. We must
therefore work towards effective and progressive
international legal standards to control the circulation
of light weapons. If it is to be a success, the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in all its Aspects, to be held next
year in Geneva, must indeed address all aspects of the
issue, including the legal arms trade, and must give
priority to transparency.
The devastating sight of the many victims of
landmines world-wide, including thousands of
children, causes us to urge all to ratify and implement
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction.
Thirdly, I think it important for us to devote
attention to the questions of impunity and of sanctions.
The prevention of bloody conflicts, the
implementation of conventions on human rights and on
international humanitarian law and the protection of
the most vulnerable require the entry into force of the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. We
must put an end to impunity in order to protect
individuals and communities against violence of all
kinds.
Sanctions form part of the means by which the
Organization can take action. They must be adapted to
their specific goals, because there have sometimes been
tragic humanitarian consequences. The recent sanctions
relating to the illicit exploitation of natural resources
demonstrate how much more effective targeted
sanctions can be. In our view, the Secretary-General’s
comments on this matter in his report on the
Millennium Assembly (A/54/2000) are apt and deserve
full attention.
Fourthly, cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations should be strengthened to
enable the United Nations, under the supervision of
those organizations, to be more effective at prevention
and at deploying locally based operations. The
international community and the Security Council must
therefore employ a consistent, sustained strategy to
build the capacity of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and of a future African union, and of regional
organizations, as well as to cooperate with them.
Finally, how could we fail to endorse all the
measures that have been advocated to strengthen
United Nations peacekeeping operations through, inter
alia, suitable mandates that include protection of the
civilian population, an improved planning capability,
rapid deployment of peace operations, and good
coordination among participants in the field. These
21
S/PV.4194
must be supplemented with socio-economic measures
for peace-building.
It is impossible to overstate how right it was for
the Council, last January, to have considered the
question of the AIDS pandemic in Africa, which poses
a genuine threat to security and to fight which all
resources must be mobilized and committed.
It is clear to all that peace and prosperity go hand
in hand, and that we must simultaneously tackle the
underlying causes of conflict, fight poverty and combat
the absence of democracy. Such a comprehensive,
consistent approach would have a broad, lasting impact
on the effective role of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security,
particularly in Africa, by providing a better life in
greater freedom for all.
For an Africa that is worthy and responsible, and
for a world at peace, we need such a partnership.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
vote on the draft resolution (S/2000/845) before it. If I
hear no objection, I shall now put the draft resolution
to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Bangladesh, Canada, China, France,
Jamaica, Malaysia, Mali, Namibia, Netherlands,
Russian Federation, Tunisia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1318 (2000).
I have one other brief item of business. I
understand that our Permanent Representatives have
discussed and agreed on the wording of a presidential
statement on the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
May I take it that we approve that statement and are
content that it should be issued by this Summit?
There being no objection, I shall arrange for the
statement to be issued as document S/PRST/2000/28.
I thank all participants for the part they have
played in this meeting; my thanks go to all the heads of
State or Government and Ministers for Foreign Affairs,
to the Secretary-General of the Organization of African
Unity, to the representatives of regional organizations
and to Mr. Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, who is present in
the Security Council Chamber.
The Security Council has thus concluded its
business for this meeting.
The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.
