United Nations S/PV.4130
00-39804 (E) This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be
incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation
concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fifty-fifth Year
4130th Meeting
Wednesday, 19 April 2000, 11.35 a.m.
New York
President: Mr. Axworthy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Canada)
Members: Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Listre
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Chowdhury
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wang Yingfan
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Levitte
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Miss Durrant
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Hasmy
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Keita
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Andjaba
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Scheffers
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ben Mustapha
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Yel’chenko
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Sir Jeremy Greenstock
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Soderberg
Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General to the Security Council on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/1999/957)
Security Council 4130th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
The meeting was called to order at 11.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflicts
Report of the Secretary-General to the Security
Council on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/1999/957)
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Colombia, Egypt,
Indonesia, Israel, Japan, New Zealand, Pakistan, Portugal,
the Republic of Korea, Singapore and the Sudan, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In accordance with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Ms. Wensley
(Australia), Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria), Mr. Kouliev
(Azerbaijan), Mr. Buallay (Bahrain), Mr. Valdivieso
(Colombia), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Wibisono
(Indonesia), Mr. Lancry (Israel), Mr. Kobayashi
(Japan), Mr. Powles (New Zealand), Mr. Babar
(Pakistan), Mr. Monteiro (Portugal), Mr. Suh Dae-
won (Republic of Korea), Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore)
and Mr. Erwa (Sudan) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council’s prior consultations, and in the
absence of objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jakob Kellenberger,
President of the International Committee of the Red Cross.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Kellenberger to take a seat at the Council
table.
If I hear no objection I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation to the Permanent
Observer of Switzerland to the United Nations to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the Permanent
Observer of Switzerland to the United Nations took
the seat reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council
is meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General to the Security Council on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, document
S/1999/957. Members of the Council also have before
them a draft resolution prepared in the course of the
Council’s prior consultations, which will be issued as
document S/2000/335.
If I may be allowed, before inviting the Secretary-
General to speak, I will just acknowledge the very good
attendance at today’s meeting. I would in particular
acknowledge the presence of 220 students from a model
United Nations Assembly, many of whom are Canadians.
We welcome these young United Nations delegates who
are joining us at today’s session, and we are glad to see
you here.
I now call on the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: I am very pleased to join
you today for this important debate dedicated to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I wish to
welcome the Foreign Minister of Canada and to express
my appreciation for his commitment to making this issue
a priority for the entire United Nations system. I also
wish to welcome the new President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), Mr. Jakob
Kellenberger, to this meeting.
The first debate on civilians in armed conflict last
year laid the groundwork for today’s vital effort to
transform our words of commitment into a better, safer
reality for the most vulnerable of our world. I am pleased
to say that both the Security Council and the General
Assembly followed up last year’s debate with concrete
steps. The General Assembly has focused its efforts on
strengthening legal protections: the adoption of a text by
2
Security Council 4130th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
the working group on an optional protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, and the expansion
of efforts to strengthen and extend the Protocol to the 1994
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel. The Security Council has also taken action to
provide enhanced protection for civilians. These efforts
have found most concrete expression in establishment of
the peacekeeping operations in Sierra Leone, East Timor
and the Democratic Republic of Congo.
The mandates of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) and the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) made specific
provision for the protection of civilians, and the mandates
of UNAMSIL and the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC)
provided for support for the protection of children through
the deployment of Child Protection Advisors.
The efforts within the Council and the General
Assembly have been supported in a variety of ways by the
Secretariat and United Nations agencies, as well as by
non-governmental organizations, our valued partners. We
have sought to strengthen the protection of internally
displaced persons, most recently in February of this year,
when my Representative on Internally Displaced Persons
undertook a mission to Burundi to urge the Government to
dismantle the regroupment camps.
Elsewhere in Africa, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is
implementing programmes for prevention and response to
sexual violence in Tanzania, Kenya, Guinea, Liberia and
Sierra Leone. Working with representatives in the field, the
United Nations Children’s Fund, the World Health
Organization and my Special Representative for Children in
Armed Conflict have negotiated “days of tranquility”,
making arrangements in Angola, East Timor, Sierra Leone
and Sri Lanka in order to permit immunization and
vaccination campaigns.
My report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict contained a number of recommendations. Today, I
wish to draw particular attention to three of them and urge
the Council to give greater consideration to their
implementation. Perhaps the most far-reaching of the
recommendations related to the creation of a rapid
deployment force. During the very same week that I urged
this step, events in East Timor offered the clearest evidence
of the need for such a capacity. In that case, thankfully, the
Australian Government, supported by other Council
members, stepped in to fill the vacuum.
Nevertheless, the crisis underscored the importance
of having a more systematic rapid-reaction capacity in the
United Nations. I urge the Council to support these efforts
and to consider taking further steps towards this
fundamental strengthening of the Organization’s ability to
protect civilians in armed conflict.
The second recommendation I wish to mention
relates to cases where there has been sufficient warning
of impending attacks or an escalation of conflict and
where the Council has in some instances made use of
preventive deployments.
In February this year, we successfully concluded
such a mission in the Central African Republic. The
positive impact of preventive measures continues to be
proved also by the role of the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Prevlaka as a stabilizing force in the
Prevlaka peninsula. I welcome the Council’s willingness
to consider the future establishment of preventive
missions, including the dispatch of monitors and
fact-finding missions, when we know that they can truly
make the difference between the peaceful settlement of
disputes and violent conflict.
Where a conflict has already led to a mass exodus of
a civilian population, a critical element in enhancing their
protection lies in improving the security of the refugee
camps. This was the focus of the third recommendation
I wish to note today. Since the introduction of my report,
UNHCR and others have taken a number of initiatives in
relation to the security, civilian and humanitarian
character of the camps and settlements. Such efforts have
included the provision of material support to local
security services in Kenya and Tanzania and an
arrangement in the refugee camps in the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia that enabled Swedish police
officers to work in partnership with the local police.
Efforts have also been made to relocate a number of
refugees away from borders in Albania, Guinea, Liberia,
Chad, the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In Zambia, on the border to
Angola, UNHCR cooperates closely with the International
Organization for Migration and the World Food
Programme to move refugees to other locations either
through airlifts or by road.
In future conflict situations, it may be necessary to
consider temporary security zones and safe corridors for
the protection of civilians and I welcome the Council’s
readiness to consider the feasibility of such measures.
3
Security Council 4130th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
However, I must emphasize that, in situations where the
consent of the parties is not forthcoming, such security
zones require the presence of a credible force.
This open debate of the Council bears vivid testimony
to a growing recognition that our first duty in any conflict
is to protect innocent civilians, who have no part in the
fighting, who have nothing to gain from its persistence and
who have no choice but to rely on the international
community to help them in their most desperate hour of
need. To answer their call is our most important obligation
under the Charter, and it is my hope that this debate will
give further impetus to our efforts to do so.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for his
very evident leadership on this very crucial issue.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Jakob Kellenberger, President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, to whom I give
the floor.
Mr. Kellenberger: I thank you, Mr. President, for
your invitation, which attests to the recognition of the role
played by the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) in an area at the core of its concerns: the protection
of civilian populations in armed conflict. It gives me
particular pleasure to take the floor under your presidency,
Sir, as you are a convincing promoter of the concept of
human security — a concept close to my heart.
The importance of taking the humanitarian dimension
into account in maintaining international peace and security
is now generally acknowledged. The open debate that took
place in March at the initiative of the Bangladesh
presidency is evidence of firm commitment to pursuing that
course. That commitment should be translated into even
more tangible measures.
The ICRC’s action is rooted in international
humanitarian law. As guardian of that body of law, the
ICRC endeavours to ensure that it is respected by all parties
involved in conflict, be they Governments or non-state
entities. Through its presence in more than 80 countries, the
ICRC establishes a dialogue with all actors in conflicts with
a view to creating a relationship of trust, thereby securing
the practical implementation of humanitarian law and
making sure that we have access to all victims of armed
conflicts in order to protect and assist them.
The protection of civilians is at the centre of that law.
I would, however, like to point out in passing that
humanitarian law also protects combatants, in particular
those placed hors de combat: prisoners of war and sick or
wounded members of the armed forces. For this
protection to be effective, all States must ratify the
humanitarian law instruments, such as the 1977 Protocols
Additional to the Geneva Conventions. Furthermore, it is
crucial that States adopt national implementation measures
and give instruction in the law, especially to their armed
forces. These various aspects of legal protection are vital
and we are glad to see that they are mentioned in the
Secretary-General’s report.
Despite all the horrors that we witness and are often
powerless to remedy, and despite the obvious limits to
what is known as legal protection, we are convinced that
humanitarian law is as relevant as ever. This was one of
the conclusions of a major survey, entitled “People on
War”, carried out by the ICRC last year among the
population of several countries, most of which had been
affected by war. The survey strongly reaffirmed the
importance of maintaining the distinction between
civilians and combatants, the cardinal principle of
humanitarian law.
In practice, however, that distinction is tending to
become blurred. Indeed, civilians have become the
primary victims and often the very object of war. Various
reasons, mainly ethnic, religious, economic and social, are
put forward to explain this phenomenon. Those causes are
compounded by other factors, such as the emergence of
paramilitary groups, whose members may have had no
proper training and whose actions may be unpredictable,
sometimes committing atrocities and becoming easy
targets themselves. An equally worrying fact is that
members of regular armed forces, if they are without
resources because they have not received their pay, may
resort to all sorts of excesses in order to survive.
The aim of humanitarian law is to protect the
civilian population as a whole against attack, whether
targeted or indiscriminate, and against acts of violence
and abuse of all kinds. Humanitarian law also provides
specific protection for certain categories of victims, such
as women, children, internally displaced persons, refugees
and persons reported missing. The work of the ICRC,
therefore, cannot be limited to certain categories; it
encompasses all victims, while taking into account their
particular vulnerability.
Violations of humanitarian law perpetrated against
civilians cause mass population movements. Millions of
people are terrorized and forced to flee for their lives, or
4
Security Council 4130th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
are driven from their homes and sometimes resettled against
their will in camps or villages.
Today the ICRC affords protection and assistance —
often the two cannot be separated — to some five million
displaced persons. Africa is particularly severely affected.
In Angola, the new upsurge in fighting has caused a mass
exodus from rural areas into towns. The ICRC is providing
aid in the form of food, medical assistance and agricultural
rehabilitation for some 330,000 displaced persons and
residents in the Huambo and Kuito areas.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the ICRC
is supplying about 200,000 vulnerable people with food and
other relief, not to mention the support given to the medical
infrastructure, the ICRC’s efforts to gain access to persons
deprived of their freedom, and the distribution of safe water
to hundreds of thousands of people.
In Colombia, where it has been working since 1969,
the ICRC has set up, in cooperation with the Colombian
Red Cross, an aid programme for displaced victims of the
internal conflict. In 1999 the ICRC alone gave emergency
assistance to some 170,000 displaced people.
To take one last example — and I am mentioning only
some of the most striking examples — in Afghanistan,
where it has 70 expatriate staff and over 1,000 national
employees, the ICRC is assisting thousands of displaced
families and families who have returned to their places of
origin, and 23,000 more in Kabul where the head of the
family is widowed or disabled. In addition, over 150,000
people receive medical care thanks to the programme of
support for hospitals. Altogether, the ICRC provides full or
partial support for more than 30 surgical units and runs five
limb-fitting centres.
These needs are so enormous that they could never be
covered by a single organization. The ICRC, concerned to
achieve maximum efficiency, takes part in the examination
and formulation of strategies designed to strengthen
consultation and cooperation with other humanitarian actors,
in particular the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the United Nations
specialized agencies and others, so as to ensure
complementary action and avoid duplication of work. This
cooperation and coordination takes place laterally and on
the operational level in the field.
The ICRC endeavours to promote harmonization of the
approaches of the various humanitarian agencies. Since
1996 it has held four workshops on the protection of
victims of armed conflict to help enhance the
effectiveness of humanitarian and human rights
organizations. The main thrust of this initiative is to
clarify the concept of protection as understood by
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law. In
regard to displaced persons, the ICRC has drawn attention
to the untoward consequences that can result from the
simple transposition of long-term solutions appropriate for
refugees onto persons displaced within their own country.
That being said, I remain convinced that cooperation and
coordination between the different humanitarian actors
can and must be improved. In this effort, the ICRC can
be counted on to act in the interest of the victims without
compromising its independence, neutrality or impartiality.
These three principles have no merits on their own but
are designed to allow us to do our job in the field as
effectively as possible and also to have, through that
presence, an adequate early warning capacity.
I should like now to say a few words about
particularly vulnerable categories of persons.
As concerns women in war, the Geneva Conventions
and their additional Protocols afford women, as civilians,
the same general protection as men. However, these
instruments recognize the necessity of offering women
specific protection because of their special needs. Despite
these rules, women continue to suffer and, all too often,
to be the targets of violence in armed conflicts. The
parties to conflict are obliged to ensure the protection of,
and respect for, women. It is high time for that protection
to become a reality. Improving the protection of women
and girls in times of armed conflict is a priority for the
ICRC.
Indeed, this resolve has taken shape in a project
entitled “Women affected by armed conflict”. The ICRC
is currently drawing up guidelines for its operational
activities relating to protection and assistance for women
in times of armed conflict. This commitment takes the
form of a four-year programme covering, among other
things, the dissemination of the rules of humanitarian law
protecting women and the issue of sexual violence. The
ICRC has also undertaken to make sure that all its
activities take account of the needs of women and girls,
on the basis of a study which is nearing completion. An
intensive awareness-raising campaign is under way in the
media. Before Beijing + 5, a film produced jointly with
the BBC, a radio programme and a new brochure on
women in war will be prepared and ready.
5
Security Council 4130th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
It is impossible to broach this matter without recalling
Canada’s special commitment to the issue and the role
played by the Canadian Government and Red Cross Society
during the twenty-seventh International Conference of the
Red Cross and Red Crescent. The plight of children in
times of armed conflict has been a source of concern for
the ICRC for many years. The Geneva Conventions and
their additional Protocols afford children general protection
as members of the civilian population. There are also a
large number of provisions affording them specific
protection. All of our field operations comprise activities
aimed at protecting children and at ensuring their health and
safety. Examples of these activities are the identification
and registration of unaccompanied children and follow-up
of their cases, representations to secure the release of
children held in detention, physical or psychosocial
rehabilitation, and the restoration of family links.
The ICRC cooperates, and intends to continue to
cooperate, in an effective manner with other agencies in the
field and with Governments. The ICRC and the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement will
carry on working to improve the situation of children in
times of conflict, in accordance with the Plan of Action
adopted at the twenty-seventh International Conference.
I should now like to refer to missing persons. For
families, one of the most tragic consequences of war is not
knowing what has happened to loved ones. Apart from the
mental suffering caused by this uncertainty, there can also
be serious legal and economic implications. Tracing missing
persons has always been at the heart of the ICRC’s
mandate, and in the aftermath of fighting, it is one of its
priorities.
One practical way of ascertaining the fate of persons
reported missing is to negotiate access to places of
detention with the authorities concerned and to hand them
lists drawn up on the basis of statements of the missing
persons’ families. In this task the ICRC is often aided by
the national Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, which
are invaluable partners both within the country concerned
and abroad.
Humanitarian law bears witness to the importance that
States attach to the issue of missing persons, but the
relevant rules have yet to be properly applied in all conflict
situations. The ICRC commends the efforts made by the
international community in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in
Kosovo and after the Gulf War, but urges it to heed the
plight of families in other contexts which may attract less
attention from the media. Indeed, the ICRC suggests that
the issue of persons unaccounted for, and its own role in
that regard, be systematically included in peace accords.
The ICRC is convinced that the incorporation of
humanitarian issues, such as missing persons, prisoners of
war and detainees, can strengthen post-conflict
peace-consolidation efforts.
I shall now speak about the role of the Security
Council. When you, Mr. President, invited me to speak
before the Security Council today, you asked me to
outline the ICRC’s views on the progress made in the
Council since its debate on the protection of civilians that
took place last year. I will do so with modesty, which is
advisable in general, but particularly so for a greenhorn.
But I will do so gladly. I would like, first of all, to stress
how much we appreciate the growing importance that the
Security Council attaches to the protection of civilians in
times of armed conflict. The mobilization of the
international community on this issue inevitably hinges on
the Security Council’s awareness of its urgency.
The Secretary-General’s excellent report and the
numerous recommendations it contains also go to the
heart of the matter and raise very pertinent questions.
Furthermore, it is most encouraging that the Council is
disposed to establish a monitoring mechanism and that the
major humanitarian agencies are associated with this
initiative, which guarantee that the debate will not remain
a virtual one. Security Council resolutions contribute to
creating a culture conducive to the prevention of
violations and the cessation of impunity for the culprits.
We cannot but welcome this trend. However, these
appeals will rapidly become empty words unless they are
accompanied by practical and concrete measures intended
to improve protection of the physical integrity of
individuals.
In his report to the Security Council on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, issued last
September, the Secretary-General drew a clear distinction
between recommended measures to strengthen physical
protection and recommended measures to strengthen legal
protection. I find this distinction useful and necessary, for
we are all too aware of the limitations of legal protection
alone. Speaking for a humanitarian organization that is
present and active on a permanent basis in practically all
situations of armed conflict, I would like to add in all
modesty that this active presence and the will — the
strong will — to maintain dialogue and contact with all
parties to the conflict constitute an essential factor for
protection in themselves.
6
Security Council 4130th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
The Secretary-General’s recommendation that the
Security Council consider the imposition of appropriate
enforcement action in the face of massive and ongoing
abuse was made in the context of a debate which became
acutely pertinent following the action of North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) forces in the Balkans. Here I
would like to share with the members of the Council a
concern of the ICRC which has to do very much with the
weight of words. The term “humanitarian” has often been
misused. We have heard talk of a “humanitarian war” or
even of “coercive humanitarian countermeasures”, to cite
only a few of the expressions that create dangerous
confusion as to the respective roles and responsibilities of
political actors on the one hand and humanitarian
organizations on the other.
The question here is not the validity of coercive action
in extreme circumstances. Such action is often a last resort,
necessary to protect the civilian population. Indeed, it may
be essential in situations where there are large-scale and
systematic violations of human rights and humanitarian law.
The States parties to the 1949 Geneva Conventions have
undertaken not only to respect, but also to ensure respect
for, the rules set out in those Conventions.
Coercive measures, however, should be envisaged only
in extreme cases. The Security Council has numerous other
means at its disposal for enhancing the security of
populations, ranging from preventive deployment to the
dispatch of peacekeeping or peace-consolidation forces. The
Council is to be commended for making provision, in the
mandate of certain missions, for measures designed to
protect civilians who are in immediate danger of physical
violence. These innovative developments demonstrate the
will to take concrete action.
In the ICRC’s view, the important thing is to
distinguish between political and military action aimed at
addressing the causes of conflict and humanitarian action
aimed at addressing its effects. The law governing the right
to use force, or jus ad bellum, must therefore remain clearly
distinct from humanitarian law automatically applicable in
the event of military operations, or jus in bello. The
legitimacy of the cause being defended can in no
circumstances exempt a military operation from the
obligations laid down in international humanitarian law.
We have noted, however, that peacekeeping operations
are taking on an increasing number of humanitarian aspects.
This trend entails certain dangers. In situations where peace
is still fragile, United Nations troops may have to use force,
which can create the impression that they are party to the
conflict. This can cause them to be denied access to
certain regions and thus to some of the victims. In
general, the ICRC believes that coercive action, apart
from affording protection for civilians, should create
conditions that allow humanitarian agencies to operate,
but without being associated with such action in any way.
Being associated with coercive action would jeopardize
the work of humanitarian organizations by undermining
their credibility and their acceptance by the parties to the
conflict. So it is the confusion between different modes of
action that is causing us concern and appears dangerous.
To each his own: the use of force is the domain of the
military, and relief activities the domain of humanitarian
agencies.
I would not like to conclude without saying a few
words about the sanctions which have been at the centre
of the Council’s debates this week. The ICRC has always
been concerned by the humanitarian consequences for the
civilian population; therefore, it cannot but express its
appreciation for the decision to establish a working group
on that topic, notably with a view to fully taking into
account humanitarian consequences.
It is essential to strengthen all aspects of
complementary action if we are to bring about tangible
improvement in the protection of civilians. In this regard,
I feel that firm resolve on the part of the Security Council
to take bold political decisions and create the conditions
necessary for the humanitarian organizations to preserve
their indispensable independence will guarantee effective
implementation of our shared objectives.
The President: I would like to express to Mr.
Kellenberger — I am sure, on behalf of all members of
the Council — great admiration and appreciation for the
work of the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Mr. Scheffers (Netherlands): After a thorough and
lengthy process, we are close to a first wind-up of a very
important debate on the topical issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. The time has indeed come for
some concrete and coherent action.
In this connection, I would like to commend the
Canadian presidency, and you personally, Minister
Axworthy, for the preparation of this debate and, as a
matter of fact, for the very capable handling by Canada
of this whole issue. The Netherlands was more than
happy to assist Canada in its efforts during the
Netherlands’ presidency last September. My delegation
appreciates highly the valuable input — including
7
Security Council 4130th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
today — by the Secretary-General and the former and the
present President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross. A week ago the Security Council had the
opportunity to discuss this issue with three major
humanitarian non-governmental organizations, which
provided us with unique insight on how protection needs
present themselves in the field.
As the representative of Portugal will make a
statement on behalf of the European Union later in this
debate, I will limit myself to four specific observations.
Taking stock of what has been accomplished so far, I
would like to recall some of the main points made by the
Netherlands delegation in previous debates and to see where
we are now.
The first and most prominent point deals with the full
compliance with the rules and principles of international
law, including human rights and international humanitarian
law. Geneva should not be regarded as a distant cousin of
the United Nations family residing in New York, but as an
intrinsic part of it. The Geneva and Hague Conventions
should always guide us when we are dealing with armed
conflicts. They contain provisions for conflict prevention
and conflict resolution and should therefore be fully used.
In this connection, I would like to reiterate my delegation’s
earlier observations on the International Fact-Finding
Commission. My delegation also believes that the Security
Council should further enhance its cooperation with the
International Committee of the Red Cross.
The perpetrators of genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes should be prosecuted and duly punished. I
seize this opportunity to pay tribute once more to the
International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia, which have clearly proved that we should not
hesitate to bring to justice those who might have considered
themselves immune. The early entry into force of the
Statute establishing the International Criminal Court will
further contribute to ending impunity and thus to the
prevention of future war crimes. Although the issue of
impunity is not dealt with in the draft resolution to be
adopted, we believe it merits the full attention of the
competent United Nations bodies.
My second point is respect for international law,
including human rights law, which is essential for the
prevention of armed conflict. As stated by the
Secretary-General in his outstanding millennium report,
gross and systematic violations of human rights offend
every precept of our common humanity. He referred in
particular to Rwanda and Srebrenica. In the face of grave
and widespread violations of human rights, the Security
Council cannot afford to stand by and watch. The Council
has the duty to act on behalf of the international
community and should therefore consider which role to
play in stopping these violations and thus prevent a
further aggravation of the conflict situation. Such
violations may well lead to crises that could endanger
world peace and security. The Commission on Human
Rights has an important role in making sure that human
rights standards are upheld. It is therefore of the utmost
importance that such violations are brought to the
attention of this Council.
Equally important, and this is my third point, is the
necessity of full and unimpeded access for United Nations
and humanitarian personnel to populations in need,
including refugees and internally displaced persons. It is
up to the countries where such people in need are to
make sure that their humanitarian requirements, including
their protection, are met. When these countries are not
able to provide for such needs, they should welcome
international support and support from non-governmental
organizations. The Council should act and take
appropriate steps when there is a denial of such access
including the freedom to move to the areas concerned, as
suggested in the draft resolution we are about to adopt.
Under specific circumstances, this may comprise the use
of all measures at the Council’s disposal, such as the
imposition of targeted sanctions.
My fourth and final point is that my delegation
would like to emphasize how important the need is for
United Nations or United Nations-mandated action to be
adequate, comprehensive and integrated. Strategic
frameworks, such as the one agreed for Afghanistan, are
a powerful tool to ensure such an approach. By
combining actions in the field of politics, human rights,
humanitarian assistance, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, and development, a very similar approach
was applied in the cases of East Timor, Kosovo and
Sierra Leone. The draft resolution before us contains a
menu of relevant elements, which should be considered
fully whenever United Nations mandates are being
prepared. The Netherlands would especially like to
encourage the Secretary-General to make full use of the
prerogatives conferred on him by the United Nations
Charter and to fully participate in the preparation of such
mandates.
In conclusion, my delegation believes that the
necessary prerequisites for adequate Security Council
action have been well defined by the draft resolution,
8
Security Council 4130th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
translating as much as possible the proposed
recommendations into a framework for future action. It is
up to the Council to take up the challenge and to ensure
that the protection of civilians in armed conflict is part and
parcel of its work.
Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): To the
Deputy Secretary-General and Foreign Minister Axworthy,
we are delighted that you are here. I also understand we
have some Model United Nations students in the gallery, so
welcome — I hope you are inspired today to follow us all.
This morning we are here to discuss a very difficult,
but a very important topic, one that was at the forefront of
the minds of the founders of the United Nations and of
many other statesmen and political leaders before them. The
United Nations founders set up this Organization “to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war”, and to
limit the human suffering and death that are the inevitable
result of war. The Geneva Conventions stipulate that, at a
minimum, civilians shall be treated humanely and not be
murdered, tortured, mutilated, taken hostage, cruelly treated
or made to face humiliating outrages against their dignity.
This focus on the impact of war upon civilians has been at
the heart of the United Nations since its beginning.
Unfortunately, ever since the founding of the United
Nations and the conclusion of the Geneva Conventions, we
have continued to see what the Secretary-General has
termed a “civilianization of conflict” — as conflicts
increasingly involve actors who blithely disregard the
fundamental protections afforded civilians under
international humanitarian law and are indeed often ignorant
of, or indifferent to, fundamental rules of armed conflict.
The traditional tools of diplomacy are not always
completely effective, but as members of the Security
Council with a responsibility to maintain international peace
and security, we must identify means to address the
outrages being perpetrated against civilians.
All of us here in the Council face a dilemma. We are
aware of, and wish to promote and uphold, the ideals that
motivated the founders of the United Nations. However, as
we all know, we are constrained by various political
realities. Our job is to walk a fine line and find a balance
between what is ideal and what is feasible. The Secretary-
General’s report now before us sets out more than three
dozen recommendations for steps that can be taken by the
Council, by Member States and by other organs in the
United Nations system to do a better job of protecting
civilians from falling victim to armed conflicts. In fact, in
various situations we have already put into practice many
of the steps the Secretary-General recommends. While we
support the ideals and the general goal of his report, we
believe that every specific situation of armed conflict
must be dealt with individually, in its own context, and
bearing in mind the global standards set by the applicable
provisions of international humanitarian law.
The United States appreciates the opportunity to
exchange ideas on this difficult topic during the long and
painstaking negotiations that have resulted in the draft
resolution we are to adopt today. We support this draft
resolution and will work with the other members of the
Council to implement its provisions as appropriate in
different circumstances.
The best way to protect civilians, of course, is to
prevent conflict before it erupts, and the Security Council
acknowledged this when it discussed the matter last
November. We recognize the importance of early warning
and early preventive actions, and we also recognize the
many serious risks civilians face during armed conflict:
they are often subjected to armed attack, or rape, or
abduction. Whether they have fled their homes or
remained in an unstable area, whether they have crossed
an international border to relative safety or sought refuge
nearby, their lives or their basic human needs may be at
risk. They may face danger from the indiscriminate and
irresponsible use of landmines or the uncontrolled spread
of small arms and light weapons carried by too many of
their fellow citizens and, many times, by their fellow
child citizens. Clandestine radio broadcasts inciting
genocide add another evil dimension to an already
dangerous situation. And camps for displaced persons and
refugees, which should be a temporary haven, may be
infiltrated by armed elements who then hold the most
vulnerable among them hostage.
There is a variety of options that we can consider.
At times, encouraging diplomatic talks between the parties
may be the proper response. At other times, the Council
may need to dispatch monitors or impose targeted
sanctions or even deploy civilian police or peacekeeping
troops. In other situations it may be appropriate to
establish temporary humanitarian corridors or safe zones,
or to choose an entirely different course of action
altogether. Badly devised actions risk raising the dangers
for the very people that we are seeking to help.
We also need to be sure that the United Nations
personnel in the field are trained and equipped to get the
job done right. Already, peacekeeping troops receive
military training; civilian police receive training in
9
Security Council 4130th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
patrolling and investigations; civilian administrators receive
training in management techniques; and relief workers are
trained in the logistics of delivering assistance. However,
they also must be fully aware of the rules of international
humanitarian law and of the special protection needs of the
most vulnerable populations, including those of women,
children and victims of disabling or communicable diseases.
The United Nations has a role to play in helping make such
training available, as do Member States. The United
Nations also has a role in helping with the demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration of former combatants,
including child soldiers. But it cannot do these things alone.
The host Governments must do their part. The World Bank,
the United Nations Development Programme and other
development agencies can also help make the transition
from the initial phase of demobilization to the longer-term
phase of reintegration into society.
In closing, I want to reiterate a point of paramount
importance: civilians cannot be adequately protected by the
international community alone. The authorities of the State
in which armed conflict is occurring must cooperate with
the international community and humanitarian organizations
in ensuring access to the civilian population at risk, and by
ensuring the safety and security of the United Nations and
humanitarian personnel involved in operations designed to
assist civilians. Each party to a conflict has an obligation
under international law towards civilians, and each
Government has a responsibility towards its citizens. Each
Government must do all in its power to live up to the tenets
of international law I referred to at the beginning of these
remarks and to protect the civilians under its authority
against threats to their lives, their dignity and their personal
rights.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I would first
like to thank the Secretary-General for his excellent
introduction to our debate and to welcome the presence
among us of Ms. Fréchette.
I would also like to welcome the presence at the
Council table of Mr. Jakob Kellenberger, the new President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
whose striking statement sheds light on our discussions. In
addition, I would like to pay heartfelt tribute to the unique
and irreplaceable role all our countries have conferred upon
the ICRC, whose members do their job with remarkable
courage and professionalism.
Our debate is at once essential — for we are talking
about protecting whole populations — and also very
technical, because it entails defining the most effective
means of ensuring that protection. The Security Council
held a very in-depth debate on 16 and 17 September on
the whole host of issues raised by the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. There is no point in repeating
that debate today, yet we must agree that our recent work
has confirmed just how important this subject is. That
importance has been specifically borne out by the
discussion we had last week on the Carlsson report,
regarding genocide in Rwanda. Following the adoption of
resolution 1265 (1999) of 17 September 1999, we are
called upon today to adopt a new draft resolution that
should make it possible to follow through on a number of
major recommendations contained in the Secretary-
General’s report of last September.
First of all, the draft resolution rivets our attention
in the way it couches the matter of protecting civilians in
armed conflict at the very heart of the Council’s
concerns — and indeed at the heart of its work. The first
operative paragraph states that the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General of 8
September will be taken into account by the Council in
carrying out its work. This means that that report is to be
an ongoing point of reference for us. Moreover, the draft
resolution clearly points out that the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is an issue that covers most of
the activities of the Council, whether we are talking of
prevention, peacekeeping or coercive action.
The draft resolution also stresses the determination
of the Council to secure all necessary information about
the status of civilians in armed conflict. Under operative
paragraphs 4, 6, 8, 24 and 25, the Secretary-General and
the Member States are invited to provide the Council with
such information. That information may come from any
pertinent source, among which we know are included
humanitarian agencies and many different non-
governmental organizations present at the sites of conflict.
It will be up to the Council to deal with such information.
That task presupposes, as has been highlighted in the
debate on Rwanda, that we in the Council will have more
time to do this and that we will undoubtedly dedicate less
time to thematic debates.
Finally and most importantly, the draft resolution
stresses the Council’s readiness to face up to its
responsibilities and to act with all the means at its
disposal to make a contribution to better protecting
civilians in armed conflict.
One of the means envisaged by the draft resolution,
notably in operative paragraphs 8 and 12, involves
10
Security Council 4130th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
appeals issued by the Council to the parties to a conflict. A
second means, addressed in operative paragraph 4, is the
establishment of operations designed to prevent conflict; the
United Nations Preventive Deployment Force in Macedonia
and the United Nations Mission of Observers observers in
Prevlaka have shown what the Council can do in preventive
terms. I also wish to mention the United Nations Mission
in the Central African Republic, which afforded a very
good recent example of United Nations success.
A third means involves peacekeeping operations of the
more conventional variety. These operations may play a
major role in protecting civilians. To that end, we must
ensure a better definition of their mandates, which is
addressed in operative paragraphs 13, 16, 17 and 18 of the
draft resolution. We must also ensure a speedier
deployment capability for such operations, as has just been
emphasized by the Secretary-General. We look forward
with interest to the outcome of work under way in the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations on this vital
topic. Finally, we must devote special attention to training
personnel involved in such operations, particularly in
humanitarian law, as recalled in operative paragraph 19 of
the draft resolution.
A fourth instrument that deserves our attention is
sanctions. The adoption of sanctions by the Council during
an armed conflict must not contribute to the deterioration of
the conditions of civilians. The Secretary-General’s report
contains recommendations on this score, as does General
Assembly resolution 51/242. It will be the responsibility of
the Working Group on sanctions, which we have recently
established, to take these into account, as specified in
operative paragraph 22.
The issue of sanctions bears on the work of the
Council within the context of Chapter VII of the Charter.
The draft resolution contains very important provisions in
this regard. Operative paragraph 5 provides that a threat to
international peace and security can result from attacks
against the civilian population and from systematic, flagrant
and widespread violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law. This is an especially important assertion.
In effect, it means that in the face of such violations, the
Council intends to place its work within the framework of
Chapter VII and, depending on the circumstances, to resort
to the possible measures referred to in that Chapter.
We attach great importance to the provisions of the
draft resolution relating to actions taken in the struggle
against anti-personnel mines and against the dissemination
of light and small weapons.
The resolution we are about to adopt thus constitutes
an important phase in our efforts to avoid the recurrence
of the humanitarian tragedies of the last decade. I
therefore wish to pay tribute to Canada’s activity in this
very important arena. We deem particularly encouraging
the fact that our debate will be pursued next year on the
basis of new recommendations of the Secretary-General.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of France for his kind words addressed to
me.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation)(spoke in Russian):
We are pleased, Mr. Minister, that you are with us once
again directing the work of the Security Council. We are
also happy to welcome to this Chamber the President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Jakob
Kellenberger. We thank him for his contribution to the
work of the Council today.
Today, on the eve of the fifty-fifth anniversary of
the end of the Second World War, consideration by the
Security Council of issues related to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is of particular significance.
The Russian Federation follows with great attention
the relevant activities of the United Nations, including
those of the Security Council and other bodies. The goal
of civilian protection, as well as the humanitarian aspects
of international peacekeeping missions, is becoming
increasingly important. We welcome the current debate
and express our gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
report, his recommendations and his statement made
today.
Russia’s position on this item is based on the need
for an effective, adequate international response to all
crises, including those of a humanitarian nature. This
response should be in strict compliance with the norms of
international law and the provisions of the United Nations
Charter. It also entails the primary responsibility of the
Security Council for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the strict observance of international
rules of conduct by all States and the implementation of
norms and principles of international law, including
international humanitarian law, by all parties to an armed
conflict.
The problem of protecting civilians in armed conflict
is multifaceted and requires a comprehensive approach.
Hence, it is fundamental to eradicate war from human
society, to prevent and put an end to conflicts. This,
11
Security Council 4130th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
inter alia, is the thrust of Russian initiatives designed to
elaborate a concept of the world in the twenty-first century
and to define the legal basis for the use of force in
international relations in our globalizing world.
Among our highest priorities in this regard is to step
up efforts for a more effective use of early warning
capabilities and preventive diplomacy, deployment and
disarmament, including combating illicit trafficking in small
arms. In the context of our discussion, we should
specifically highlight the principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes between States and the role of the
General Assembly and Security Council in accordance with
Chapter VI of the Charter.
Russia, like many other States, is fully aware from its
own experience of the meaning of war and of the suffering
it brings to peoples. Despite the efforts of the international
community, armed conflicts continue to cause death and
suffering for many thousands of people on our planet,
particularly innocent civilians. Many of them are children,
women, the elderly, refugees and displaced persons; in
other words, the most vulnerable groups of the population.
Political and humanitarian personnel of United Nations
missions, the International Committee of the Red Cross and
non-governmental organizations also fall victim to armed
conflict.
The primary responsibility for protecting civilians in
all circumstances is vested in the States and parties to an
armed conflict. However, international efforts undertaken,
including those undertaken by the Security Council, can
have a powerful, positive impact on the performance of this
task. We consider the resolution to be adopted after today’s
discussion as a significant step in the right direction. It will
serve the purpose of enhancing protection of civilians as
well as international personnel and will be a serious
warning for those who violate international humanitarian
law in the course of armed conflicts.
Last year marked half a century since the adoption of
the Geneva Conventions on the protection of victims of
war. Unfortunately, despite the fact that the vast majority of
States have become parties to the Conventions, there is still
too wide a gap between the provisions contained therein
and their implementation during armed conflicts. The
problems in this sphere should continue to be addressed in
the United Nations General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council (ECOSOC), the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC) and other bodies directly involved in
the protection of civilians in armed conflicts. We support
the strengthening of cooperation and coordination between
the Security Council and the above-mentioned organs on
the understanding that in civilian protection just as in
other issues there is a “division of labour” based on the
provisions of the United Nations Charter and other
international legal instruments.
Bearing this in mind, Russia is open to a broad
dialogue aimed at reaching agreement on specific ways to
mobilize the additional potential of international political
and legal means for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation commends
Canada for emphasizing on the issue of human security
during its presidency of the Council this month. We
believe that the subject of the Council’s meeting today,
“Protection of civilians in armed conflict”, is a clear
reflection of Canada’s continuing commitment to the
promotion of human security, for after all, the underlying
purpose of maintaining peace and security around the
world is to preserve the security and well-being of each
individual. My delegation is also gratified, Mr. President,
that you have made this an open meeting to allow for the
participation of the general membership of the
Organization, thereby contributing further to the openness
and transparency in the work of the Council to which
Canada, and others in the Council, is also strongly
committed. We are particularly pleased to see you, Sir,
preside over today’s meeting. Your active participation in
the meetings of the Council has set a benchmark for your
ministerial colleagues to follow.
My delegation is appreciative of the important
remarks made this morning by the Secretary-General and
Mr. Jakob Kellenberger, the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). Their very pertinent
observations and proposals deserve the serious
consideration of the Council. My delegation also
appreciates Mr. Kellenberger’s comments on the
humanitarian impact of sanctions, which is equally
pertinent to the discussion at hand. We note that the
Secretary-General himself has also touched on this aspect
in his report.
The seriousness and emphasis placed by the Security
Council on the protection of civilians affected by armed
conflict are evidenced by the number of meetings already
devoted to this subject. Only last month the Council had
an open meeting to discuss the important subject of
humanitarian aspects of issues before the Council in the
context of the maintenance of peace and security. We also
discussed, in February this year, the issue of the
12
Security Council 4130th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
protection of United Nations and associated personnel, and
humanitarian personnel in conflict zones. The report of the
Secretary-General to the Council on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, which forms the basis of the
draft resolution we will be adopting later today, is a
response to the need for a set of guidelines on how to
better protect civilians, which have more and more often
become the targets of violence by combatants and armed
elements in armed conflicts.
The international community is becoming increasingly
alarmed at the growing number of civilians caught up in
armed conflicts around the world, and particularly
vulnerable groups such as women, children, the aged and
the infirm, who constitute some 90 per cent of conflict
casualties around the world. What is more disturbing is the
fact that they have increasingly become deliberate targets as
part of the combatants’ war strategy. This is a deplorable
development in the history of warfare. Such inhumane acts
are unacceptable and must be condemned in the strongest
terms. They are criminal and cruel acts for which the
perpetrators must not be allowed to go scot-free, as this
would only strengthen the culture of impunity that is so
pervasive in so many areas of armed conflict around the
world.
My delegation believes that the protection of civilians
in armed conflicts should be all-encompassing. They should
not only be assured of their physical security in situations
of armed conflict but also be provided with legal protection
under international law. This point has been underscored by
the Secretary-General and the President of the ICRC and
previous speakers. There are a number of international
instruments or conventions that provide a legal basis for
their protection, but these have not prevented civilians from
being attacked and targeted with impunity. The perpetrators
of these crimes must be warned that they are accountable
for their actions and cannot hope to escape the full penalty
of the law, even after the conflict is over. Only through
such stern warnings by the international community and the
actual prosecution and punishment of the guilty can these
criminal acts be brought to an end. We must, singly and
collectively, demonstrate our resolve to mete out
punishment to those responsible.
As a practical measure to ensure the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, it is important that both military
and civilian United Nations personnel involved in
peacekeeping missions be appropriately sensitized on the
subject and provided with adequate training and instruction
on international humanitarian and human rights law so as
to be better able to handle actual situations on the ground.
It is imperative that they have unimpeded access to
civilians in need.
The physical protection of civilians in armed conflict
has become even more urgent than before in respect of
the hundreds of thousands of refugees in refugee camps
around the world. The Secretary-General has stressed this
point just now. Serious efforts must be made to ensure
that armed elements are not allowed into refugee camps,
unless they are first disarmed. This is to ensure that the
civilians are not harassed or intimidated by these elements
in their midst. This is a particularly difficult task to
undertake but an extremely important one if we are to
ensure that refugee camps remain refugee camps and do
not become recruiting grounds for combatants or for the
fomenting of violence and disorder.
The protection of civilians in armed conflicts
requires a comprehensive approach on the part of the
international community. It also requires coordinated and
concerted efforts on the part of all concerned —
peacekeepers, United Nations humanitarian workers and
personnel of other international relief agencies and
non-governmental organizations. They are indispensable
partners in the field. While performing its own specialized
duties, each plays a supportive and reinforcing role in
ensuring the physical, legal and psychological protection
and well-being of the hapless civilians caught in the
traumas of armed conflict.
The Secretary-General has made a number of
recommendations in his report. This morning he has
highlighted three of them, which my delegation whole-
heartedly supports. The Council has also adopted
resolution 1265 (1999), which, inter alia, set up a
mechanism to review the recommendations contained in
the report. These recommendations have been examined
and incorporated in the draft resolution before the
Council, which, if fully implemented, will make a major
contribution towards fulfilling the goal of ensuring the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Malaysia
therefore strongly supports the draft resolution and will
play its part towards its effective implementation.
The President: I thank the representative of
Malaysia for his very kind words.
Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes you to New York, Mr.
President, to preside over this open meeting and also
expresses its appreciation of the efforts made by
Ambassador Fowler and the delegation of Canada for its
13
Security Council 4130th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
convening. We would also like to thank the Secretary-
General and Mr. Jakob Kellenberger, President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) for their
statements just now.
Today, armed conflicts continue to rage in many parts
of the world, inflicting great harm on civilians, jeopardizing
regional stability and development, and even threatening
international peace and security. Addressing the issue of
how effectively to protect civilians in armed conflict has
always been a serious and difficult task for the international
community.
Since this issue was first discussed by the Security
Council in February 1999, some progress has been made in
this field. Last September, the Council adopted resolution
1265 (1999) on the basis of the Secretary-General’s report
and established an informal working group to study the
report and its recommendations. Building on this, the
Council has prepared the draft resolution before us. It is our
hope that its adoption will help the international community
to achieve better results in the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
The Chinese delegation has consistently attached
importance to the issue of protecting civilians in armed
conflict and has always participated actively in the
consideration of this issue by the Security Council, the
General Assembly and other relevant bodies. We have
participated in a constructive manner in the informal
working group’s review of the Secretary-General’s report
and recommendations, expressed our position and put
forward positive suggestions on and amendments to this
draft resolution.
Today, I would like to highlight once again the
following points.
First, armed conflicts throughout the world differ in
their causes, manifestations and natures. The Security
Council should review and address the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict on a case-by-case
basis, dealing with each situation on its own merits. The
Security Council must take timely measures in response to
such cases as the Rwandan genocide. Usually, however, it
is the sovereign States that bear the main responsibility for
protecting civilians in armed conflict. The Security Council
cannot successfully consider and address this issue without
the close cooperation of the countries involved. It should
fully respect the opinions of the countries or parties
concerned, assist them in various ways, in accordance with
their specific needs, and act when necessary in support of
their efforts to protect civilians.
Not long ago, for example, the Security Council, in
response to the specific situations of the countries
concerned, incorporated elements of civilian protection
into the mandates of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone and the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This is
commendable. In our view, the Government of a country
in armed conflict tends to decide on the measures
necessary to protect civilians in accordance with the
nature and characteristics of the conflict and the actual
circumstances of civilians in the area of conflict. In this
regard, the positions of sovereign States should be
respected by the Security Council. Action taken without
the understanding and cooperation of the countries
involved may lead those countries to resist. Should this
occur, not only will relevant measures for protecting
civilians fail to be implemented in any meaningful way,
but more civilians will be dragged down into misery.
It must be pointed out that any attempt to politicize
humanitarian concerns, wantonly interfere in other
countries’ internal affairs or, worse yet, overturn a
legitimate Government under the pretext of protecting
civilians runs counter to the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter and will inevitably have
serious consequences. The draft resolution before us
reaffirms the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter and stresses the need to respect the
political independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of all countries. We must keep in mind and abide by
these principles in acting to protect civilians in armed
conflict.
Secondly, in considering the issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, the Security Council should
ensure a clear division of labour and enhance coordination
and cooperation with other bodies. The issue of protecting
civilians in armed conflict involves political,
peacekeeping, humanitarian, disarmament, legal and many
other dimensions. It requires the concerted efforts of the
entire international community and the United Nations
system. The 40 recommendations in the
Secretary-General’s report were not made for the Security
Council alone. Many of them need to be assessed and
addressed by the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and other relevant bodies. In
our view, all agencies within the United Nations system
should work with a well-defined division of labour and
14
Security Council 4130th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
terms of reference. The Security Council should review and
address this issue within its own mandate and, in doing so,
support and cooperate with other agencies in this regard.
This is the only way that different departments of the
United Nations can work in harmony and mutual
reinforcement, allowing the system as a whole to play its
role more effectively.
Thirdly, while addressing the issue of protecting
civilians in armed conflict, the Security Council should seek
to eradicate the causes of crises. The Security Council, with
its primary responsibility for maintaining international peace
and security, should draw upon past successes and failures
alike so as to perform its duties more effectively with a
view to creating a favourable international environment of
peace for all regions and countries. The Council should
focus its efforts on finding solutions to the armed conflicts
themselves.
Civilians can be truly protected only through the
establishment of a generally favourable and peaceful
environment and the early defusing of specific disputes
leading to conflicts. At the same time, we believe that the
international community and the relevant United Nations
bodies should take further steps to eradicate the root causes
of conflict by helping the countries at risk to eliminate
poverty, develop their economies, promote national
reconciliation and maintain domestic stability. Only thus
can a fundamental solution be reached to the issue of
protecting civilians in armed conflict.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): Thank
you, Mr. President, for Canada’s leadership on this issue.
We are impressed by the stamina you are showing in
keeping up with our arcane procedures in this body and I
think we are going to miss you.
I should also like to express the United Kingdom’s
appreciation for the Secretary-General’s and Deputy
Secretary-General’s personal involvement in this issue,
which is very important, and to pay tribute President
Kellenberger of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC), not only for coming to join us this morning,
but also for giving us a speech that we shall have to think
about. On that basis, I am sure that he will be welcomed
back to this Council whenever there is a subject that affects
the ICRC.
The working group on civilians in armed conflict has
worked long and hard to produce the draft resolution which
we will adopt at the end of this meeting. It is a good draft
resolution and the Canadian delegation is particularly
deserving of congratulations. I should just like to add that
our experts recently have done particularly good work on
a number of resolutions. When texts are not coming to
ambassadors for solution, that is a sign that something is
going right in the procedures of inter-delegational activity
here, and that is very much to be welcomed.
But I should like to look forward for a moment. This
meeting needs to set down a marker. Today’s draft
resolution is not the end of a process. It will have value
in the world outside only if it is the catalyst for a more
systematic approach by the Council to the protection of
civilians in specific conflicts. Last Friday we took stock
of what happens when the United Nations and the
international community get things wrong. The Carlsson
report on Rwanda and the Secretary-General’s own report
on Srebrenica illuminated our collective commitment to
human security; but I am not clear what we would do
tomorrow if Rwanda hit us again.
The concept of security for individuals does not
stand in opposition to that of security for States. It plays
an intrinsic part in the wider objective. When individuals
are protected, and their human, economic, social, political
and cultural rights are upheld, international stability is
consolidated. The goals in this draft resolution lie at the
heart of a sustainable conflict- prevention strategy.
What is the next step for us, the members of the
Council? James Orbinski, President of the International
Council of Médecins Sans Frontières, made an excellent
presentation to Council members in an Arria-format
meeting last week. He said at one point that
“the central task in achieving protection of civilians
is to clearly define problems and solutions — not to
settle for vague problem definitions that mask
political causes and responsibilities”.
I think that President Kellenberger has forcefully made
the same point to us in this debate.
The Security Council’s first objective should be to
contain threats to the peace. But we often appear
hamstrung in undertaking actual preventive measures well
in advance of the outbreak of violence. The Secretary-
General this morning pointed to the Central African
Republic and to Prevlaka as welcome exceptions to this,
and Macedonia was another. But national priorities tend
to make us shy of committing resources, and we slip too
easily into a focus only on the immediate causes of
conflict.
15
Security Council 4130th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
It is time to take a more professional approach to
human security and conflict prevention. We should be
making a real effort to improve coordination and
information flow within the United Nations system. We
need to strengthen the proactive role of the
Secretary-General, so that coordination with the Economic
and Social Council and the relevant United Nations
agencies can begin to work more naturally. It is interesting
to see that a number of us now are taking up this theme of
the coordination between separate bodies of the United
Nations. We need also to forge operational links between
the regional organizations and the Security Council that can
bear the weight of the work we have to do. Most
fundamental of all, we need to make the psychological leap
to tackling conflicts at their roots — their economic, social,
structural, sometimes personal roots.
We will not always succeed. When we fail,
peacekeepers may well be needed. The report which is
being prepared by Lakhdar Brahimi and his panel will
address the vital question of how we can do better in
deploying peacekeepers. The United Kingdom is keenly
interested in that report and expects from it an ambitious
agenda for us to address. We need reformed Security
Council procedures and reinforced Secretariat structures.
But more than these, we need an improved system-wide
approach that will consolidate the expertise of all relevant
bodies without stifling the capacity of any to do the work
that it does best. We need to produce clear-sighted analysis,
comprehensive and integrated planning and well-resourced
implementation.
As for post-conflict activity, let us think beyond
protection and assistance during conflict and establish
coherent strategies to build peace after the war is over. The
move from crisis to reconstruction needs early thought and
coordination across the United Nations family. We cannot
wait until the peacekeepers and humanitarian teams have
left before putting our plans in place. This is something
which the United Kingdom is trying to do in Sierra Leone.
The draft resolution before us concentrates on the
promotion of physical security. That is the first area where
the Council can make a difference. It contains concrete
commitments which we should strive to keep in practice.
But more significant than that, it states that the targeting of
civilians and the systematic violation of their rights can
constitute a threat to international peace and security — a
wake-up call to the Security Council, if we are listening.
The Secretary-General’s report makes clear that the
protection of civilians in armed conflict goes wider than
simple physical security. For example, the international
legal framework has made dramatic strides in recent years
with the Rome Statute and the Ottawa treaty on
landmines, both still awaiting the signature and
ratification of too many Member States.
The European Union statement, to be made by
Portugal this afternoon, goes into greater detail on legal
aspects, on small arms and on vulnerable groups, so I
shall leave United Kingdom comment on these points to
my distributed text. But we regard it as particularly
important that combatants are educated in their
obligations under international humanitarian law.
This is a complex and ambitious agenda in front of
us. It adds up to the mainstreaming of conflict prevention
throughout the United Nations family of institutions. The
Security Council cannot succeed on its own. The United
Kingdom will vote for the draft resolution before us. In
doing so, I encourage the wider international system, both
intergovernmentally and through the United Nations
agencies, to examine how best to make their own
contribution.
And let us not forget the national level. The primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians does not rest
with the Security Council, with the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) or with the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). It is the
responsibility of the belligerents in conflicts: of
Governments, of non-State actors and particularly of their
leaderships. They too must make a commitment and
expect to be reproached by the international community
if they do not — a commitment to, where possible,
resolve their disputes through peaceful means and to
respect the rights and security of civilians. Such an
understanding of the rights of the individual is
indispensable to the sort of step-change that we are
seeking today.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United Kingdom for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French): We
are pleased to see you with us once again, Sir, presiding
over this important meeting of the Security Council. I
wish also to welcome the presence of Ms. Fréchette,
Deputy Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Likewise, we wish to thank Mr. Kellenberger, President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
for being with us today and for the very interesting
statement he made this morning.
16
Security Council 4130th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
On your commendable initiative, Mr. President, the
Security Council is today considering the question of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. This question is
both topical and related to the Council’s responsibilities in
the area of the maintenance of international peace and
security.
To look at the armed conflicts that have taken place in
recent years is to come to the inevitable and disturbing
conclusion that the suffering of civilians is increasing, as
are the risks they face, which include threats to their lives.
Aggression; forced displacements, both inside and outside
countries; the blocking of the delivery of humanitarian
assistance; and the hardships endured by vulnerable groups,
in particular children, women and the elderly, all are threats
to the physical security of defenceless civilians.
Unfortunately, these practices are the result of
deliberate actions, aimed at civilians taken by the parties to
the conflict. Civilians are targeted and used as a means of
warfare. As is noted by the Secretary-General in his report
submitted to the Security Council in September 1999 on
this question, not even United Nations personnel and
international humanitarian personnel are spared.
Following consideration of this question in February
and September 1999, the Security Council strongly
condemned those actions and affirmed the resolve of the
international community to deal with them.
Today, on the basis of its responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the Council
is preparing to adopt a new draft resolution on this issue
that will provide for a number of steps and actions aimed
at strengthening the physical and legal protection of
civilians in armed conflict, so as to safeguard them during
armed hostilities, ensure that humanitarian assistance can
reach them and provide them with a secure environment
pending a resolution of the armed conflict. The inhuman
practice of targeting civilians, which has occurred in recent
armed conflicts, must be put to an end. On the basis of that
conviction, we support the draft resolution before the
Council.
Accordingly, I should like to stress certain aspects of
the question that my delegation believes to be particularly
important. First, as the report of the Secretary-General and
the draft resolution before us today make clear, the question
of the protection of civilians in armed conflict is extremely
complex, because it encompasses many aspects that are
interconnected or closely linked to varying degrees,
including in the political, legal, humanitarian, peacekeeping
and peace-building areas. Given the multidimensional
nature of the protection of civilians in armed conflict, it
is necessary to adopt a comprehensive, consistent, non-
selective approach, taking into consideration the specific
characteristics of each situation.
The second aspect of the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is the fact that it is, in essence,
a humanitarian action. As such, it must be guided by the
principles of neutrality and impartiality.
Thirdly, any action to protect civilians must
supplement efforts to find a solution to the conflict in
question, in accordance with the provisions regarding
dispute settlement mechanisms in the United Nations
Charter. Of course, the best approach is to prevent
conflicts before they start, and, consequently, this is the
best way to reduce human suffering, especially that of
defenceless civilians.
Fourthly, because of the many aspects relating to the
protection of civilians, coordination among the various
actors is highly desirable to ensure the desired
effectiveness in the framework of a comprehensive and
complementary approach. The role of coordinator should
be played by the United Nations.
Fifthly, it is essential to respect the principles of the
sovereignty, political independence and territorial integrity
of States and non-interference in their internal affairs, as
well as to secure the consent and cooperation of the
parties, in particular the Governments of the countries
concerned.
The question of the protection of civilians is not a
new one. In the occupied Palestinian and Arab territories,
civilians have waited too long for the complete
observance of international law, including international
humanitarian law and the relevant conventions, in
particular the Geneva Convention Relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, and their
fundamental rights, of 12 August 1949. Other more recent
situations in Africa also require international attention.
Those are the comments that I wished to make on
behalf of my delegation, and I reiterate our support for
the draft resolution before the Council.
Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): I wish to thank you, Mr.
President, and your delegation, for initiating the
discussion of this very important subject. I also want to
thank the Secretary-General for his report and excellent
17
Security Council 4130th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
recommendations, which have set the stage for our
deliberations today, as well as for the draft resolution we
plan to adopt. We welcome the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, and thank him
for his very important statement.
Today, civilians, especially women, children and the
elderly, are deliberately targeted by combatants and are
constantly becoming victims of indiscriminate shootings,
cruel and degrading treatment, physical and psychological
torture and mutilation. You, Mr. President, have referred to
this phenomenon as the “civilianization” of conflicts, and
we share your view. It is therefore timely for the Security
Council to consider the protection of civilians in terms of
its overall mandate under the Charter of the United Nations.
All the recommendations made by the Secretary-
General warrant serious consideration and implementation
by the Security Council to the extent possible. However, the
recommendations should be implemented in a fair and
consistent manner, and civilians everywhere should be
accorded the same physical protection so as to uphold the
credibility of the Council. Those recommendations relating
to the proliferation of arms and their impact on armed
conflict and to the provision of humanitarian assistance are
of particular importance and interest to my delegation.
The uncontrolled flow of not only small arms but all
types of sophisticated light weapons into areas of conflict
needs to be seriously addressed. Weapon-producing
countries should not transfer arms, including landmines, to
regions where armed conflict is imminent or raging.
Equally important in this regard is the responsibility of
Member States for ensuring that their citizens are not used
as mercenaries.
Furthermore, the recommendations relating to the
special protection needs of women and children are strongly
supported by my delegation, and special arrangements
should be put in place to ensure the protection of such
people against the horrors of armed conflict.
Human suffering as a result of displacement is on the
increase. On the other hand, displaced persons fleeing into
neighbouring countries continue to place a huge social and
economic burden on the host countries, especially in Africa.
The international community needs to continue to provide
significant support to host communities as well as to
refugee populations.
The protection of civilians is closely linked to the
capacity of United Nations peacekeepers to deploy rapidly.
That point was highlighted this morning by the Secretary-
General. As we have stated before, timely deployment,
together with the appropriate mandate and adequate
resources, can drastically improve the plight of besieged
civilians during armed conflict. Again, support by the
international community remains crucial.
The disturbing continuation of attacks against United
Nations and associated personnel should receive the
Council's urgent attention, and adequate measures must be
considered to ensure the security of humanitarian field
workers. In this regard, we support the call by the
Secretary-General for the ratification of the 1994
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel, and for the development of an
appropriate protocol to extend the scope of legal
protection to all United Nations and associated personnel.
My delegation concurs with the view that enough
international humanitarian and human rights law
instruments exist to ensure the legal protection of
civilians. What is required is that parties have the political
will to ratify and implement them and that parties to
conflicts respect their provisions. Appropriate steps, such
as those recommended by the Secretary-General, would
therefore play an essential role in heightening awareness
and promoting climates of compliance.
My delegation fully supports the draft resolution we
are going to adopt later today. However, we wish to
reiterate our grave concern over the situation at hand and
would recommend that the Council continue to request
reports from the Secretary-General and review the
situation at regular intervals.
Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like, first of all, to welcome the presence at this meeting
of Mr. Kellenberger, the new President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and to thank
him for his important statement. I wish to express to him
Argentina's gratitude and constant support for his
institution's work.
I would like to thank Minister Axworthy for his
presence here in the Council and, through him, to convey
my gratitude to the Government of Canada for having
organized this open debate in which, in addition to the
members of the Council observers and other Member
States are participating. I would also like to commend his
country on the efforts it is making to enhance the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. In our
understanding, this is one of the topics of greatest concern
18
Security Council 4130th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
on the Council's agenda, and it calls for an urgent response
on our part.
Recent experience has demonstrated that civilians are
no longer merely the victims of armed conflict; they have
become the targets of the belligerent factions. It has become
common to consider the murder, terrorization, rape and
expulsion of the civilian population from their homes a
military tactic. Sierra Leone, Angola, East Timor and
Kosovo provide examples of a long list of atrocities.
The Council has repudiated these misdeeds on
numerous occasions, but it is not enough for us to condemn
this aberrant conduct; we must find a way to ensure that it
does not recur.
As we said last September in discussing this same
topic in the context of strengthening legal protection for
civilians, the international community has endowed itself
with many important instruments. Despite their limitations,
it can be said that we have developed an adequate body of
law to confront these situations.
Regrettably, this level of development in jurisprudence
is not matched by a similar level of compliance. We must
focus our efforts on shrinking this yawning gap. In this
regard, we wish to reiterate our support for the
recommendations of the Secretary-General, of 8 September
1999, directed at strengthening legal protection; in our
view, these recommendations will be very useful to our
task.
Whereas the international community, as we have just
said, has legal instruments to confront the issue of legal
protection of civilians, the same developments have not
occurred in the field of physical protection of civilians.
Hence the obvious and urgent need to tackle this problem
in order to fill this vacuum.
The Secretary-General's report contains an ambitious
set of recommendations to improve the physical protection
of civilians in armed conflicts, and these relate to various
areas of the Council's work. Many of them can and should
be extensively developed. This is crucial to the concept of
human security and to the new realities that prevail in
armed conflicts.
We are not going to recite a comprehensive listing of
the recommendations of the Secretary-General, but we
would like to draw attention to some aspects that seem
important to us.
First of all, there must be a smooth flow of
communication between the Secretariat and the Council
so that this body will have access to all the information
required to enable it to respond as soon as possible,
including by taking preventive action. Similarly, we must
explore all the possible modalities of cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations.
The Council must have at its disposal a clear set of
rules for the protection of civilians when considering
mandates for peacekeeping operations. These rules must
include measures for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, measures to control
small arms and light weapons and means of controlling
media that incite people to genocide, crimes against
humanity and other grave violations of humanitarian law.
At another level, we are concerned that in many
cases of conflict, access for humanitarian assistance to the
civilian population is denied, in violation of international
law, and personnel providing assistance are attacked.
Many of these attacks, far from being accidental, are
determined specifically by the fact that the personnel
belong to the United Nations or are linked in some
manner to the Organization. This is why we support, as
we said last February, the Secretary-General's
recommendation that we expand the scope of application
of the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United Nations
and Associated Personnel by means of an additional
protocol.
Many of the recommendations that we have just
mentioned concerning the physical protection of civilians
in armed conflict have been reflected in the draft
resolution presented by Canada, which we fully support.
The adoption of resolution 1265 (1999) last
September constituted a fundamental step forward. The
working group created as a follow-up measure has now
finished its deliberations and has presented us with the
results of its work. The Council must take on board these
results and continue its work. This open debate and the
adoption of the draft resolution will be another step in the
right direction. It is time for the Council to take the lead
and set seriously in motion the mechanisms and measures
proposed in the recommendations of the Secretary-
General.
The President: I thank the representative of
Argentina for his very kind words.
19
Security Council 4130th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
Miss Durrant (Jamaica): It is a pleasure to see you,
Sir, once again presiding over the Council's deliberations,
especially as we are debating today the issue of protection
of civilians in armed conflict. This very important issue,
which is at the heart of the mandate of the Security
Council, in the light of its relevance to the maintenance of
international peace and security, has rightly been given
increased attention in recent years. My delegation therefore
appreciates the special attention which Canada has given to
this issue, and we wish to thank the Canadian delegation
for piloting the draft resolution now before the Council.
We wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
important introductory statement and for the
recommendations contained in his report, document
S/1999/957. We also wish to recognize the valuable
contribution made by the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) over the years and to thank the President
of the ICRC for his thought-provoking address. We also
wish to take this opportunity to express our appreciation to
the staff of the humanitarian agencies of the United Nations
and of the non-governmental organizations who daily risk
their lives to assist civilians in zones of conflict.
It is regrettable that despite the continued efforts by
the international community to address the deliberate
targeting of civilians in conflict areas around the globe,
innocent women, children, refugees and other vulnerable
groups are targets of warring parties in violation of
international law. This has resulted from the fact that most
modern conflicts are intra-State in nature. Indeed, most of
the persons affected are now internally displaced persons
rather than refugees who have crossed borders. While we
recognize the need to proceed on a case-by-case basis,
taking into account the particular circumstances, there is no
doubt that the gravity of the problem resulting from the
blurring of the lines between civilians and combatants
requires us to redouble our efforts to devise and adopt
effective responses.
It is in this context that we are pleased with the efforts
of the informal working group established by Security
Council resolution 1265 (1999) to review the
comprehensive recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General's report. A number of the proposals made
in the report aimed at improving the legal protection of
civilians warrant detailed attention. Urgent steps must be
taken to follow up on the Secretary-General's
recommendations, which are particularly concerned with the
need to meet the challenge of inducing States and non-State
actors to comply with the provisions of international law.
The development of appropriate international mechanisms
to prosecute those who commit grave breaches of
international law must continue to be given priority. We
have begun with the establishment of the International
Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.
Jamaica strongly supports the view that promoting
respect for international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law and addressing the current culture of
impunity will contribute significantly to the overall
protection of civilians in conflict situations. More
attention must therefore be given to disseminating
knowledge of human rights obligations and to
encouraging States to fulfil their obligations to respect
international law and to take appropriate legal measures
to punish offenders.
In addition, it is imperative that we develop
innovative strategies for addressing violations of
international law by non-State actors. It is unfortunate that
the legal regimes at our disposal cannot be applied easily
to such actors. In the case of internal conflicts
characterized by the existence of complex groupings of
militias and criminal elements, it is difficult in practical
terms to enforce the accountability of these individuals.
This is an area which requires serious study to explore
possible solutions.
The success of our efforts to promote protection for
civilians in armed conflict depends largely on our
willingness to take bold steps in a number of critical
areas. I wish to highlight some of these, which should
form part of a broad-based and comprehensive strategy to
address the plight of these persons.
First, there is an urgent need to ensure that the
special protection and humanitarian needs of vulnerable
groups, particularly women and children, are addressed in
the mandates of peacemaking, peacekeeping and peace-
building operations. The Council's recognition of the
importance of child protection represents an important
development in efforts to address the special needs of
children. In this regard, we strongly support the inclusion
of specific provisions in peace agreements, and in the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
particularly of child soldiers. The momentum already
gained in this area must be maintained. Further action
needs to be taken to offer women and girls special
protection, particularly from acts of sexual violence.
Second, the question of impunity must be resolutely
addressed in the most innovative ways in order to deter
20
Security Council 4130th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
future violations of human rights by parties to armed
conflict. Adopting appropriate targeted measures, including
the imposition of arms embargoes where parties to conflicts
deliberately target civilians in violation of international
humanitarian law, could represent an important and
effective means of achieving this objective.
Third, the design and implementation of Security
Council sanctions must be improved significantly to
increase their effects on targeted groups while minimizing
their unintended effects on civilians. During our debate
earlier this week on general issues relating to sanctions, my
delegation emphasized that the appropriate use of
humanitarian exemptions and “smart” sanctions were
critical elements in our effort to reduce the unintended
humanitarian impacts of sanctions regimes.
Fourth, appropriate responses must be developed with
the cooperation of other international bodies, regional
organizations and civil society during the early phases of
conflicts to curb the illicit traffic in small arms and light
weapons, which contribute to the escalation of conflicts and
which result in serious harm to civilians. Supporting
initiatives to promote mine action, where appropriate,
should also become part of the Security Council's response
to civilian tragedies.
Fifth, provisions must be made as a matter of course
for appropriate training in international humanitarian,
human rights and refugee law for personnel involved in
United Nations operations, and for sensitizing them about
the conditions in the countries concerned.
Sixth, every effort should be made to ensure that
peacekeeping missions have appropriate mandates and
adequate resources in order to strengthen their ability to
offer credible and adequate protection to civilians in
situations of conflict. In this connection, we must ensure
that the civilian nature of refugee camps is maintained and
that the issue of protection for internally displaced persons
is addressed.
Seventh, improving the environment for the safe and
secure provision of humanitarian assistance to individuals
in need is a major challenge. Attention to legal and physical
protection for humanitarian personnel should be given
greater priority. Humanitarian workers must be able to offer
their services in situations of conflict and should be allowed
to do so without being subjected to abuse.
In all of these areas, much remains to be done; and
increased cooperation between the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the rest of the United Nations
system, regional bodies and non-governmental
organizations will prove essential for achieving progress
and for ensuring a comprehensive approach to protection
for civilians in armed conflict.
These concerns, among others, are at the heart of the
Security Council's mandate for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The clear connections
between large-scale human suffering, systematic and
widespread violations of the rights of civilians and the
breakdown in international peace and security increase the
need for the Council to keep this issue at the forefront of
its agenda.
While the action already taken by the Security
Council to improve the protection of civilians is a step in
the right direction, my delegation believes that there is a
further need for ensuring that the international community
takes a comprehensive, integrated approach to the
problem. This approach must involve not only the
improvement of physical and legal protection, but must
also be aimed at eradicating the root causes of armed
conflict. Prevention of armed conflicts is the best
protection and in this regard, the Security Council must
place special emphasis on the development of appropriate
preventive measures.
As highlighted by the Secretary-General in his 1999
report on the work of the organization, long-term
prevention strategies must seek to prevent destructive
conflicts from arising in the first place. A holistic
approach to maintaining peace and protecting civilians
should therefore involve the development of appropriate
early warning and information-gathering mechanisms.
In his report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, the Secretary-General reminded us that the
responsibility for the protection of civilians cannot be
transferred to others, and that the United Nations is the
only international Organization with the necessary reach
and authority. The draft resolution before us today, which
my delegation is pleased to support, seeks to recommit
the Security Council to this task.
The President: I thank the representative of Jamaica
for her kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): My delegation endorses
the statement that will be made by the representative of
the Azerbaijan Republic on behalf of Georgia, Ukraine,
Uzbekistan, Azerbaijan and the Republic of Moldova.
21
Security Council 4130th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
I also wish to join previous speakers in expressing our
appreciation to the delegation of Canada for organizing
today's open debate and for its tireless efforts to bring it to
a successful conclusion.
We also thank President Kellenberger of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) for his
excellent presentation.
My delegation had an opportunity to state its position
on these issues on several occasions, and I will limit my
remarks to those points that we feel particularly pertinent in
the context of today's stage of our deliberations.
One can hardly find any other topic on the agenda of
the Security Council that has attracted such genuine and
vivid attention on the part of the members of this body, and
of the international community as a whole, for the past
several years. Its consideration passed through several
distinct stages, gaining each time more and more
momentum and thus bringing the Council closer to more
substantive results. In 1999 alone we witnessed several
interesting debates on this issue, not to mention discussions
on a number of related topics throughout the year.
Preparation by the Secretary-General of his
momentous report containing a body of recommendations
set an important agenda and the basis for further work by
the Council, as well as by other United Nations bodies. Last
month the Council provoked an unusually keen debate, with
participation of the wider United Nations membership, on
humanitarian aspects of its work. That debate brought to the
surface several difficult but important questions regarding
the role of the Security Council and other United Nations
organs in considering humanitarian issues, as well as the
limits on the Council and other international actors in
taking action for humanitarian purposes.
The draft resolution we are going to adopt today
provides answers to many of those questions. It also
represents a major milestone in the work of the Security
Council and reflects a growing consensus among the
members of the international community as to the ways and
means to ensure protection of civilians in armed conflicts.
The draft resolution effectively reaffirms that the Council
can and will act in situations where deliberate targeting of
civilians and systematic, flagrant and widespread violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law
constitute a threat to international peace and security. Other
provisions of the resolution define areas where the Council
action is essential and establish standards for such action.
I would like to mention another important feature of
the approach adopted by the Security Council in
considering the recommendations presented in the
Secretary-General’s report. By confining itself to the
recommendations related to the physical protection of
civilians and deciding not to embark upon other matters,
the Council left important issues for consideration by the
wider United Nations membership and thus set a clear
precedent for its future work in this area. The Council
took this decision consciously, with due regard for many
concerns that had been voiced by non-members of the
Council in this regard and in consideration of the need to
improve its working methods and increase coordination
with other United Nations bodies. My delegation
considers this particularly important, especially in view of
the fact that the Council requested the Secretary-General
to submit his next report on the subject in March 2001.
Prevention of conflicts is an important part, probably
the key part, of the overall strategy aimed at protection of
civilians. Prevention, containment and elimination of
conflicts constitute the main task of this body. Apart from
the need to focus on the economic and social causes of
conflicts, which is the major task of the whole
Organization, we believe there is also an obvious need to
elaborate a framework document to define clear-cut
principles and criteria, as well as effective mechanisms
for the authorization by the Council of enforcement
measures to prevent armed conflicts within States at their
earliest stage.
We think that such a universally accepted document
could substantially enhance the capacity of the Security
Council for early action to avert the potential outbreak of
internal armed conflicts. Such regulation could definitely
create better conditions for unanimity among the members
of the Security Council, especially the permanent ones, in
a decision-making process. We would also like to
emphasize that any such preventive action by the Council
should be based on the Charter of the United Nations and
principles of international law, including the principles of
the political independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States. It is important that the draft resolution
to be adopted make explicit references to these norms and
principles.
A number of important recommendations by the
Secretary-General relating to the legal aspects of
enhancing the protection of civilians were left outside the
scope of the draft resolution. We would like to comment
on some of these.
22
Security Council 4130th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
First of all, Ukraine fully subscribes to the
recommendation contained in the report regarding the need
to accelerate ratification of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. While recognizing that the
text of this document may not be perfect in all respects and
that further work is needed to finalize the necessary legal
framework, we view such a court as the only viable
democratic mechanism of a universal character to enforce
respect for international humanitarian law. By signing the
Rome Statute several months ago, my country took its first
step towards participation in this instrument. Recently,
extensive work was undertaken in Ukraine to elaborate and
eventually adopt the necessary implementing legislation that
will lead to the ratification of the Statute.
In this regard, Mr. President, I wish to point out that
the efforts of your country and your personal commitment
serve as a valuable example and strengthen our
determination to pursue this cause. I would also like to
commend the elaboration of the Crimes Against Humanity
Act, which makes Canada the first country to have
developed comprehensive legislation to implement the
Rome Statute.
Let me also emphasize the importance my country
attaches to the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel. Its entry into force last
year represents significant progress in strengthening the
regime of protection of people in the service of the United
Nations operating in conflict zones under the mandate of
the Security Council or General Assembly. At the same
time, we recognize that the Convention is far from adequate
for ensuring the same level of protection to categories of
United Nations and associated personnel engaged in
operations other than those specifically authorized by the
Security Council or the General Assembly. We wish once
again to put on record our support for the elaboration and
adoption of an additional protocol to extend the scope of
legal protection for United Nations and associated
personnel.
We regret the fact that during the last decade children
have appeared among combatants. The recent finalization
of a draft optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the minimum age for children in armed
conflict represents a significant contribution to the
protection of the rights of this most vulnerable group. We
hope that its eventual adoption by the General Assembly
will be followed by rapid ratification by States and
subsequent effective implementation in their national
legislation.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Ukraine’s support
for the draft resolution before us today. By adopting it,
the Council takes a significant step forward in developing
its policies and practices aimed at the effective protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We look forward to the
next report of the Secretary-General, which, we hope, will
enable us to make further progress in this direction.
The President: I thank the representative of Ukraine
for his very fine words.
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): It is a great pleasure
to see you, Sir, chairing this important meeting of the
Council on the subject to which your personal
commitment, your country’s proactive interest and the
dedication of the Canadian delegation are well known.
For some time now we have been pleased to see the
Council’s engagement in the humanitarian aspects of
issues before it. Today’s open meeting is a sequel to that,
and we are happy to participate in the debate.
I will take this opportunity, if you will allow me,
Sir, to thank you personally for your very gracious words
of appreciation for Bangladesh’s presidency of the
Council last month. We acknowledge the presence of the
new president of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Mr. Kellenberger, and we thank him for his
comprehensive statement touching upon important aspects
of the issues of the protection of civilians. The presence
of the Secretary-General at the outset of our debate today
is very much appreciated, and we believe his statement
also effectively drew attention to the subject under
discussion.
Since the debate we had on the report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, issued last September, the subject has received
increasing attention in the Council’s work. We consider
today’s deliberations to be the culmination of that
initiative in that there is now a draft resolution based on
the recommendations of the Secretary-General contained
in that report.
The draft resolution is on a subject which is of a
somewhat evolving nature in the sense that the nature of
the conflict, changing as it does, defines the protection
needs of the civilians. We feel that the experience of the
United Nations in dealing with situations of armed
conflict has also changed, for various reasons. This only
shows that the task of defining Council action in meeting
the needs of civilians in armed conflict will have to
23
Security Council 4130th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
evolve over time. Therefore, one set of steps cannot be
considered a panacea for all situations.
Having said that, we do feel that some commonalities
exist between the protection needs of civilians in differing
situations of armed conflict, and that they could be
effectively addressed. Our support for the draft resolution
is based on that premise.
It is perhaps no wonder that in the draft resolution,
while considering ways to provide for the protection of
civilians, steps have been considered to address the relevant
issues on a case-by-case basis and as appropriate. From this
point of departure, we see it address the special protection
needs of women, children and other vulnerable groups,
including refugees and internally displaced persons. The
mention of the existing legal framework, including the
Charter, international humanitarian law and human rights
and refugee law, although considered inadequate, appears
to be comprehensive.
We support enhancing the capacity of the United
Nations for rapid deployment in conflict situations. We also
support preventive deployment, which can be an effective
action to prevent an impending crisis. Bangladesh supports
the focus on situations where refugees, internally displaced
persons and other sections of the civilian population are
deliberately placed in vulnerable situations. We need to
improve the security of refugee camps so that armed
elements cannot threaten the situation there. The need for
United Nations peacekeeping missions to include a media
component to disseminate information relevant to their
purpose and mission is a welcome proposal.
We support the consideration given to the
appropriateness of temporary security zones and safe
corridors for the protection of civilians and the delivery of
emergency assistance. We reiterate our support for the issue
of incorporating measures relating to the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants,
particularly child soldiers, in the mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. The incorporation of a
mass media component, a novel approach in our opinion,
should also be useful in many situations.
It is equally important to provide training to personnel
on international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law, as well as in negotiation and communication skills,
cultural awareness and civil-military coordination.
We welcome the Council’s decision to set up an
informal working group on a temporary basis on the
general issues of sanctions, and support its consideration
of the recommendations contained in the Secretary-
General’s report. It is heartening to note that the General
Assembly’s Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations has considered the recommendations. While
looking forward to the next report of the Secretary-
General on the issue under consideration, we affirm our
intention to support the draft resolution.
The President: I thank the representative of
Bangladesh for his kind words.
Mr. Keita (Mali) (spoke in French): I would like
first of all to express my delegation’s satisfaction at
seeing on the Security Council’s agenda the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Allow me to
welcome the presence here today of the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). We
wish to pay tribute to him for the efforts made by his
institution in the protection of civilians.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict remains
a cause of great concern to the international community.
The increasing number of conflicts and the systematic
recourse to violence against the civilian population, in
violation of the norms of international law and
international humanitarian law, attacks against United
Nations personnel, associated personnel and humanitarian
workers are a serious threat to international peace and
security. We must adopt a concerted approach consonant
with the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter.
In his report of September 1999, the Secretary-
General made a striking analysis of the situation and
formulated a number of recommendations that we fully
share and support. At this point, my delegation would like
to make just a few concise observations.
First, concerning the protection of civilians,
deliberate acts of violence against civilians in times of
conflict require greater involvement of United Nations
bodies, all Member States, civil society, non-
governmental organizations working in the field and
above all the State on whose territory the conflict is
taking place so that the acknowledged principles of
respect for humanitarian law will produce the necessary
positive results.
In addition to physical protection, civilians require
greater legal protection, and this implies wider accession
to the various instruments relating to international
24
Security Council 4130th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
humanitarian law, the incorporation of these instruments
into domestic law and above all their implementation,
which will contribute to the creation of a more solid basis
for the legal protection of civilians. This legal framework
would be relevant to the new guidelines on protecting
vulnerable groups, women and children, refugees, displaced
persons, humanitarian personnel and the staff of
peacekeeping missions.
Secondly, sanctions, as the coercive instrument of the
international community, are also a source of serious
concern because of their humanitarian repercussions. We
believe that the imposition of sanctions must from now on
take into consideration human security, and that is why we
are in favour of targeted sanctions. We must make
sanctions more humane, as it is not our duty to create
conditions of humanitarian catastrophe through excessive
rigidity.
Thirdly, concerning the proliferation of light weapons
and small arms, the massive and uncontrolled use of these
arms remains a serious threat to human security. They are
easy to acquire and use, and they have become a symbol of
the suffering of civilian populations. This is why my
delegation would like to emphasize the importance of
measures to stem the flow of illicit weapons, and
particularly small arms and anti-personnel landmines. The
West African subregion has taken some useful initiatives in
that area, including a resolution on small arms and a
moratorium on the manufacture, import and export of light
weapons.
The international community, hitherto helpless in
terms of ensuring that embargoes are respected and
preventing illegal arms transfers to areas of conflict, must
react with greater cooperation and coordination in the
overall effort to stem the proliferation of light weapons and
attenuate their devastating impact. The United Nations
conference on small arms in 2001 will undoubtedly be the
beginning of a solution in this area.
Fourthly, in connection with peacekeeping, the
multitude and type of conflicts and their disastrous impact
on civilians call for the establishment of multidimensional
peacekeeping operations. This is why we believe that
peacekeeping operations must be endowed with clear
mandates in all areas, including better monitoring of
refugee camps. This is why we are glad to see the
protection of civilians, and particularly children, being
covered in peacekeeping mandates. My delegation would
like to emphasize once again the need for concerted and
coordinated action between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in this field in order to
bring about the desired degree of confidence.
We support the implementation of the Secretary-
General’s recommendations he highlighted in his
statement this morning, particularly the creation of a rapid
intervention force and preventive missions.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict must go
beyond the merely physical and legal protection
advocated in the report. It must include the economic,
social and cultural protection of populations, because
there is no longer any doubt about the close linkage
between peace and economic security. Human security
can flourish only in that context.
Finally, we wish to support the important draft
resolution that we are about to adopt and restate my
country’s firm commitment to promoting the culture of
peace and opposing the culture of impunity.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Canada.
At the outset, allow me to express my appreciation
to the members of the Council for the attention and
consideration that they have shown me during my
presence here in the past few days and for their
cooperation with my country’s delegation in addressing
the human security challenges facing the international
community. I will also take, as the representative of the
United Kingdom said, deep reflection on the arcane ways
of the Council back with me when I return to Ottawa
later this afternoon. It certainly has been an experience
and I thank the Council for it.
Allow me, as well, to join with others in expressing
appreciation to Secretary-General Annan for his very
strong declaration and his continuing leadership in this
field. I particularly welcome Mr. Kellenberger for his
remarks, which not only set out very important ideas, but
vividly evoked the suffering endured by millions of war-
affected people whom his organization must deal with on
a daily basis.
The words of the Secretary-General and Mr.
Kellenberger underline very dramatically how the
victimization of civilians has become motive, means and
manifestation of modern armed conflict. It is a cruel
reality that none of us can ignore. In our increasingly
interconnected world, the insecurity of others sooner or
later becomes a matter of our own insecurity. This new
25
Security Council 4130th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
global context has, as a result, forged common interests and
common humanity into what I believe is a powerful
impetus for common action.
For Canada and our foreign policy, this has meant
putting a priority on people’s security. It was the inspiration
behind the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction, the impetus for the
creation of the International Criminal Court and the motive
for our efforts to address the proliferation of small arms
and the needs of war-affected children.
Advancing this human security agenda was also one
of the objectives that Canada set for itself in seeking a seat
on the Security Council. Some may recall that, last
February, during our first presidency, I came to the Council
to encourage it to make the protection of civilians in armed
conflict a primary concern in this Council’s work.
Last fall, the Secretary-General presented a remarkable
report that pointed the way ahead and the Council
responded with resolution 1265 (1999) — its own
commitment for action — under the presidency of the
Netherlands. Today, the Council will take action that gives
further coherence to this activity and that effectively sets a
new course for the Council in defending the safety of
people. The Secretary-General’s report was a blueprint for
action. The draft resolution we will adopt today is a
handbook. Most importantly, the text before us entrenches
the principle that, in the pursuit of peace, the security of
people is at least as worthy a subject as the security of
States. In both spirit and letter, the draft resolution provides
the basis for Council concern and action for this purpose.
This does not mean that the State is obsolete. On the
contrary. As the representative of the United Kingdom
pointed out in his very eloquent statement, human security
does not weaken sovereignty, but strengthens it by
reinforcing democratic, tolerant, open institutions and
behaviour that do protect people. For another thing, the
State remains the most powerful instrument for pursuing
collective action.
It does, however, reflect a shift in the perspective of
this Council, where the security of people is no longer a
by-product, but is increasingly becoming a central tenet of
the Council’s work. The text before us calls attention to
specific human security threats that require action. This is
important because consciousness itself stimulates
conscience. We need to know before we can act. Recent
Council debates on issues of direct concern to the safety of
people have served this purpose very well: on conflict
prevention, sponsored by Slovenia; on small arms,
initiated by the Netherlands; on the protection of United
Nations and humanitarian workers, under the direction of
Argentina; on war-affected children, chaired by Namibia;
on the situation of refugees and internally displaced
persons in Africa, presided over by the United States;
and, of course, on the broad humanitarian aspects of
issues, which was brought before the Council by the
representative of Bangladesh.
The draft resolution pulls together many of these
strands and highlights, with particular emphasis, the
special needs of women and children in conflict, the
importance for unhindered humanitarian access to conflict
zones, the protection of refugees in their camps and the
pursuit of those who violate security. In so doing, it
creates an obligation and responsibility for the Council to
shape its work accordingly.
The text before us also moves forward Council
practices in the defence of people. In the last year, new
peacekeeping missions have been deployed in Kosovo,
East Timor and Sierra Leone, each with a robust and
explicit mandate to facilitate humanitarian efforts and to
offer direct protection to civilians. The text before us
reinforces this very crucial statement and responsibility of
the Council.
There is also a movement to adapt the use of
sanctions so that they can enhance, rather than diminish,
the safety of people. The Council’s decision Monday to
create an informal working group to provide concrete
reform proposals and its action yesterday to strengthen the
Angola sanctions regime are, again, positive signs that
there is a new direction appearing and that we are
building. The provisions of the draft resolution advance
these practices with further procedural references to
peacekeeping, the use of sanctions and information-
sharing between the Security Council and the United
Nations system and its members.
Council members would be the first to agree that
neither they, nor anybody else, has a monopoly when it
comes to protecting civilians in armed conflict. In
response, this draft resolution links Council practice to
initiatives elsewhere — such as the landmines campaign
and efforts to prosecute war criminals — that promote
human security. For example, with regard to war-affected
children, there is considerable momentum for global
action. In January, as many have noted, there was an
international agreement on raising the age at which young
26
Security Council 4130th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
people can be deployed in combat. Later this month, Ghana
and Canada will host a conference in Accra to catalyse
efforts in the West African region on the protection of war-
affected children. In September, Canada will host an
international conference bringing together Governments,
international agencies and civil society to develop a global
plan of action. This will provide a basis for the work on the
special session on children over which the representative of
Jamaica will be presiding next year. Council engagement in
these areas can go a long way towards complementing the
impact of these initiatives. They work in complementary
fashion.
In sum, the text before us conveys this basic message:
people — not just States — are subjects of global relations,
and the security and basic rights of people — not merely
the absence of military conflict between States — are
fundamental to world stability and peace. Coming from the
Security Council, this is a powerful message of change for
the United Nations and the international community.
However, it is clearly not a message without
considerable challenges, nor one that has been met with
undiluted enthusiasm, as we have seen. Those who have
suffered under colonialism and other outside involvement
in their countries might well be skeptical. However,
preventing abuse, stopping atrocities and dealing with the
impact of war are also their issues, pertaining to their
realities and clearly affecting stability in their regions.
Others argue that the promotion of human security diverts
attention and funds from the more basic priority of
development. But far from being mutually exclusive, human
security and human development are just opposite sides of
the same coin. It is hard to devote resources to improving
the gross national product when they are being spent to
repair the ravages of war. Freedom from fear is an
indispensable precursor to freedom from want. The two go
together.
Translating human security principles into practice also
means grappling directly with difficult, highly charged
subjects, being active in difficult, intractable conflicts where
human suffering is great and taking action in difficult
circumstances when the use of military force may be
necessary to alleviate extreme abuse. No one in any way
diminishes the difficulty and complexity of these kinds of
initiatives.
There has been progress; we have seen it. But frankly,
there have also been setbacks. Resistance to taking robust
Council action last year in Kosovo, reticence in dealing
openly in this Council with issues related to internally
displaced people and reluctance by the Council to become
more engaged in certain conflicts that take a relentless
and appalling toll on human life all make clear the need
for improvement.
There are, finally, some very practical considerations
in promoting human security. Council decisions aimed at
protecting the safety of people are only as good as our
ability to carry them out. This is no secret. For the most
part, we know what is needed — faster, more resolute
and more effective response. Ultimately, this takes
political will and the application of considerable
resources. Neither is inexhaustible, and the willingness of
the international community to commit them is still an
open question.
To be sure, work by the Council to promote human
security remains a work in progress. It is work that
should continue, because human security, including the
security of civilians, must not be an issue that is
considered just once or twice a year. This draft resolution
will ensure that it becomes an integral part of the
Council’s deliberations each and every time it considers
action — that, in effect, human security is hardwired into
the Council’s operations.
Our discussions over the last few days — on the
Rwanda genocide, the Angolan conflict, the general use
of sanctions and the protection of civilians in armed
conflict — point to immediate concerns that need Council
focus. They also suggest that the Council’s hardwiring
needs to be part of a system-wide rewiring. Growing
threats such as the abuse, trafficking and proliferation of
small arms; emerging trends such as the increasing role
of non-State actors, both in perpetuating war and
promoting peace; and new and complex human security
challenges in specific areas like the Horn of Africa,
including Sudan, where a confluence of natural disasters
and man-made
27
Security Council 4130th meeting
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
warfare, especially the relentless and systematic targeting of
civilians, results in extreme human suffering — these all
require a global system that is appropriately programmed to
respond.
The Millennium Assembly offers an occasion to put
concern and action for human security and safety where it
belongs: at the very centre of the United Nations system.
The Council’s action today is a step in this direction,
providing leadership and renewed meaning to the principles
of the Charter and giving renewed hope to the peoples for
whom this Organization was founded.
The meeting was suspended at 2.15 p.m.
28
United Nations S/PV.4130 (Resumption 1)
00-39810 (E) This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be
incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation
concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fifty-fifth Year
4130th Meeting
Wednesday, 19 April 2000, 3 p.m.
New York
President: Mr. Axworthy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Canada)
Members: Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Listre
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Chowdhury
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wang Yingfan
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Levitte
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Miss Durrant
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Hasmy
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Keita
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Andjaba
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Scheffers
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ben Mustapha
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Yel’chenko
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Sir Jeremy Greenstock
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Soderberg
Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General to the Security Council on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/1999/957)
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
The meeting was resumed at 3.20 p.m.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of Portugal. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): I again have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the European
Union — Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and
Slovenia — and the associated countries Cyprus and Malta,
as well as the European Free Trade Association countries
members of the European Economic Area, Iceland,
Liechtenstein and Norway, align themselves with this
statement.
This debate is another important milestone in the
discussions also initiated under the Canadian presidency of
the Security Council in February 1999 on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. The European Union would like
very much to thank you, Mr. Minister, as well as the
Canadian delegation and Ambassador Fowler, for
organizing this debate today and for having chaired the
informal working group established pursuant to resolution
1265 (1999).
We hope that a concrete framework of action will
emerge from this debate and that, based on the
recommendations and proposals contained in the rightly
commended report of the Secretary-General on this subject,
that framework will establish clearer guidelines for the
response by the United Nations system to the growing need
to protect civilians in armed conflict. The European Union
sees the work currently being undertaken on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict as an ongoing process and
looks forward to the next report by the Secretary-General
on this subject.
In recent times, conflicts have most often been of an
intra-State nature. In his report to the Millennium
Assembly, the Secretary General wrote that such conflicts
“have violated, not so much borders, as people” (A/54/2000,
para. 193) living within those borders. We are increasingly
confronted with the need to protect individuals and
communities against armed conflict in their immediate
neighbourhoods.
Safe and unimpeded access to those in need of
assistance is an obligation under international humanitarian
law and one which national authorities are legally bound to
ensure. This obligation also extends to all other parties to
a conflict. We know, however, that in many instances this
legal obligation is deliberately flouted. The European
Union believes the Council should make clear in its
relevant resolutions that civilian populations must have
unimpeded access to humanitarian assistance and that
there should be full cooperation with the United Nations
in providing such access. The safety and security of those
entrusted with the delivery of assistance and supplies
must also be ensured.
While men account for the largest number of
combatants, women and children are disproportionately
represented among civilians affected by conflict. Women
also constitute the majority of refugees and internally
displaced persons. The specific needs of women, children,
the elderly and the disabled should be taken into account
in camps for refugees and internally displaced persons, in
the mandates of peacekeeping and peace-building
operations and, whenever possible, during the negotiation
of peace agreements. The situation of children in armed
conflict is an area of particular concern.
The humanitarian character of camps and settlements
for refugees and internally displaced persons should be
strictly enforced, and the deployment of international
military observers or other personnel should be envisioned
when it has become evident that these camps are being
used to achieve military purposes.
The dire situation of some 25 million persons who
have been forced to leave their homes due to the outbreak
of conflict is receiving increased attention on the part of
the international community. The Secretary-General
recommends in his report on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict that the States concerned follow the legal
guidance afforded by the Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement. We most definitely support that
recommendation. The European Union would also like to
encourage the Council to contribute to an increased
awareness among Member States of the importance of the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement and to
examine what possible role it could play with regard to
the protection of internally displaced persons and in the
dissemination of those Principles.
We also welcome the decision adopted by the
Inter-Agency Standing Committee earlier this month to
the effect that the Emergency Relief Coordinator, acting
in his own capacity or on suggestions from the
humanitarian or resident coordinators, should bring to the
attention of the Security Council issues concerning
2
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
internally displaced persons whenever that is deemed
appropriate.
The legal protection of civilians in armed conflict can
also be enhanced. The European Union fully supports the
call of the Secretary-General for the ratification of the
major instruments of international humanitarian law, human
rights law and refugee law, for the withdrawal of those
reservations which weaken the protection of civilians, and
for the taking of all appropriate legislative, judicial and
administrative measures to implement those instruments.
The Security Council could play an active role in
convincing Member States that have not yet done so to
ratify the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United Nations
and Associated Personnel. Serious consideration should be
given to expanding the scope of the Convention to include
locally recruited personnel, who are essential to the
functioning of peacekeeping and humanitarian missions.
Furthermore, the activities of the two existing ad hoc
Tribunals should be fully supported by all Member States,
especially with regard to complying with their orders and
requests for the arrest and surrender of accused persons. In
this context, the International Criminal Court will be
crucial. The European Union urges those who have not yet
signed the Rome International Criminal Court Statute to do
so and all States to proceed to ratification as soon as
possible. Our common persistent efforts to combat impunity
for war crimes is also an important contribution to the
prevention of renewed armed conflict.
The first step to be taken in the protection of civilians
is, of course, to prevent conflicts. The link between the
prevention of armed conflicts, the facilitation of the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the protection of
civilians during armed conflict, in particular the protection
of human life, has been well established by this organ, most
recently in its presidential statement of 30 November 1999.
The European Union stresses the importance of a
comprehensive approach to conflict prevention extending
from early warning to post-conflict peace-building. This, in
turn, requires the promotion of a culture of prevention
within the international community. It also entails paying
attention to an expanded view on security.
However, it should be reiterated that conflict
prevention is based on respect for the Charter of the United
Nations and other provisions of international law, including
human rights. When this fails, the international community
has an obligation to act. It has at its disposal a plethora of
measures that, if used judiciously and in a timely manner,
can be powerful tools in the prevention of full-fledged
conflicts.
The European Union would like to encourage the
Secretary-General to resort more often to the prerogative
conferred on him by Article 99 of the Charter. Both the
Secretary-General and Member States should be invited
to bring to the attention of the Council any matter which,
in their opinion, may threaten peace and security. The
establishment in the Council secretariat of an
early-warning mechanism for coordination and systematic
dissemination of reliable early-warning information,
including human rights information, could be one way to
support and facilitate the work of the Secretary-General.
The early deployment of preventive missions should
also be considered whenever possible. Because conflict
situations evolve quickly, the United Nations must be
ready to plan and deploy its operations accordingly. They
must be placed on the ground as soon as possible, with
sufficient resources to achieve the mandates entrusted to
them by the Security Council.
At that early stage a number of measures could be
envisioned, ranging from the use of fact-finding missions,
special envoys and monitors to preventive diplomacy and
a more consistent use of information and analysis made
available by independent treaty body experts and
mechanisms of the United Nations Commission on
Human Rights in order to determine potential conflicts
and to act preventively. Improvement of the capacity of
the Secretariat in terms of expertise and resources could
also be contemplated upon the identification by the
Secretary-General of any additional requirements needed
to fulfil his capabilities.
The European Union supports proposals to expand
the scope of the United Nations standby arrangements
system, including by increasing the number of civilian
police and specialized civil administration and
humanitarian personnel. We also support the proposal that
peacekeepers and humanitarian personnel be trained in
human rights and international humanitarian law,
including child- and gender-related provisions.
With regard to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes, these can be essential
to a peace process and should be included early in the
relevant peace agreements and mandated by the Security
Council with sufficient resources. A successful DDR
programme can break the cycle of violence.
3
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
There are about 500 million small arms and light
weapons in circulation and considered responsible for
roughly 90 per cent of all deaths in contemporary conflicts.
Their easy availability has aggravated too many conflicts,
whose ruthlessness is hardly understandable at the dawn of
the twenty-first century. Stopping the illegal traffic of these
weapons must be a priority for the international community.
A greater use of embargoes is one of the tools at the
disposal of the Council and one it should use more often,
but embargoes per se can be of little value if they are not
respected and enforced by all States, not least by the
neighbouring countries.
As the Secretary-General recommends, the Security
Council can also use targeted sanctions to deter and contain
those who commit grave violations of international
humanitarian law or human rights, including those parties
to a conflict which do not refrain from attacking civilians.
In this context, it is very much linked to the other debates
we had under your presidency, Sir.
The European Union had the occasion to further
elaborate on the subject of sanctions in a statement
delivered before this Council on 17 April, and again on 18
April on the occasion of the consideration of sanctions
against UNITA.
The Secretary-General has identified, in his report on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, a
comprehensive set of preventive measures that, if followed
through, could have a positive impact on enhancing the
security of civilians in conflicts. General pronouncements
alone will not change much, even if they do, importantly,
raise awareness of the plight of civilians in conflicts.
As the Secretary-General has himself stated:
“We know what needs to be done. What is now
needed is the foresight and the political will to do it”.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Israel. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Lancry (Israel): I wish to emphasize our
appreciation for your leadership in this discussion and to
commend the several discussions that preceded it over this
past year. In the months since the Secretary-General
presented us with his report, we have seen special attention
given to the protection of civilians in places like Sierra
Leone, Angola and others. This gave birth both to
short-term and long-term measures. More importantly, it
added to a renewed focus on the plight of civilians
targeted in armed conflict.
As the report of the Secretary-General pointed out,
physical protection must precede legal protection. It is the
more immediate need. We have seen efforts to begin
integrating ex-military forces into civil society. We have
seen attempts to place United Nations peacekeepers in
areas where civilians are vulnerable. We have seen plans
to increase civilian police, which would be a welcome
development across the globe.
Still, all of these practical steps begin with a legal
one: identifying the deliberate targeting of civilians as a
distinct crime. As we recall, resolution 1265 (1999)
strongly condemns the deliberate targeting of civilians.
We should also recall that the Secretary-General’s report
in September specifically used the word “terror” to
describe such actions and noted that:
“The violence is frequently perpetrated by non-state
actors ... and privately financed militia.”
(S/1999/957, para. 8)
These affirmations serve to identify and help
criminalize the tactic of wilfully targeting civilians. They
also reaffirm that any violations by States or militias are
worthy of the attention of the Security Council. Moreover,
by criminalizing the tactic itself, we prevent actors from
hiding behind their political or military purposes. The
international community has finally established that no
end justifies a deliberate assault on the innocent. This is
a universal principle, and the next step might be for
Member States and entities to explicitly outlaw the
practice.
Still, we have only scratched the surface. The
question still plagues us: how did the century that saw the
birth of our international human rights instruments also
witness the most vicious targeting of civilians in human
history? Less than 50 years after the conventions on
genocide, human rights and humanitarian law, we saw the
systematic destruction of entire civilian households, both
in Europe and in the African continent.
Moreover, our current age has marked the growth of
a new tactic, which is as cynical as it is brutal: the use of
civilians as human shields. This practice must itself be
included as part of the same theme, for it is in essence
the same crime: the deliberate attempt to cause the death
and suffering of civilians in armed conflict.
4
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
Nevertheless, the root causes continue to elude us. The
above-mentioned report refers in paragraph 48 to “the
obligation ... to prevent the open incitement to violence
against particular groups”. We must recall that the worst
case of targeting civilians, in the century just past, began
with the vilification of an entire people. This continues to
be the case today. Groups that attack civilians are often also
guilty of conducting media campaigns against entire peoples
or ethnic groups.
This is no coincidence. We must demand that States
do their utmost to prevent demonization before — and
especially after — it reaches the point of violence. The
outlawing of incitement to violence is a step in the right
direction. But more must be done to promote a climate of
peace and respect for human rights. This begins with
respect for the human rights of all peoples, regardless of
ethnic group, religion or nationality.
There is another point that is worth emphasizing:
civilians must never be the direct target of war; however,
they must certainly be the target of peacemaking. All
efforts at diplomatic reconciliation, between States and
parties, must be supplemented by efforts to promote
normalization of relations between peoples and societies. In
this manner we can lay the groundwork for a climate in
which civilian life and human dignity will be respected. Let
us hope that the focus on the innocent, beginning in this
forum, will set the stage for a greater recognition of the
inherent rights of all human beings across borders and
continents. Then civil society will be truly safe and free.
The President: The next speaker is the representative
of the Republic of Korea. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Suh Dae-won (Republic of Korea): I would like
to begin by expressing my delegation’s appreciation to you,
Minister Axworthy, for your efforts to generate greater
participation in the work of the Security Council. I likewise
commend you for once again providing a forum for the
interests and concerns of the international community
relating to security issues of a humanitarian nature,
including in the open debate of the Council on “general
issues relating to sanctions” on 17 April 2000. My
delegation also offers thanks to the Secretary-General and
his staff, and Mr. Kellenberger, the new President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, as well as the
informal working group of the Security Council, for their
indispensable work on this issue.
Since my delegation introduced the issue of the
protection of humanitarian assistance to refugees and
others in conflict situations to the Council during its
Security Council presidency in 1997, we have been
following the Council’s successive measures on this issue
with deep interest. We note with satisfaction that the
Council has held a number of meaningful discussions
dealing with the protection of civilians in conflicts, which
resulted in the adoption of resolution 1265 in September
1999. We applaud the Council’s continued efforts to fulfil
its responsibilities in this regard in a more concrete and
action-oriented manner.
In his report in document S/1999/957, the Secretary-
General rightly emphasizes the close connection between
widespread violations of the rights of civilians and
breakdowns in international peace and security. The
Security Council has also confirmed through many
resolutions that violations of international humanitarian
law constitute a continuing threat to international peace
and security. Today’s alarming breaches of international
humanitarian norms therefore flout both the authority of
this Council and the spirit of the Charter of the
Organization.
My delegation supports the Secretary-General’s
recommendations contained in document S/1999/957 and
the Council’s decision to consider appropriate steps to
implement his recommendations at this juncture. The
ever-widening gap between our international humanitarian
norms and an often dreadful reality calls for not only the
Security Council, but the whole international community
to act decisively and promptly.
Let me address several points to which my
delegation attaches particular importance.
First, despite an ever-expanding legal corpus, there
is still room for improving the protection of civilians in
conflicts within our international legal framework. Indeed,
the existence of international law does not mean that it
can be upheld only by effective measures to ensure
compliance. It is imperative that a culture of compliance
begin to prevail so that legal protection and physical
protection are no longer two separate matters.
It is in this context that my delegation echoes
previous speakers in expressing its expectations for the
future role of the International Criminal Court (ICC). I
am pleased to announce that my Government signed the
Statute of the ICC last month, and we invite others that
have not yet done so to become signatories. My
5
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
delegation also supports the Secretary-General’s view that
there is a need to consider using enforcement measures to
facilitate the arrest and surrender of those persons accused
by ad hoc tribunals and to devise judicial and investigative
mechanisms with national and international components
pending the establishment of the International Criminal
Court.
The Statute of the Court stipulates that attacks against
humanitarian or peacekeeping personnel constitute war
crimes. With a view to better ensuring the safety of United
Nations and humanitarian personnel, we join the
Secretary-General’s call for an early ratification of the 1994
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel. We also believe that the proposal to extend the
scope of the 1994 Convention to cover wider categories of
humanitarian personnel, including local staff, deserves
favourable consideration.
Secondly, my delegation concurs with the
Secretary-General’s recommendations for a more proactive
use of preventive monitoring in areas of potential conflict
and in the deployment of preventive peacekeeping missions,
which have already proved to be effective. In this context,
we would like to join in appealing to all Member States to
participate more actively in the stand-by arrangement
system. Today the Secretary-General made an important
suggestion: to create a rapid deployment force. This idea
certainly merits further discussion.
Furthermore, in view of the multifaceted nature of
recent conflicts, there is an urgent need to strengthen the
United Nations rapid-reaction capability to cover more than
the traditional mandates of peacekeeping. It should also
cover a number of other functions, such as the protection of
humanitarian assistance to civilians. It goes without saying
that mandates for peacekeeping operations should be more
precise and comprehensive in order to provide effective
direction and clarity.
Thirdly, my delegation appreciates the attention that
has recently been given to improving sanctions. The
Security Council, for its part, has made consistent efforts to
refine the use of sanctions. While we recognize the
difficulty of achieving effective “targeted sanctions”, we
also believe that there is a continuing need to minimize
collateral — albeit unintended — humanitarian suffering
through the imposition of more specifically targeted
sanctions and periodic substantial review mechanisms.
While we all continue to seek more effective and
smarter sanctions, tighter arms embargoes should be sought
in all situations where the parties to the conflict target
civilians. In this regard, effective measures must be taken
to control the flow of small arms and light weapons to
conflict areas. My delegation strongly supports the
suggestion made by Under-Secretary-General Prendergast
at Monday’s Council meeting that sanctions regimes
should be endowed with more effective monitoring
capabilities, including the necessary resources and
expertise. We will continue to support the efforts of the
Council and the Secretary-General to strike a balance
between upgrading the credibility of sanctions and
minimizing human suffering.
Fourthly, it is worth giving serious attention to the
Secretary-General’s suggestion that we provide States
with political and financial support to facilitate
compliance with the Ottawa Convention. Mine clearance
is an urgent precondition to a minimum level of safety for
civilians. A donor to the Mine Action Support Group, my
Government has also been contributing since 1996 to the
Voluntary Trust Fund for Assistance in Mine Clearance
in support of demining activities in Cambodia, Tajikistan,
Guatemala and El Salvador. We will continue to make
such contributions and invite others to do the same.
Finally, we would like to re-emphasize the primary
importance of maintaining the civilian and humanitarian
character of camps for refugees and internally displaced
persons. We fully support a number of practical
suggestions in this regard, in particular the deployment of
international military observers and the relocation of
camps to a safe area away from war zones. While
recognizing that primary responsibility for the protection
of internally displaced persons rests with the Governments
concerned, we support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation for a wider use of the Guiding Principles
on Internal Displacement in the work of the United
Nations.
Let me close by reiterating my delegation’s hope
that the Security Council will continue to expand its
involvement in the protection of civilians in conflict
situations in the months to come. The Republic of Korea,
for its part, will continue to be actively engaged in this
important process and to contribute to its success.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Austria,
Mrs. Benita Ferrero-Waldner, who is returning home to
the United Nations as a longtime member of the family
here.
6
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
I invite her to take a seat at the Council table and to
make her statement.
Mrs. Ferrero-Waldner (Austria): Let me begin, Mr.
President, by extending my appreciation to you and to your
country for having taken the initiative in February last year
to bring before the Security Council the very important
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict. It is a
particular pleasure to see you presiding over this meeting
today. I wish therefore to congratulate you, and, through
you, the Security Council, on the encouraging results
which — in a little more than a year’s time — have been
achieved so far in addressing this matter.
The steady increase in civilian casualties in conflict
situations strikes us as one of the past century’s most
horrific features. Sadly — and I am stating the obvious for
the Council — the 1990s proved no exception to this
pattern, but rather culminated in armed conflicts marked by
massive, deliberate brutality against civilians, with
particularly negative effects on women, children and other
vulnerable groups.
This is true for every region of the world, and I would
like to welcome the particular emphasis the Council has
placed recently on Africa. In my capacity as
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), I will concentrate today on
the OSCE region and on the steps taken by the OSCE to
better protect civilians in times of conflict.
An impressive number of instruments of international
humanitarian and human rights law have been adopted since
the Second World War. But as we enter a new century, we
are still far from a worldwide “climate of compliance”. The
law continues to be broken, violated and, unfortunately,
ignored. I would like, therefore, to welcome the landmark
report of the Secretary-General to the Security Council on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. In this report,
he has presented a set of courageous yet very practical
proposals, including measures that the Council can adopt
within its sphere of responsibility with a view to developing
effective responses to this ongoing challenge. In adopting
resolution 1265 (1999) of 17 September 1999, the Council
welcomed the Secretary-General’s report and supported
many of its recommendations. The Council also underlined
the importance of consultation and cooperation between the
United Nations and other relevant international
organizations and actors, including regional organizations,
in this respect. Furthermore, it expressed its willingness to
work in cooperation with regional organizations to examine
how these bodies might better enhance the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
As the Council is aware, cooperation between the
United Nations and the OSCE takes place on a multitude
of levels. Apart from our day-to-day cooperation in the
field and the humanitarian and political tasks we face
together in some regions of the OSCE area, there are
important issues of common concern regarding the way
we approach the challenges of the new century. The topic
of this debate concerns one of them.
As stated in the Charter for European Security,
adopted in Istanbul in November 1999, the OSCE will
seek ways of reinforcing the application of international
humanitarian law in order to enhance the protection of
civilians in times of conflict. I believe that working
together with the Security Council in this respect would
only seem natural and mutually beneficial.
At this point, I should also like to highlight that at
the Istanbul Summit, the OSCE laid the foundations for
a strong focus on the concerns and situation of the
individual human being. Ultimately, it is the OSCE’s aim,
as expressed in the Summit Declaration, “to improve
human security and thereby to make a difference in the
life of the individual”.
Keeping these words in mind, Austria, which holds
the Chairmanship-in-Office of the OSCE, strongly
believes that in situations of armed conflict, the OSCE
must focus its attention on the victims and the
vulnerable — their interests, rights and protection. In this
connection, and as part of an integrated approach to
security policy, the Austrian Chairmanship-in-Office has
put special emphasis on taking concrete steps to better
protect civilians in armed conflict.
One important aspect is the protection of children
affected by armed conflict, an issue that has been dear to
us for a long time. In September last year, therefore, we
suggested that the question of children in armed conflict
be considered regularly in the OSCE framework. Austria
greatly appreciated the initiative of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict, Olara Otunnu, in proposing a 10-point
agenda by which the OSCE could undertake to make the
protection of children affected by armed conflict a central
policy concern.
At the OSCE Istanbul Summit of November 1999,
the heads of State or Government of the participating
7
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
States of the OSCE endorsed this approach. They
committed themselves to actively promoting children’s
rights and interest, especially in conflict and post-conflict
situations. They decided to regularly address the rights of
children in the work of the OSCE, including by holding a
special meeting in the year 2000, dedicated to children in
armed conflict, and to pay particular attention to the
physical and psychological well-being of children involved
in war or affected by armed conflict.
In this connection, a Human Dimension Seminar on
children and armed conflict will be held from 23 to 26 May
2000 in Warsaw, with the aim of raising awareness within
the OSCE, including OSCE field presences, about the
effects of armed conflict on children and the aim of
examining the possibilities for intervention by the OSCE to
address them. I therefore take pleasure in informing the
Council that Mr. Olara Otunnu, as well as representatives
of the United Nations Children’s Fund and other
international organizations and non-governmental
organizations, will contribute to that meeting.
Another key issue which is high on our agenda as
OSCE Chairman-in-Office, is the problem of internal
displacement. Persons displaced within their own countries
by internal conflict and grave violations of human rights
and humanitarian law pose a great challenge to which both
our organizations are called to respond. The protection of
and provision of assistance to millions of internally
displaced people must become a priority concern to us. The
same holds true for the ultimate aim of their return to and
reintegration in their places of origin. Within the United
Nations, important work has been done on this topic by the
Representative of the Secretary-General for Internally
Displaced Persons, Mr. Francis Deng. He has been a
catalyst of greater attention to the problem of internal
displacement, working both within the United Nations
system and in collaboration with regional organizations,
such as the Organization of African Unity.
Austria also took the initiative to raise the issue of
displacement within the OSCE. A Human Dimension
Seminar on this topic, with the participation of Mr. Francis
Deng, will be held later this year. Among its objectives will
be the promotion of the wider use of the Guiding Principles
on Internal Displacement and their integration into the work
of the OSCE.
In conclusion, let me express my conviction that there
is great potential for further and closer cooperation between
our organizations in dealing with the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. The examples which I have mentioned
may be just a beginning. There is scope to intensify our
efforts and to expand cooperation to other areas of
common interest, such as the fight against the
proliferation of small arms, the monitoring, protection and
promotion of human rights in conflict zones and the
training of field mission personnel, as well as
peacekeeping and peace-building operations.
I strongly believe that such common endeavours to
protect the vulnerable, building on our positive
experiences of cooperation in the past few years, will
soon lead to concrete results. They will be felt positively
by those whose well-being we wish to secure. This in
itself should encourage us to intensify our work in this
direction.
Finally, let me greet the Austrian students from the
University of Vienna who are studying international
organizations and who are sitting in the Gallery. They
have followed this meeting very diligently.
The President: I endorse the welcome that the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Austria gave to the
students here. It is always great to see them observing the
Council in action.
The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Singapore. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Allow me to begin by
congratulating the delegation of Canada on arranging
another discussion on this important topic in this Chamber
and to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report. We would also like to commend you, Minister
Axworthy, for your decision to preside over this debate in
person. Your personal presence here bears eloquent
testimony to Canada’s commitment to its human security
agenda. We would also like to acknowledge the
contribution made by Mr. Kellenberger this morning and
to pay tribute to the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) for its substantial contributions over the
years through its efforts to bring relief to civilians and
those in need, often under very trying circumstances.
As this is the fourth meeting we have had on this
subject, it may be fair to ask ourselves whether we are
going in the right or wrong direction in our
discussions — that is to say, will all our discussions
actually lead to fewer civilians being killed in armed
conflicts?
8
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
Our first goal in the United Nations is always to
prevent conflict, or, as the United Nations Charter states,
“to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war”.
However, if conflict occurs — and it is likely to occur
again — our job is to ensure that we protect the lives of
civilians before those of soldiers in these conflicts. Is this
goal realistic?
We should begin by acknowledging that civilians have
been killed in armed conflict for thousands of years. In an
annex attached to our remarks, we have reproduced two
tables from a recent book by Michael Renner, which
indicate the heavy casualties among civilians in armed
conflicts before and after 1945. Whether we live in Asia,
North America or Europe, none of us has been spared the
horrors of war. Indeed, as recently as 1898, in the Spanish-
American War, up to 95 per cent of the victims were
civilians.
As we enter the twenty-first century, the great conceit
that we have begun to believe in is that mankind as a whole
has become more civilized. Indeed, we have in some
respects. Inter-State wars seem to be a sunset industry.
With a few exceptions, we do not see large armies in the
field killing each other.
But unfortunately, a new trend has emerged. In place
of inter-State wars, we now see more intra-State wars.
Hence, it is no longer a case of soldiers killing soldiers.
Instead, as we heard at the debate on the Carlsson report,
on Rwanda, last week in this Chamber, it is neighbours
who kill neighbours, friends who kill friends, civilians who
kill civilians. Rwanda is not the only place in recent history
where civilians have killed civilians. We have seen the
same thing in Sierra Leone, in Kosovo and elsewhere.
We should, of course, be dismayed that such recent
atrocities have taken place despite the great progress we
have made in formulating rules to protect civilians and
combatants alike against some of the more reprehensible
acts of war. These norms are clearly set out in the Geneva
Conventions, as well as in other instruments of international
humanitarian law. We can therefore support the call by the
Secretary-General to encourage a “climate of compliance”
(S/1999/957, para. 5), which many others have echoed in
their remarks today — a “climate of compliance” of
existing rules and principles.
But how does one explain humanitarian law to
combatants, who are often underaged, poor and illiterate, let
alone expect them to comply? Even the ICRC has
acknowledged the difficulties of applying accepted
humanitarian norms in today’s “new” conflicts. It states,
“The lack of discipline among belligerents, the
targeting of the civilian population as weapons
flood the territory and the increasingly blurred
distinction between combatants and non-
combatants often cause confrontations to take
an extremely brutal turn in which there is little
place for the rules of law.”
Clearly, the long-term solution to this problem is to
promote development and education. But is there anything
we can do in the meantime to save civilian lives when an
armed conflict breaks out? Here, we should be grateful
for the incisive analysis and recommendations contained
in at least three recent reports: the Secretary-General’s
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, of
8 September 1999, the Carlsson report on the 1994
Rwanda genocide, of 15 December 1999, and the
Secretary-General’s report on Srebrenica, of 15 November
1999. If we read these reports in detail, as we all should,
we will find many valuable solutions.
I also understand that the Council’s informal
working group has been studying the Secretary-General’s
comprehensive recommendations since last September to
examine how they could be implemented. But let us
remember that the peoples of the world will judge the
United Nations not by its words but by its deeds. What
message, for example, was conveyed by the deeds and
actions of United Nations operations in Rwanda and
Srebrenica? Will such history repeat itself again? Will the
United Nations once again be paralysed by political
inertia and apathy? Will soldiers again abandon
supposedly safe areas, leaving innocent civilians as sitting
ducks ready for the inevitable ensuing slaughter? Will the
United Nations once again send a mission that is from the
start grossly understaffed, under-resourced and ill
equipped?
If we are to be completely honest with ourselves, we
have to admit that both in Srebrenica as well as Rwanda,
it would appear that the protection of the lives of soldiers
was more important than the protection of the lives of
civilians. Although this may appear strange at first sight,
we know why this happened. We congratulate
Ambassador Peter van Walsum of the Netherlands for
candidly explaining the source of the problem:
“It is understandable, but unfortunate, that a
troop-contributing country which suffers heavy
9
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
casualties will inevitably find itself under
pressure from its parliament and its media to
withdraw its contingent. The more this reflex can
be counted on, the greater the likelihood that
precisely such a contingent will be targeted by
parties opposed to the peace operation. We have
no solution for this problem, but it raises a
discomforting question as to the suitability of
democratic countries for peace operations.”
(S/PV.4127, p. 6)
Fortunately, not all democracies behave in this way. In
East Timor, the lives of hundreds of thousands of East
Timorese civilians were also threatened by rogue militia.
Fortunately, in this case the United Nations authorized the
deployment of a well-equipped international force, under
strong leadership and provided with a clear mandate. This
force had the will to robustly execute its mandate. In so
doing, this operation proved that the United Nations could
fulfil its responsibility of preventing the brutalization of
innocent civilians by armed militia.
Clearly, all conflict situations are different. But
none — I repeat, none — provide easy solutions. As
Foreign Minister Lloyd Axworthy of Canada told the
Council last week,
“the protection of civilians requires strengthening
our disposition to intervene with force if
necessary.” (ibid., p. 24)
Minister Axworthy may have been stating the obvious. But
the key implication of what he said is often unmentionable
in the Security Council — to save civilians you need
effective military forces. The question is, where will they
come from and who will pay the costs? In the case of East
Timor, for example, every Australian taxpayer was asked
to pay an additional 1,000 Australian dollars per person.
How many taxpayers in democracies are prepared to do
this?
Even when troops and resources are available, it may
not necessarily mean that civilians will be protected. It is
troubling that Timothy Garton Ash, in a recent article in
The New York Review of Books, has reported a growing
intolerance of all other ethnic groups among the Kosovars.
Ash has also detected what he had called “reverse ethnic
cleansing” taking place in Kosovo “under the very noses
and tank barrels of more than 40,000 international troops”.
Resolution 1291 (2000), which extended the mandate
and authorized the expansion of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUC) in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, exemplifies yet again the difficulties of
reconciling the lofty ideals of today’s debate and the
actual painful decisions made by the Council. MONUC’s
mandate to protect civilians is deliberately couched in
even more conditional language than the mandate given
earlier to the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL). A quick comparison of resolution 1291
(2000) and resolution 1289 (2000), expanding UNAMSIL,
will, we believe, illustrate this point.
In short, we should recognize that protecting
civilians in armed conflict will require hard decisions.
Considerable resources, human and otherwise, have to be
placed at risk. Consistent and coherent policies have to be
worked out. But in this context, is it fair to ask the United
Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations to do
more when it is being starved of resources, especially
from the United Nations major contributors? Is it not
obvious that an underfunded United Nations can do little
to protect civilians?
Our remarks today are not intended to create
pessimism. But we should set realistic expectations for
the civilian populations of the world about what the
international community can and cannot do. On this we
agree with the point made by Minister Axworthy this
morning when he described the work of the Council here
today to promote human security as being work in
progress. Indeed, last week Minister Axworthy also cited
a very moving account given by Philip Gourevitch in his
book of how young, defenceless Hutu girls in a convent
school refused to leave the side of their Tutsi friends,
even though they were ordered to do so by the
genocidaires. The simple question that the rest of the
world will ask of the United Nations in the future is
whether the soldiers will display the same courage and
sacrifice as those Hutu girls, or whether they will be
withdrawn by their parliaments and media at the first hint
of danger.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Japan. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Kobayashi (Japan): Let me start by extending
my appreciation for your initiative, Mr. President, in the
discussions in the Council on the serious and growing
problem of civilians in armed conflict.
10
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
I should also like to join the others who this morning
welcomed Mr. Jakob Kellenberger, the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). I wish
to take this opportunity to express Japan's continuing
support for the worthy work that the ICRC is carrying out
around the globe under his able leadership.
Today, I shall not dwell upon our basic recognition
that the majority of victims in an armed conflict are
civilians — mainly women and children — as this has been
articulated by many others in the previous debates in the
Council; nor shall I comment here on all the interrelated
and valuable recommendations that are about to be adopted
by the Council. Rather, I should like to try to shed some
light on today's theme by discussing how to respond to the
plight of internally displaced persons.
The displacement of civilians is a matter of
international peace and security, since peace, reconciliation
and reconstruction in war-torn communities depend, at least
in part, on their effective reintegration. Moreover, if
unaddressed, internal displacement not only causes internal
instability but may also spill across borders and upset
external and regional stability.
I should like now to express Japan's views on how to
address the issue of internally displaced persons by
stressing the following two basic points.
First, Japan supports the approach taken by Mr.
Francis Deng, Representative of the Secretary-General on
Internally Displaced Persons, which is based on the belief
that sovereignty is responsibility. Under that approach,
through analysis and dialogue with Government and
agencies in the field, the international community would
jointly try to solve the problem. When a given Government
is not in a position to completely fulfil its responsibility —
for political, economic, or other reasons — then the
international community can come in to help, with the
consent and understanding of that Government. Japan
believes that such an approach should be strongly enhanced,
and in this context Japan is considering extending some
financial support to facilitate Mr. Deng's worthy efforts.
My second point pertains to how better to respond to
the issue of persons displaced by armed conflicts. If you
recall, in the Council last January Ambassador Holbrooke,
of the United States, made an eloquent case for the need to
address a displaced population that remains within the
borders of a State wrecked by conflicts. His suggestion that
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) might play a wider role in the response
to the issue of internally displaced persons triggered an
intense debate in the international community on how to
address this pressing subject. The realities in the growing
number of cases of displacement and the activities of
humanitarian agencies both suggest that the protection
aspect of the response towards internally displaced
persons has clearly been weak.
Mrs. Sadako Ogata, the High Commissioner for
Refugees, has responded to Ambassador Holbrooke's
suggestion with a qualified “yes”. According to her, in
such cases where refugees and internally displaced
persons are generated by the same causes, or where
refugees have sought asylum across borders in areas
where there are also internally displaced persons, UNHCR
would be able to utilize its expertise and skills to protect
the displaced persons. This, in our eyes, and in the eyes
of the international community, I believe, would be a very
encouraging sign that the need to protect civilians affected
by armed conflict is meeting with a better response. This
is so because it would mean efficient use of limited
resources, as well as avoiding layers of bureaucracy.
It is also encouraging to know that efforts towards
greater coordination on the humanitarian front are being
made by the United Nations and relevant organizations.
The Inter-Agency Standing Committee, chaired by the
International Red Cross, is pursuing more accountability
in the international response to internally displaced
persons. I shall not go into detail here on the desirable
institutional arrangements that have been under
deliberation, and recently with greater intensity. What
should be kept in mind, however, when undertaking this
exercise is that there is no model method for protecting
civilians caught in an armed conflict. Each conflict has a
different historical and geographical background, and the
pattern of activities by United Nations agencies and other
international bodies differs in each conflict and each post-
conflict situation. Whichever body has the most
value-added expertise, and whichever is well placed in the
field, should be designated as being accountable. A
coherent and comprehensive response by all actors —
including better protection, assistance and economic
recovery for internally displaced persons — needs to be
pursued effectively.
I should like to conclude by expressing the readiness
of my Government to actively take part in the effort by
the international community to seek ways to address the
issue of displacement. When effective methods are
agreed, you can be assured, Mr. President, of Japan's full
support and cooperation.
11
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt)(spoke in Arabic): As the
Security Council resumes its consideration of the report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and the report of the working group that
followed up that report, we wish to reaffirm our position:
the Security Council should not be the only body to
consider this issue or its report. We believe that the report
should also be considered by the General Assembly, with
all its recommendations, so that the Assembly can look into
the general principles therein on reducing human suffering,
including the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We
may recall what the Council has said in the past regarding
the protection of civilians in armed conflict within the
context of full respect for the delicate balance of powers
between the principal organs of the United Nations, as
reflected in the Charter. These include the General
Assembly, other United Nations organs and governmental
and non-governmental bodies outside the United Nations
involved in the protection of civilians.
We welcome and advocate action by the Council, in
accordance with the powers entrusted to it in the United
Nations Charter, in situations where civilians are targeted
or where there is interference with the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. We also strongly condemn the
targeting of civilians in time of war. Egypt calls on all
States parties to a conflict to respect the rights of civilians
and to refrain from using civilians as a means of achieving
political or military goals. Egypt believes that the delivery
of humanitarian assistance to civilians should not be
hampered and that civilians should not be used as human
shields.
We also call for the same standards to be universally
applied. There are rules of international humanitarian law
that apply to all States, large and small. In this context, we
note the Council’s position on issues referred to in the
report before it. First, targeting civilians in armed conflicts
is prohibited, and respecting human rights is a binding
obligation. It is indeed our primary objective to ensure the
implementation and application of that law. The Charter
calls for respect for such legal norms and standards. Failure
to respect these laws can lead to threats to international
peace and security. Certain ideas that have not yet achieved
international consensus are being voiced in certain quarters.
However, we believe we must continue to develop specific
criteria to be used where the violation of legal norms leads
to a threat to international peace and security.
We must never use double standards or favour the
political interests of certain Members of the United
Nations, more specifically, of the permanent members of
the Security Council. We must not favour their interests
over those of the other Members of the United Nations as
a whole. We believe the Council should take into account
the entire issue of powers granted to it under the Charter.
When the Council takes action vis-à-vis certain States that
have violated international norms, it must respect the
restrictions contained in the Charter. It must consider the
situation, then report on the situation and determine
whether the conflict in question is indeed a threat to
international peace and security. Any internal dispute over
a territory should not be regarded ipso facto as a threat to
international peace and security.
We support action by the Council to protect
personnel providing humanitarian and international
assistance. We believe they must be allowed to do their
job. They must have access to areas of conflict.
Organizations involved in the delivery of humanitarian
assistance must also respect the principles of neutrality,
impartiality and humanity. These points are contained in
the guidelines contained in General Assembly resolution
46/182.
Egypt believes that the provision of humanitarian
assistance to civilians in time of war should be carried out
with the consent of or at the request of the countries
concerned. There must be full respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of States
and for their national legislation. Humanitarian assistance
must not be used as a cover for action in support of the
political interests of any particular State or group of
States. When we speak of providing humanitarian
assistance, we are thinking of programmes carried out
under the auspices of the United Nations or the
International Committee of the Red Cross. The consent of
the States parties to the conflict is required. Those States
must then provide protection for the personnel providing
the humanitarian assistance. We do not believe that any
organization should take unilateral decisions to offer
assistance to civilians in any particular State without
obtaining the prior consent of the State concerned.
There are provisions in the Charter on the sovereign
equality, territorial integrity and political independence of
States, and the Council has to take those principles into
account when dealing with issues of security — for
example, in the establishment of temporary secure zones
or safe corridors for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance.
12
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
Another point I would like to make is that when
dealing with humanitarian assistance to civilians in armed
conflict, the international community has to distinguish
between States within whose territories there are
Governments that impose the law and other States where
there is virtually no legitimate Government. The latter case
is of course an exception to the rule. However, one must
always proceed on the basis of consensus.
Internally displaced persons do not constitute a totally
separate category; they are civilians and international
human rights laws and conventions provide appropriate
protection for civilians. So we believe that we need to
ensure respect for these conventions, rather than invent new
norms to protect one particular category of civilians to the
exclusion of others. Protection for displaced persons is the
responsibility of the Governments of the States represented
in the United Nations as a whole.
On the question of preventive diplomacy, fact-finding
missions and so forth, we believe that the Council can carry
out certain actions in order to prevent conflict and reach a
peaceful settlement to a conflict. Chapter VI of the Charter
is relevant here, and of course the consent of the State
concerned is required, because these procedures are in fact
voluntary.
In connection with peacekeeping missions and
operations, and how they are related to the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts, the Security Council must be
cautious in those cases where it gives a mandate to a
peacekeeping operation to protect civilians against any
dangers threatening them in armed conflicts. When the
Council takes such a decision, it must also take into
account the fact that, in considering each case individually,
it is setting a precedent for other, similar cases. Double
standards and selective application of such standards should
be avoided.
We also believe that human, technical and other
resources must be made available so that any
responsibilities given to peacekeeping operations can in fact
be fulfilled. Perhaps I could just give one rather glaring
example, that of the tragic events of Srebrenica, which
should never have been allowed to recur.
In concluding, I should like to thank you very much
indeed, Mr. President, for all the work that you have done
in promoting the activities of this Organization. Canadian
diplomacy has always had an important role to play in
connection with the United Nations. You have also done
your utmost to ensure respect for the law. I would also note
the excellent relations, based on mutual respect, between
Egypt and Canada. Also, at an individual level, you
yourself have excellent relations with your Egyptian
counterpart.
The President: I thank the representative of Egypt
for his kind words addressed to me.
In accordance with the decision taken earlier in the
meeting, I invite the Permanent Observer of Switzerland
to the United Nations to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would first of all like to thank you, Mr. Minister, and the
Canadian presidency for having organized this debate,
thus giving us the opportunity to express our views on an
issue of crucial importance. I welcome the participation
of the President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) in this morning’s debate, and I wish to pay
tribute to the tireless efforts of the ICRC on behalf of the
victims of armed conflicts throughout the world.
Switzerland welcomes the draft resolution submitted
to the Security Council for consideration, which describes
the initiatives that the Council and the entire international
community could undertake in order to improve the
protection of civilian populations in armed conflicts.
In earlier statements, I have had the opportunity to
affirm my country’s priorities for action in the
humanitarian field, such as respect for international
humanitarian law, the protection of civilian populations,
unimpeded access to victims of conflict and the security
of humanitarian personnel. I will therefore confine myself
today to three specific points that I believe to be of major
importance and deserving of in-depth consideration.
First, the question of the protection of civilian
populations in armed conflict compels us to consider the
current evolution of these conflicts throughout the world.
The proliferation of complex and prolonged emergency
situations, as seen recently in Somalia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Angola, Burundi, Sierra Leone,
Afghanistan and many other countries challenges the
bases on which human rights and international
humanitarian law instruments have been developed.
Respect for the provisions of these legal instruments
is broadly based on the responsibility of States; but we
see that non-State armed actors — armed groups, private
militia — tend to be increasing. It is deeply disturbing to
13
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
see that in the most recent internal conflicts, civilians not
only are the victims, but are becoming targets for the
warring parties. Many studies have been made of this
situation, including very recently in the excellent report of
the Secretary-General on the millennium.
It is therefore important to ensure respect for the rule
of law and for humanitarian principles by non-State armed
actors. We are obviously aware of the concrete problems
that this poses. Suffice it to mention the question of
recognition of these actors as subjects of international law
or the question of the legitimacy accorded them by
involving them in a political dialogue. Yet it must be noted
that armed groups often have considerable power over the
territory under their control. As military entities, they may
also be called upon to ensure protection of the civilian
population and to facilitate humanitarian operations in the
areas under their control. They are also actors who must be
taken into account if peace negotiations are to begin.
As we reflect on these issues, we must necessarily be
guided by common article 3 of the Geneva Conventions,
which enshrines the minimum rules of conduct that apply
to all of the parties to a conflict and which admit no
derogation.
The second priority also falls within the framework of
the human security strategy. In addition to what should be
a continuing struggle to eliminate anti-personnel mines and
to strengthen victim assistance programmes, the question of
small arms and light weapons must be at the forefront of
our concerns. My delegation believes that it is urgent to
establish stricter control over these weapons and their
transfer, which would involve preventive and regulatory
measures alike. Our agenda in this field must include the
marking of small arms and light weapons, measures to
monitor their trade and the development of codes of
conduct and actions to reduce the number of these weapons
already in circulation in areas of conflict.
The Security Council, as the organ with primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security, can also contribute to these efforts and provide an
impetus for all partners concerned to do likewise.
Lastly, I wish to mention here the need more closely
to involve the economic actors, and in particular the private
sector, in the search for lasting solutions to armed conflict.
Recent discussions on Angola and Sierra Leone have made
this clear. We have reason more systematically than in the
past to try to achieve cooperation among representatives of
the humanitarian community, the States concerned and the
economic actors.
Finally, the development of, and respect for, codes
of conduct and thorough work within the framework of
the global covenant proposed by the Secretary-General
could also yield the innovative solutions that we urgently
need.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Bahrain. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): Since this
is the first time I am addressing the Security Council this
month, I should like, Sir, to express to you our
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council. I should like also to express my thanks and
appreciation to you for holding this important meeting on
a very important subject: the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
Today we cannot but devote greater attention to the
suffering of unarmed civilians in situations of armed
conflict. Civilians are terrorized, brutalized, tortured, and
murdered at the hands of parties to conflicts, despite the
fact that the inadmissibility of attacking civilians is
enshrined in international humanitarian law and in human
rights law.
The situation calls for immediate and prompt action
that is not restricted to the agreements and rules
governing this issue but also extends to working towards
ensuring greater respect of these agreements and rules by
the parties to a conflict.
While we must deal with the root causes of armed
conflict in a drastic and comprehensive manner in order
to provide long-term protection for civilians through the
promotion of economic growth, the elimination of
poverty, the realization of sustainable development and
national reconciliation, we must also take immediate
measures to force the combatants to show greater respect
for the rights of civilians in armed conflict. Dealing with
any armed conflict in a comprehensive manner requires
a long period of time, during which civilians should not
be kept without protection.
At previous open meetings held by the Security
Council on the issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, there was unanimous agreement on
condemning the targeting of civilians in armed conflict
14
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
and attacks against targets that are subject to the protection
of international law. At those meetings it was stressed that
it was of the utmost importance to implement appropriate
protective measures.
On 17 September 1999, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1265 (1999), which deals with two major aspects
of the problem. The first one relates to encouraging the
parties to a conflict to respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law, human rights law and
refugee law, in particular those contained in the Hague
Conventions of 1899 and 1907, and in the 1949 Geneva
Conventions and their 1977 Additional Protocols.
The resolution also stresses the issue of responsibility,
so that the phenomenon of impunity can be dealt with,
thereby ensuring that those responsible for genocide, crimes
against humanity and other serious violations of
international humanitarian law are brought to justice. It
stresses also that it is extremely important to guarantee
unhindered access of humanitarian assistance personnel to
civilians in armed conflict, and to ensure the safety,
security and freedom of movement of United Nations
personnel.
Here we would like to emphasize the importance of
this aspect, bearing in mind recent incidents in which
parties to a conflict launched attacks and used force against
United Nations personnel and against other personnel from
international humanitarian organizations.
The second aspect of the problem that is dealt with in
that same resolution concerns the role of the Security
Council and the United Nations in the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. In this regard, we believe that
greater importance should be attached to the issue of the
excessive stockpiling of small arms and light weapons, in
view of their negative effects and the destabilization they
cause, and that we should do our utmost to prevent the use
of these weapons and their proliferation. In this regard, I
would like to stress that the States exporting such weapons
bear the greatest responsibility.
As for the recommendations contained in the report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict — many of which will be adopted by the
Security Council at the end of this meeting in the form of
a draft resolution — they contain many positive measures
that could improve the situation of civilians in armed
conflict. However, those measures should be implemented
in a manner consistent with the purposes and principles of
the United Nations, as set out in the Charter. I say this
because if certain measures are applied without taking
into account the special characteristics of each situation,
or without due regard to the principle of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States, they may harm not only
individuals, but also States. Of course, harm to States
results in harm to individuals, since individuals make up
States. Such an outcome would be undesirable, and we
therefore believe that our objective should always be to
ensure full protection for civilians and, at the same time,
to preserve the principles on which the United Nations
was established.
I should like to refer to one more important issue
with regard to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. When efforts to provide such protection fail,
there is always the possibility that such civilians,
particularly refugees, may, willingly or unwillingly,
become participants in the fighting on one side or the
other, thereby contributing, deliberately or otherwise, to
the conflagration and further complicating and
perpetuating the conflict, with undesirable consequences.
It is clear, therefore, that the protection of civilians in
armed conflict is an imperative for all of us.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Azerbaijan. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Kouliev (Azerbaijan) (spoke in Russian): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of Georgia, Uzbekistan,
Ukraine, Azerbaijan and the Republic of Moldova on the
question of civilians in armed conflict.
At the outset, I should like to thank the members of
the Security Council for the unflagging attention that they
have been giving to the issue of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. This is not merely an acute problem of
life today, but a priority for the international community,
especially the Security Council. I should also like to thank
the delegation of Canada for taking the initiative of
holding a debate on this item in the Security Council.
Your delegation's efforts, Sir, are designed to give real
content to the concept of human security and to make it
concrete through practical actions.
The States in our group are grateful to the Secretary-
General for his report on this issue, contained in
document S/1999/957, which includes specific
recommendations as to how the Security Council, acting
within its mandate, could enhance the level of physical
and legal protection for civilians in armed conflict.
15
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
Our debate today can be seen as an integral part of the
ongoing process within the Security Council to work out
comprehensive approaches to the settlement of conflict
situations that will not only enable us to put an end to
violence and reduce to a minimum the suffering of the
civilian population, but help in the search for stable and
lasting solutions to the conflicts themselves.
As we see it, there are at least two aspects to this
issue, so we must take an approach that is appropriate for
each one. The first aspect relates to ensuring the physical
protection of the civilian population, the consideration of
which is among the responsibilities of the Security Council.
The second aspect is more general. A unique mechanism
exists, consisting of various elements ranging from the body
of international humanitarian law to the activities of various
humanitarian organizations that try to protect the rights of
civilians in armed conflicts and to provide them with
assistance.
During earlier meetings of the Council focusing on
this issue, almost all the speakers agreed that in armed
conflict today there is an increasing tendency for civilians
to be deliberately and arbitrarily targeted for attack,
subjected to violence and killed. We are greatly concerned
by the fact that genocide, ethnic cleansing and other gross
violations of human rights have not only become linked to
modern armed conflicts, but, in manner of speaking, have
developed into just another way of waging war.
With regard to this burning issue, some of the
countries in our group can speak not merely on the basis of
hearsay, but from experience of the tragic consequences of
such actions. The States in our group would like to
emphasize that the civilian population must never be
targeted in armed conflict, regardless of their political,
ideological, racial, ethnic or religious nature or for any
other reasons. Obviously, unless there is an appropriate
response to such violence against civilians, those negative
tendencies will continue to develop and may even become
irreversible, with the result that more and more people will
be dragged into the conflict, the area of the conflict will
grow increasingly larger and peace and stability will be
threatened, which in turn will provide fertile ground for the
emergence or strengthening of ethnic hatred.
Of particular concern is the situation of internally
displaced persons. Today, there are over 20 million people
in this category, which needs sufficient attention on the part
of the international community. During earlier meetings of
the Council on this issue, Mr. Olara Otunnu, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict, drew our attention to the fact that the
most vulnerable group of the population is displaced
persons.
In this connection, the States in our group regard as
extremely important the work being done by Mr. Francis
Deng, Representative of the Secretary-General on
Internally Displaced Persons. We would also like to note
how much we appreciate the work done by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner on Refugees,
headed by Mrs. Sadako Ogata. We also appreciate the
work done by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, headed by Mr. Sergio Vieira
de Mello.
Attention must also be given to the problem of the
return of refugees and other displaced persons to their
former homes when the territory is not controlled by the
legitimate Government. We are speaking about physical
and legal protection for those persons. Armed conflict
which has not been completely resolved can flare up
again with renewed force, giving rise to a new wave of
violence against civilians and bringing all prior
peacemaking efforts to nothing.
We would also note the special link of modern
armed conflict with aggressive separatism and religious
extremism. These negative phenomena today are one of
the main challenges of the twenty-first century. Our group
of countries regards them as one of the root causes of
bloodshed and continuing military conflicts that directly
threaten the lives of the civilian population, regardless of
their racial, ethnic or religious identity.
The countries of our group believe that today one
particularly crucial issue is coordinating efforts by the
world community as it seeks legal mechanisms and
instruments for combatting terrorism. Our countries
strongly support the initiative of Uzbekistan — made
public at the Istanbul summit of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe in 1999 — on the
establishment of an international centre to combat
terrorism.
Another issue of particular concern involves the
illicit supplying of weapons to areas of conflict. We must
step up our efforts to put an end to this. Halting the flow
of weapons, including small arms and light weapons, into
areas of chronic instability can be one of the main
elements of a strategy to combat acts of violence against
civilians and humanitarian personnel. In this context, we
cannot fail to be deeply disturbed over violations of arms
16
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
embargoes imposed by the Council. We strongly advocate
strengthening the effectiveness of such embargoes. At the
same time, it is quite clear that unless we solve the question
of how to prevent and limit the uncontrolled proliferation
of weapons, it will be difficult to settle conflicts and ensure
security for civilians. Here we can only agree with the
recommendations of the Secretary-General that arms-
exporting countries should at least exercise restraint,
especially when exporting weapons to areas of conflict or
tension.
The States belonging to our group believe that the best
way of protecting civilians in armed conflicts is to
effectively prevent conflict. The root cause of humanitarian
crises must be removed by using inter-ethnic reconciliation,
confidence-building measures and economic development
and by supporting national stability.
We also believe that regardless of where and when
conflict erupts, it is necessary to urge the parties involved
to put an end to the conflicts as quickly as possible by
peaceful means. They should also strictly comply with the
norms of international law, and insofar as they can, they
should provide protection and assistance to civilians. They
should not allow any kind of violent attacks on civilians,
and they should not allow any interference with the delivery
of humanitarian assistance.
In conclusion, I would like to stress the importance of
efforts to achieve consensus in the United Nations, on the
basis of which one can integrate, in a balanced way, the
work being done by the General Assembly, the Security
Council, the Economic and Social Council, the specialized
agencies and other international participants to develop the
best possible conceptual framework for ensuring more
scrupulous respect for the norms of international law, on
the one hand, and, on the other hand, to move beyond the
provision of humanitarian assistance into the area of
organization-building and socio-economic development.
It is our hope that the Security Council, once it adopts
the important draft resolution on this item today, will very
carefully monitor the protection of civilians and react
appropriately to all cases where the lives and security of
peaceful people are threatened.
The President: I thank the representative of
Azerbaijan for his kind words addressed to the Canadian
delegation.
The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Australia, whom I invite to take a seat at the Council
table and make her statement.
Ms. Wensley (Australia): Today's debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict is a welcome
opportunity to consider more fully, and to hear the
considered views of a substantial number of Member
States — including, importantly, non-Council members —
on the issues and recommendations raised in the
Secretary-General's report of September 1999.
It was under Canadian leadership a little over a year
ago that Council attention was refocused on the issue of
protection of civilians. We want to commend Canada for
its initiative in holding this follow-up meeting and for its
firm commitment to pursuing this very specific aspect and
dimension of the more general and, I would say, still-
evolving concept of human security.
The Secretary-General's report and also the
statements we have heard from others today underline that
strengthening protection for civilians requires a multi-
dimensional approach, addressing legal and physical
assurances, conflict prevention and post-conflict peace-
building activities.
It is clear that Member States, the United Nations
and regional bodies must all focus more attention on ways
of improving implementation and enforcement of existing
humanitarian and human rights laws and norms, including
the Geneva Conventions — particularly the fourth — and
the 1977 Additional Protocols, and of promoting
observance of these instruments at all levels. This means
support for efforts to develop consistent national laws. It
also means support for efforts to develop national
institutions to disseminate laws of armed conflict through
education and training, both of armed forces and of
civilian administration, and for monitoring and
enforcement of laws.
Strengthening the legal protections for civilians also
involves ensuring adequate recourse to justice where
violations have taken place. We have heard many
speakers address this issue, but it is certainly vital that we
have effective institutions to bring to justice perpetrators
of crimes against humanity. It is for this reason that
Australia welcomed the establishment of the special
tribunals and views the International Criminal Court as a
particularly powerful instrument in this regard. It
reinforces the obligations of States to investigate and to
prosecute those responsible for major violations; and,
17
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
where no State is able or willing genuinely to do so, it
provides a mechanism for the investigation and prosecution
of crimes.
In our view, more emphasis needs to be placed on
developing and implementing concrete measures to improve
the physical security of civilians caught in conflict
situations, with particular attention to be given to the
vulnerable groups of women, children and displaced
persons. Those measures should include greater use of
preventive action, increased use of the specific mechanisms
for the protection of civilians provided for in international
humanitarian law instruments, increased use of United
Nations Charter provisions to investigate conflict situations
and, as a last resort, sanctions targeting delinquent parties,
but — as we discussed earlier this week in another equally
welcome open debate — such measures should be tailored
to minimize adverse impact on the civilian population.
Another important component is the sustained use of
political and diplomatic pressure to ensure that parties
guarantee access for civilians to humanitarian assistance
and necessary protection for United Nations and related
personnel, the International Committee of the Red Cross,
and humanitarian relief workers. Although humanitarian
relief workers are entitled to the same protection as
civilians, their operations — we have all acknowledged —
make them especially vulnerable to attack in conflict
situations. We look forward to the Secretary-General’s
comprehensive report on the safety and security situation of
humanitarian personnel, when it is submitted during the
fifty-fifth session of the General Assembly, and beyond that
to further international cooperation in enhancing the
protection of those humanitarian workers who are not
specifically protected under current international
humanitarian law instruments or under the Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel.
There is also scope for the international community to
improve the physical security of civilians through its
peacekeeping activities. Australia supports the
Secretary-General’s recommendations to include explicit
provisions for the protection of civilians within United
Nations peacekeeping mandates where warranted and where
the United Nations missions are provided with the resources
to fulfil those responsibilities. In this context, it is
especially important that United Nations peacekeeping
mandates be clearly and realistically defined, in terms of
both responsibilities and objectives. Where peace
enforcement powers are entrusted to United Nations
operations, they must be backed up with the necessary
resources.
The International Force in East Timor (INTERFET)
demonstrated that a well-equipped, mobile force can have
an immediate, positive impact on the physical security of
civilian populations, as well as perform a critical, longer-
term deterrence function. INTERFET benefitted from a
robust mandate that left no question as to its authority to
enforce peace if required, and from strong support from
the international community.
The capacity for rapid deployment and force
projection are essential to peacekeepers’ ability to
stabilize conflict situations and to extend protection to
civilians. Australia considers that the recent report of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations contains
a number of useful ideas and suggestions on how the
United Nations capacities in these areas might be
improved, and we look forward to opportunities to
consider those ideas and suggestions further.
But effectively maintaining peace — and in so doing
guaranteeing the security of civilians — also requires
confidence-building measures at the grassroots level to
defuse tension and confrontation and to lay the
groundwork for political reconciliation. Here, we believe
Australia’s experience in the Peace Monitoring Group in
Bougainville, in company with other South Pacific
countries, offers some lessons. The role of the Peace
Monitoring Group has largely been one of building
confidence between parties and ensuring continued
commitment to peaceful settlement of the dispute.
Australia supported the provisions of the draft
resolution before the Council today on the protection of
civilians. Its welcome adoption will represent another
important step in the Council’s ongoing efforts to enhance
international security, not only in the broad geopolitical
sense but in a very practical way that can benefit people
right down to the village level. That is to say, to benefit
the ordinary citizens and civilians whose safety and well
being is the subject of today’s open debate.
The President: I thank the representative of
Australia for her kind words addressed to my delegation.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Colombia. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to express its appreciation to your
country, Canada, and to you in particular, Ambassador
18
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
Fowler, for your dedication and your dynamism during the
Council’s intensive work this month.
Likewise, we want to thank the members of the
Council for giving us this opportunity to participate in this
important debate. The Council has on various occasions
drawn attention to the difficult and often distressing
situation of civilians in armed conflict. We attach great
importance to the recommendations made by the Secretary-
General to strengthen the physical and legal protection of
civilians in armed conflict, and we believe that the scope of
those recommendations should be examined exhaustively by
the General Assembly.
Actions motivated by political, ethnic or religious
hatred often disregard fundamental principles of humanity
and are therefore challenges to individual conscience and to
the collective feelings of nations. The millions of persons
caught against their will in the crossfire of current armed
conflicts are rightly a source of concern for the
international community. As we were reminded last year by
the campaign of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, even wars have limits. The Committee’s
humanitarian work deserves our appreciation and support.
My country joins others who have spoken in this
debate to reject and condemn the use of prohibited methods
of combat in internal conflicts, particularly the actions of
some non-State actors against civilian populations — such
as the taking of hostages for the purpose of extortion,
indiscriminate attacks against civilians and civilian
installations and the use of hunger as an instrument of war.
But will the outcry of the international community be
heard?
Among the recommendations for the protection of
civilians that are before the Council, we wish to underscore
a few that we consider indispensable to preventing future
conflicts and sparing civilian populations further suffering.
With regard to small arms and light weapons, we
believe that the Security Council must adopt a more
forceful attitude to that illegal traffic, when considering
current armed conflicts. This phenomenon is linked to
transnational criminal organizations which use money
laundering as a means to internationalize violence. The
availability of these weapons in areas of conflict fuels a
spirit of discord and is a direct cause of the loss of many
civilian lives. For that reason, my country has been
advocating stricter control of the international arms trade in
the framework of preparations for next year’s conference.
With regard to the recruitment of minors, our
delegation believes that under no circumstances should
children participate in war. We are pleased to note the
agreement reached at the beginning of the year regarding
the protocol on the participation of children in armed
conflict. The Government of Colombia categorically ruled
that no person younger than 18 years of age can serve in
the national armed forces and encourages other countries
to adopt the same age limit for recruitment. We also
condemn the use of minors in the ranks of irregular
armed groups in all parts of the world, and we appeal for
a united attitude of rejection of this practice.
We underscore the constructive approach of
promoting confidence-building measures among the
parties involved in internal conflicts, with the active
participation of civilian society in this process. This is an
approach that is useful either at the beginning of conflicts
or in the peace-building stage. We hope that it will be
possible soon to have the handbook of good conduct in
the field, the publication of which has been announced.
Regarding coercive measures against massive and
ongoing abuses, the Secretary-General presented to the
Council several criteria for the adoption of coercive
measures in cases of internal conflicts that present grave
violations of human rights and international humanitarian
law. We believe that the United Nations must act with
prudence and extreme care in this field in order not to
undermine principles of international law that are firmly
established, and without which we might be cast into
great confusion. We express our strong preference for
examining situations carefully on a case-by-case basis and
to use procedures for cooperation among States before
resorting to sanctions mechanisms.
On 9 April 2000, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of the non-aligned countries, meeting in Cartagena at the
thirteenth Ministerial Conference of the Non-Aligned
Movement, addressed the question of the erosion of
respect for the norms and principles of international
humanitarian law and the question of the considerable
increase in the number of refugees and displaced persons
caused by conflict situations. On that occasion, among the
various measures adopted, the Ministers appealed to the
parties to a conflict to respect international humanitarian
law and human rights law and to ensure the safety,
security and protection of humanitarian personnel. They
also advocated greater international financial efforts to
help the victims of humanitarian emergencies and
reaffirmed the distinction that must be made — a vital
one — among actions of a humanitarian nature,
19
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
peacekeeping or peacemaking operations and operational
activities for development.
My country agrees with what was expressed by the
Ministers of the Non-Aligned Movement. It welcomes the
measures to be adopted by the Security Council today and
reiterates that other organs of the United Nations should
also broadly consider the various means of strengthening
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The President: I thank the representative of Colombia
for his kind words addressed to my delegation.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of New Zealand, whom I welcome back to
the Council. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Powles (New Zealand): Exactly one week after
the Secretary-General presented his report of 8 September
1999 on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, the
Security Council authorized the deployment of a
multinational force to East Timor to restore peace and
security. In the days leading up to this decision the media
had conveyed shocking images of violence against civilians
and their large-scale dislocation by the militias in a pattern
of reprisal following the United Nations-conducted popular
consultation. Members of the Council, under the leadership
of Ambassador Andjaba of Namibia, travelled to Dili to
assess the situation at first hand and to report to the
Council.
The speed and effectiveness of the Council’s response
in the case of East Timor was exemplary and sets a
benchmark for the future discharge by the Council of its
key role in combating the deliberate targeting of civilians.
New Zealand, for its part, along with many other countries
represented in this Chamber, contributed promptly to the
multinational force authorized by the Council and continues
to participate in the successor United Nations peacekeeping
operation through what is our largest deployment overseas
in nearly 50 years.
In the interval since the Secretary-General’s report on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict we have also
been reminded of our failures. Last Friday we heard Mr.
Ingvar Carlsson, former Prime Minister of Sweden, brief
the Council on the findings of the Independent Inquiry into
the failure of the international community to prevent the
systematic slaughter of some 800,000 people in Rwanda in
1994. And the Secretary-General himself provided last
November his own report on the fall of Srebrenica.
We welcome the fact that the Council has taken the
initiative, through the establishment of its informal
Working Group, to take the matter of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict yet a stage further in
accordance with its responsibilities under the Charter, and
we strongly endorse action on today’s draft resolution. By
this draft resolution the Council clearly indicates that it
intends to keep the question firmly at the fore of its
agenda.
When heads of State or Government gather here in
New York in early September for the Millennium
Summit, we believe the international community will be
presented with an unparalleled opportunity to make
further progress collectively. The Secretary-General’s
millennium report offers valuable guidance on the
protection of the vulnerable. The Secretary-General notes
in particular the need to reassert the centrality of
international humanitarian and human rights law.
I think it is generally agreed that current
humanitarian law includes all the necessary principles and
basic rules to guide us. There is some further work to be
done in specific areas, but the fundamental principles are
well established and incontrovertible.
In the last few months the international norms have
been further developed in the child soldiers optional
protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Children are one of the most vulnerable groups in any
society. As the Secretary-General and others have noted,
they are often among the worst affected in a conflict
situation. They will also bear the scars of conflict into
their adult years, not just through injury and trauma, but
through lost opportunities to gain an education and to
grow up in normal social surroundings. This can lead to
the perpetuation of a culture of conflict. It is crucial that
special measures be taken to protect children from the
effects of armed conflict, and to prevent them from
participating.
The optional protocol’s focus on the demobilization,
rehabilitation and reintegration of child soldiers
recognizes that, in tandem with legal safeguards, practical
action is required to protect children from the effects of
conflict. The recent appointment of child protection
advisers in United Nations peacekeeping missions in
Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is a welcome development in this regard.
As the Secretary-General has pointed out, the
problem of protection of civilians lies not so much in the
20
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
absence of law as in the refusal of belligerents throughout
the world to respect that law. The most urgent need is to
create a “climate of compliance” with international law. At
present the lack of effective enforcement mechanisms
means that an essential component is missing. We hope that
this will change in the near future with the establishment of
a permanent International Criminal Court.
The recent experience of the International Criminal
Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda illustrates
the potential of the International Criminal Court. Over the
last year there have been a number of arrests and
convictions in both Tribunals. These confirm that
international criminal tribunals can and do work. However,
their importance goes beyond dealing with past events in
those particular countries. They serve notice that the
international community is serious in its resolve to bring
perpetrators of atrocities against civilians to justice and to
put an end to the climate of impunity. We look forward to
the outcome of the Indonesian Government's investigation
into violations of human rights in East Timor and to the
holding of those responsible for such violations fully
accountable under the law.
New Zealand is firmly committed to ratification of the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. It will
shortly introduce legislation to Parliament to implement
various obligations contained in the Statute, and New
Zealand hopes to be in a position to ratify the Statute
within the next few months, once that legislation has been
passed.
At the same time, my Government has decided to
create new offences of genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes. There will be universal jurisdiction for
these offences which will allow the prosecution in a New
Zealand court of a person who is not a New Zealand
national and who did not commit the offence in New
Zealand. It is intended that these offences will come into
force on the passage of the legislation, which will mean
that New Zealand will be in a position to institute
prosecutions in its courts from an early date. This is
particularly important in the period before the International
Criminal Court comes into existence.
New Zealand urges other countries to accelerate their
ratification processes so that the International Criminal
Court can be established in the near future. This would
seem a most appropriate way to signal that the new
millennium is also the beginning of a new phase in
international criminal justice.
New Zealand also strongly supports the extension of
the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel to cover a broader range of
personnel and a greater variety of United Nations
missions. We saw the danger that some of those working
with the United Nations came under in East Timor.
Abduction and murder of humanitarian workers takes
place too regularly in arenas such as Chechnya. The
targeting of these dedicated people, who are often
working in extremely difficult circumstances to bring
relief to the civilian population, is cynical and brutal, and
we should do all in our power to have it stopped. We
look forward to the report of the Secretary-General, due
in May 2000, that will include recommendations
addressing the scope of legal protection under the
Convention. That report will set the tone for future debate
on the topic and act as a fresh stimulus towards concrete
action on expansion of the Convention's scope.
The violation of the rights and freedoms of internally
displaced persons is not necessarily separately covered in
international law. Nevertheless, such people are of course
covered by international human rights law. States have no
excuse for not following these principles and the legal
guidance based on them, contained in the Guiding
Principles on Internal Displacement.
Finally, the importance of the separation of
combatants and other armed elements from civilians in
refugee camps has been starkly demonstrated on
numerous occasions, including in the Great Lakes region
of Africa and in Timor. Safety and humanitarian relief
cannot be assured without it, and arrangements for
repatriation can be seriously hampered when militias exert
power over displaced people. Coupled with this is the
need to ensure access for civilian populations to sources
of humanitarian assistance. The diversion or withholding
of relief supplies as a means to political ends is contrary
to the principles of humanity and should attract
appropriate sanctions.
We are grateful for the opportunity to have spoken
on these important matters in the Security Council today,
and we look forward to the Council's continuing to carry
out its key leadership role.
The President: I thank the representative of New
Zealand for his kind words addressed to me.
The final speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Indonesia. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
21
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): My delegation wishes to
extend its congratulations to you and the delegation of
Canada on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of April. We remain
confident that under your able guidance, the issue before us
will be brought to a successful conclusion. May I also
extend our felicitations to your predecessor, Ambassador
Anwarul Karim Chowdhury of Bangladesh, for his skilful
stewardship of the Council's activities last month. We
would also like to join other delegations in expressing our
appreciation to the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and
to the President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Mr. Jakob Kellenberger, for their statements earlier
this morning.
It is one of the tragic ironies of the contemporary
world that despite the adoption of numerous conventions on
international humanitarian and human rights law during the
past five decades, which uphold the rights of civilians and
the obligations of combatants during conflict situations,
civilians have become the targets of brutality, terror and
indiscriminate killing. It is particularly unconscionable that
women and children are also victims of atrocities. Such dire
situations call for a multifaceted approach that would
provide legal and physical protection to civilians during
hostilities.
The report of the Secretary-General contained in
document S/1999/957 enumerates a number of measures to
strengthen both these aspects of protection. Their adoption
and implementation would compel the parties to a conflict
to respect the rights guaranteed to civilians under
international law and conventions. Despite the coming into
force of a comprehensive framework of international
humanitarian and human rights law, the rights of civilians
have often been violated. Hence, their implementation is of
utmost importance in ensuring the safety and security of the
civilians, which are their inherent rights.
In those endeavours, it is equally important to
acknowledge that international law does not take
precedence over national law and legislation, while a
balance must be sought to harmonize the sacrosanct
principle of national sovereignty with the provisions of the
United Nations Charter. It follows that any action or
intervention must necessarily be based on the consent of the
States concerned, rather than unilateral imposition.
Indonesia is gratified to note that in some of the conflict
areas dealt with by the Council, respect for sovereignty and
territorial integrity was reaffirmed. At the same time,
Indonesia is also saddened to learn that an absence of
respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity remains
obvious in a country which now continues to experience
internal conflicts.
Our attention is also drawn to the need for
monitoring, addressing and understanding the root causes
and implications of conflicts in order to facilitate the
consideration of options and to prevent the outbreak of
violence. As peace and stability and socio-economic
development are interlinked, close cooperation and
coordination between the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council would
facilitate a comprehensive approach to these multifaceted
issues. In this context, it is pertinent to note the
communication from the President of the Security Council
addressed to the President of the General Assembly,
contained in document S/2000/119 of 14 February 2000,
which sought the Assembly's views on the strengthening
of the Organization's capacity to plan and deploy rapidly
and the modalities to mobilize international support for
security forces from Member States.
Finally, Indonesia, while regretting the lack of
consultations with the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, welcomes the Secretary-
General's Bulletin on the guidelines on compliance with
international humanitarian law by United Nations
peacekeepers. We believe that such guidelines can help
promote not only the safety and security of the United
Nations peace troopers but also the safety and security of
the civilians.
In sum, we agree that the plight of civilians in
armed conflicts can no longer be neglected and can be
dealt with only within a comprehensive framework of
action. Let me express Indonesia's unequivocal support
for the role of the United Nations in humanitarian
activities and for the Organization's consistent
commitment in upholding international humanitarian and
human rights law.
The President: I thank the representative of
Indonesia for the kind words he addressed to me.
It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/2000/335) before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall
put the draft resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
22
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
In favour:
Argentina, Bangladesh, Canada, China, France,
Jamaica, Malaysia, Mali, Namibia, Netherlands,
Russian Federation, Tunisia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1296 (2000).
There are no further speakers on my list.
The Security Council, having offered its President
great flexibility and generous support, has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.
23

