United Nations S/PV.4484
Security Council
Fifty-seventh year
4484th meeting
Tuesday, 5 March 2002, 10 a.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.
02-27239 (E)
*0227239*
President: Mr. Petersen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Norway)
Members: Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Tafrov
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Belinga-Eboutou
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wang Yingfan
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Valdivieso
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Levitte
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Diallo
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Corr
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Gokool
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Lajous
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Yap
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wehbe
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . Sir Jeremy Greenstock
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Cunningham
Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 26 February 2002 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2002/209).
2
S/PV.4484
The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of March, I should like
to take the opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Adolfo Aguilar Zinser,
Permanent Representative of Mexico to the United
Nations, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of February 2002. I am sure that
I speak for all members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Aguilar Zinser for
the great diplomatic skill with which he conducted the
Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 26 February 2002 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2002/209)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Spain, Ukraine and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kusljugic
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the
Council table; Mrs. Šimonović (Croatia),
Mr. Arias (Spain), Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine) and
Mr. Šahović (Federal Republic of Yugoslavia)
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Petritsch to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jacques Paul
Klein, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Coordinator of United Nations Operations in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Klein to take a seat at the Council
table.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 1 March 2002 from the
Permanent Representative of Spain to the United
Nations, which reads as follows.
“I have the honour, in my capacity as
representative of the Presidency of the Council of
the European Union, to request that Javier Solana,
Secretary-General of the Council and High
Representative for Foreign Policy and Common
Security, be allowed to participate in the Council
meeting to be held on Tuesday, 5 March 2002, on
Bosnia and Herzegovina, in accordance with rule
39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council.”
That letter has been published as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/2002/218. If I
hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees
to extend an invitation under rule 39 to Mr. Javier
Solana.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Javier Solana to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
3
S/PV.4484
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2002/209, which contains the text of a
letter dated 26 February 2002 from the Secretary-
General, transmitting the report of the High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2002/221, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council’s
prior consultations.
I welcome the presence at this morning’s meeting
of the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Kofi
Annan, and I give him the floor.
The Secretary-General: Let me say how happy I
am, Mr. Minister, to see you in the Chair and once
again to welcome you to New York and to United
Nations Headquarters.
This meeting signals an important moment of
transition and consolidation in Bosnia. I would like to
begin by paying tribute to the High Representative for
the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, whose
effective leadership helped secure the gains made by
the international community over the last few years. I
know he and my Special Representative, Mr. Jacques
Paul Klein, worked well together, and I want to thank
him for that cooperation as well. I would also like to
salute the tireless efforts of my friend Javier Solana
towards maintaining the momentum for peace and
reconciliation throughout the Balkans. His presence
here today signals the priority that the European Union
attaches to the future of Bosnia.
The United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) is well on track to completing
its core mandate by the end of 2002. I believe that the
Council can be very satisfied with the work of
UNMIBH as an advocate of reconciliation and as an
agent of the rule of law — and, of course, with what it
has achieved already. It has improved and integrated
the police, while serving as a voice for coexistence,
tolerance and cooperation at all levels of society.
Through all those efforts, UNMIBH’s civilian and
police officers have done much to give the people of
Bosnia faith in a better, peaceful and united future.
Specifically, UNMIBH has transformed and
reduced the police force from a 40,000-strong war-time
militia to a 16,000-strong professional police force. In
addition, each police officer has been trained in human
rights; selected groups have been trained in drug
control, organized crime and crowd control; two multi-
ethnic police academies have been established, in
Sarajevo and in Banja Luka; and, at present, the State
Border Service covers 75 per cent of the country’s
borders and has reduced illegal immigration through
Bosnia and Herzegovina by two thirds.
Of course, UNMIBH has not been alone in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, but is part of a broader
international effort — including the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the European Union —
which will continue. By the end of 2002, UNMIBH
will have completed the peacekeeping phase of police
restructuring. However, there will still be challenges to
face for the Bosnians themselves and for the
international community committed to helping them.
Among these, in the area of the police, are low salaries
and poor housing conditions, lack of funds and
continued political interference in the work of law
enforcement agencies.
There will undoubtedly continue to be a need for
international monitoring and assistance in order to
sustain the progress that has been made. I therefore
welcome a recent decision by the European Union to
establish a post-UNMIBH follow-on police mission to
commence on 1 January 2003. The next phase of
capacity-building in law enforcement, including
improving judicial and penal systems, will therefore be
carried out in the context of the European Union. The
United Nations stands ready to cooperate closely with
the European Union, the Office of the High
Representative and others concerned to ensure timely
planning and a smooth transition.
Ultimately, it is the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina who must take control of their own
destiny and build a peaceful, prosperous future as a
successful multi-ethnic State. It is my hope that they
will find support and inspiration in the many countries
around the world which have made their diversity their
greatest asset, with opportunities for all in a climate of
tolerance and mutual respect.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
the kind words he addressed to me.
Before giving the floor to those wishing to make
statements, I invite participants to hear briefings from
Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, High Representative for the
4
S/PV.4484
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and from Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and
Coordinator of United Nations Operations in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
I give the floor to Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Petritsch: When I took up my mandate in
Bosnia and Herzegovina in August 1999, Yugoslavia
and Croatia were ruled by the same leaders who had
brought about the disastrous conflicts of the 1990s.
Their proxies still wielded power in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Consequently, refugees saw little hope of
returning to their homes. Reform was effectively
blocked by wartime politicians, who did nothing to
overcome the internal economic divisions and the
virtual absence of an adequate legislative framework.
State-level institutions had been established, but they
were underfunded, understaffed and lacked real power.
My predecessors, Carl Bildt and Carlos Westendorp,
worked hard to correct this but were severely hampered
by an uncompromising political climate inside the
country and a lack of cooperation from Zagreb and
Belgrade.
Faced with this situation, my strategy was clear.
Since arriving in Bosnia and Herzegovina, I have
vigorously promoted the creation of an investment-
driven, rather than an aid-dependent, market economy;
the mass return of refugees to their homes, by rolling
back the results of ethnic cleansing; and the
consolidation of institutions — legal, political,
economic, social, educational and civic — that will
sustain a viable democracy long after the international
community has ended its extraordinary assistance and
involvement in the country’s affairs.
After 11 September, the potentially disastrous
consequences of weak and failed States have been
burned into our consciousness. The experience of
Bosnia and Herzegovina has shown conclusively that
countries cannot recover from war or protracted civil
strife simply through material aid or military
assistance. They need institutions that work and a
culture in which laws are properly debated and
universally applied and respected. Today, with regard
to Afghanistan, even sceptics accept that institution-
building must be at the core of successful intervention.
Consolidating the rule of law has underpinned our
strategy in Bosnia and Herzegovina, since institution-
building, refugee return and economic development
can be promoted only in a secure environment of law
and order. In this respect, the work of the International
Police Task Force (IPTF), mandated under the
Dayton/Paris Peace Accords to provide the citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina with an efficient and impartial
police service, has been key to the peace
implementation efforts. I would like to take this
opportunity to commend the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Jacques Paul Klein; the IPTF
Commissioner, Vincent Coeurderoy; and the staff at
IPTF and the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) for the strenuous efforts they
have made in order to carry out this work.
On 18 February, the European Union’s General
Affairs Council announced that the European Union is
ready to establish a police mission, which will take
over from IPTF from 1 January 2003, as the Secretary-
General has already indicated. The European Union
Police Mission (EUPM), supported by the European
Union’s institution-building programmes, will
contribute to peace implementation and to the
European Union’s overall policy in the region, notably
the Stabilization and Association Process. It represents
a unique opportunity for the European Union to
develop its political engagement with Bosnia and
Herzegovina and to support structural reform crucial to
the country’s Europeanization process.
Allow me to express my appreciation to the
European Union’s High Representative for Common
Foreign and Security Policy, Javier Solana, for the
decisive and constructive approach adopted by the
European Union in undertaking the EUPM. The
European Union’s initiative was welcomed and
accepted by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council on 28 February. I have duly
informed the Secretary-General of this.
Policing in Bosnia and Herzegovina will not be
fully effective as long as there is a belief that certain
individuals are beyond the reach of the law. In this
respect, the work of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), and the cooperation
given to ICTY by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities at the State level and in both entities, is
crucial to the country’s overall recovery.
5
S/PV.4484
Just a few days ago, Stabilization Force (SFOR)
troops launched operations in eastern Bosnia to arrest
Radovan Karadzic. Let me take this opportunity to
thank the SFOR Commander, General John Sylvester,
and his soldiers for these courageous undertakings,
necessitated by the absence of credible efforts by the
Republika Srpska authorities to apprehend and transfer
to The Hague indicted war criminals hiding on their
territory.
The entity of the Republika Srpska must be left in
no doubt that as long as it fails to live up to its
obligations, it will not receive the full backing of the
international community. I remain firmly convinced
that unless Radovan Karadzic, Ratko Mladic and other
indictees end up in The Hague, people will not be able
to turn the page and look to the future. The Serb
Democratic Party (SDS), founded by Karadzic, has
announced the expulsion of members indicted for war
crimes. Yet the SDS will have to show practical and
public support for the ICTY before this kind of
statement is greeted with any sort of credence.
If approved by the ICTY under the 1996 Rome
Agreement, commonly known as the rules of the road
procedure, war crimes cases may be tried in Bosnia and
Herzegovina courts. I am acutely aware of the
sensitivity and importance of such trials, which not
only are aimed at bringing perpetrators to justice but
also play a key role in the overall reconciliation
process.
In the light of a plan proposed by the ICTY
Prosecutor last year regarding possible remission of
ICTY cases to Bosnia and Herzegovina, my Office is
currently engaged in discussions with ICTY and the
United Nations Office of Legal Affairs here in New
York with a view to cooperating on a consultancy
project that will identify the resources that are needed
to try more war crimes cases in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The consultancy will begin shortly. It is
being funded by the Governments of the United
Kingdom and Sweden, and will entail close
cooperation with other United Nations agencies,
international organizations and Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities.
While international efforts in the broad sphere of
the rule of law have yielded results, progress in some
areas has fallen short of expectations, because there has
not yet been a thorough reform of the judiciary. The
Judicial System Assessment Programme (JSAP), which
had been set up by UNMIBH two years earlier, was
terminated in November 2000. As a consequence of
JSAP’s closure, my Office was tasked to set up the
Independent Judicial Commission (IJC). On 14 March
last year, I issued the Decision formalizing the
establishment of IJC and determining its mandate.
However, IJC reported to me a rather alarming picture:
judges and prosecutors, many of whom gained office
during or immediately after the war on ethnic or
political rather than professional grounds, are often
unfit to carry out their duties. There is a lack of
adequate financing, and courts are often subject to
undue external influence.
Following a request from the Peace
Implementation Council (PIC), last week I presented a
reinvigorated programme of judicial reform measures
for 2002-2003 to the Political Directors of the Steering
Board. This combines a restructuring of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina court system and a depoliticized
appointment procedure with the introduction of a High
Judicial Council. It also encompasses the reform of key
laws, including civil and criminal procedure codes. The
Council of Europe was invited to work on the details of
the strategy in order to develop a system for Bosnia
and Herzegovina that is compatible with modern
European standards.
Indeed, the Europeanization of Bosnia and
Herzegovina — crystallized in the imminent accession
of the country to the Council of Europe and in the EU
Road Map itemizing steps that Bosnia and Herzegovina
must take in order to move closer to eventual European
Union membership — is the overarching context for
promoting the rule of law and advancing the main
agenda of the international community for Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s recovery.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has reached a crucial
juncture in its path towards permanent recovery. The
main political parties are discussing how to implement
the Constitutional Court’s decision on the constituency
of peoples throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina. Indeed,
this is a test case of whether Bosnia and Herzegovina
will develop into a State committed to human rights
and the rule of law, and to the protection of the
individual as well as that of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
three constituent peoples and the group of the so-called
others.
The implementation of this decision puts an
enormous burden on the still fragile political system in
6
S/PV.4484
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Yet this is a moment when
the country must establish internal equilibrium founded
on a constructive interdependence of all groups.
There is still a widely held view that compromise
and consensus are a kind of weakness. We are striving
to change this deeply ingrained attitude, an attitude not
confined to Bosnia and Herzegovina alone. The talks
now under way are part of a process through which the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement is
evolving into something broader and deeper.
This evolution — transcending the limitations of
Dayton — is an incremental process, yet truly
democratic in nature. It has again highlighted the
evolutionary potential of Dayton. The very fact that the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, an
institution provided for in the Dayton Constitution, has
triggered this process indicates that the Dayton system
is indeed capable of reforming itself. Even well-
intended statements from abroad risk jeopardizing this
process which I view as “ownership in the making”. I
believe that the parties must be given every opportunity
to produce “home-grown” solutions, arrived at by
Bosnia and Herzegovina leaders for the benefit of the
citizens of their country.
However, time is of the essence. The current
constitutional discussions must produce a successful
outcome within days, so that the necessary
amendments can be made to the Entity constitutions
and the Bosnia and Herzegovina Election Law within
the time frame required to hold general elections on
schedule in October of this year. These elections will
be the first post-war polls organized by the domestic
authorities and will introduce a four-year election
cycle, which should further enhance the stability of the
political system.
As the rule of law has begun to take hold, the
number of returning refugees, throughout Bosnia and
Herzegovina, has increased dramatically. Last year,
more than 92,000 so-called minority returns were
recorded, a 36 per cent increase over the corresponding
figure for the year 2000, which had been termed a
“breakthrough” at the time by the United States-based
non-governmental organization Human Rights Watch.
If this rate is maintained — and I believe it can be
maintained — mass return will be completed within
two years. Here I would like to mention the crucial role
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) in what I believe is a historic
achievement, which just two years ago seemed
extremely unlikely.
Since the end of 1997, more than 102,000
property claims have resulted in repossession — that
is, 41 per cent of all such claims in all of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. That rate will hit the 50 per cent mark
shortly, thus meeting a key condition of the European
Union road map.
I believe we can be proud that the corner has at
last been turned, but this is not the time to relax our
efforts. Adequate funding must be sustained until the
return process has been completed.
The Srebrenica massacre left a legacy of war
more bitter than any other. I welcome the United
Nations recovery programme for Srebrenica, which
aims to address the extraordinary social and economic
problems there. It will underpin the efforts of the
international community in the context of the
Srebrenica Action Plan to facilitate returns to this area.
In 2000 and 2001 I issued decisions setting aside
land for a cemetery and a memorial at Potocari near
Srebrenica. A marker stone was formally installed at
the site on the sixth anniversary of the massacre on 11
July 2001. The proposal made by the associations of
the victims’ families to add the nearby so-called
Battery Factory site as a location for the memorial is
being considered at the moment, and a site assessment
of the property is being undertaken, funded by the
United States Government. However, I continue to urge
these associations to proceed without delay to plan for
the burial of the remains that have been exhumed and
prepared for interment.
Early in my mandate, I introduced the concept of
“ownership”, or “odgovornost” as they say in the local
languages, to address the dependency syndrome of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and to encourage the Bosnia
and Herzegovina authorities at all levels to meet their
responsibilities. Today, international peace
implementation officials face a healthy amount of pride
on the part of Bosnia and Herzegovina leaders, civic
activists and citizens alike. I see this as proof that they
have the genuine will to start owning problems and
taking responsibility for their country’s future.
With the Alliance for Change, a coalition of
reform-oriented parties that displaced the nationalist
establishment in government at the beginning of 2001,
there are finally politicians leading the country who
7
S/PV.4484
support and defend Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
statehood. With assistance from the international
community extended in a spirit of evolving partnership,
they have, among other things, passed an election law
and prepared Bosnia and Herzegovina for Council of
Europe membership.
As the circumstances of peace implementation
have considerably changed, the international
community has adapted its engagement so as to meet
new challenges in the most effective way. In the spring
of 2001, I was asked by the Foreign Ministers of the
European Union and the Contact Group to oversee the
streamlining of international civil implementation
structures in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Let me share
with you key elements of the final streamlining plan.
The Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council (PIC), of course, remains the overall board of
directors, the body to whom I report. In Bosnia and
Herzegovina, there will be a cabinet-style body of
international agency heads, chaired by the High
Representative and responsible for cross-cutting policy
development, supported by an inter-agency situation
group. At the centre, there will be four task forces
covering the core strategic areas of economic reform,
refugee return, institution-building and the rule of law.
Finally, there will be a restructured field presence
based on new joint areas of responsibility and the so-
called co-location of all key agencies.
We have reached the final stage of peace
implementation where more must be done with fewer
resources, and everything must be prepared for a hand-
over to the local authorities. This streamlined model
will deliver a leaner, less bureaucratic, international
community presence with reduced overall costs. It is
being put into effect immediately.
In conclusion, Mr. President, let me inform you
and the members of this body of my intention to leave
my post at the end of May. This is my last presentation
to you, but I will send a final report to the Secretary-
General at that time.
I am convinced that Bosnia and Herzegovina can
and will be a viable State if we continue to implement
our overall plan with firmness and consistency. It is
essential that we do not lose focus at this crucial stage.
Forces bent on destruction and division are not yet
completely defeated.
Yet, the contours of a stable and self-sustainable
Bosnia and Herzegovina, based on the Dayton/Paris
Accords and firmly on course to Europe, are at last
coming into view. Bosnia and Herzegovina has
normalized its relations with its neighbours and now
speaks as an equal and respected member of the
community of States in South-Eastern Europe. I am
proud that I have played a part in bringing this about.
When I leave my post in May, Mr. President, I am
confident that my distinguished successor and friend,
Paddy Ashdown, with your continued support, will
further build on the solid foundation we have put in
place. He will have the opportunity to finally return
Bosnia and Herzegovina to its rightful place — into the
hands of its citizens.
Mr. Klein (spoke in French): Thirty-two months
have passed since, at the request of the Secretary-
General, I had the honour of accepting the leadership
of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) — a mission that the
Secretary-General himself originally set up. While it is
true that the United Nations was not invited to Dayton,
the fact remains that, at the end of 1995, the United
Nations was the only organization able to deploy on the
ground a major multinational police mission within a
complex post-war environment.
The Secretary-General thus entrusted to me the
responsibility of making a success of UNMIBH.
Towards that end, he advised me to spell out clear-cut
and specific mission goals, to prepare a plan and to
implement it, as had been done with regard to the
United Nations Transitional Administration for Eastern
Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium. Three months
later, on the basis of an objective analysis of the
mission status, I came before the Council to announce
that the task to be carried out by the mission would
take two to three years. With the Council’s support, we
set up the UNMIBH Mandate Implementation Plan —
better known by the abbreviation “MIP” — which
represented a pattern of guidelines based on six major
programmes designed to reform, restructure and
democratize the police forces of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
(spoke in English)
Today, I am pleased to report that UNMIBH is
making strong progress towards completing its core
mandate — on schedule and within its budget — by the
end of this year. Our MIP Action Plan for 2002 was
8
S/PV.4484
finalized last month and is designed to be our
performance plan and monitoring tool for the
completion of our remaining projects by December
2002.
The Council will recall that our core task was to
take 40,000 largely untrained police who were
organized on a mono-ethnic war-time footing, and to
turn them into professional, multi-ethnic police forces
made up of less than half that number, each with
human rights and professional training, working in
accountable police structures and with a basic level of
modern police equipment.
Our progress since the Secretary-General’s most
recent report in November 2001 has been steady. Allow
me to outline just some of the highlights. With respect
to police reform, in January we completed the two-year
project of registration of all the 16,919 law
enforcement officers currently exercising police
powers in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We have begun to
weed out those suspected of war crimes or other
crimes, and those violating the property laws. Last
year, for example, some 2,000 police officers
regularized their housing at our insistence, and a
further 3,000 are now being vetted.
All provisionally authorized police officers have
undertaken compulsory training courses in human
rights and many have received or are completing
advanced professional training. In close cooperation
with the Stabilization Force (SFOR), we have placed
particular importance on improving local police
capacity in crowd and riot control. In January,
UNMIBH and the SFOR multinational support units
conducted the first joint training of 100 members of
local police support units. In total, some 800 police, in
company-size formations, will receive such training
this year.
In the core area of police restructuring, a
comprehensive systems analysis of 21 police
administrations began in January. The Brcko District
Police Force that we established last year serves as our
model for a democratic, multi-ethnic local police
institution. Our goal is to accredit law enforcement
agencies that meet this model. The expected
completion of this project in September will coincide
with the final certification of individual police officers.
Minority police representation has steadily
increased. Through the two police academies that we
established, over 1,050 minority police officers,
including 365 women, have been recruited. Some 192
minority police have returned to their pre-war locations
through our voluntary redeployment programme, and
85 former officers have been re-employed following
refresher courses. We expect at least another 300
minority cadets this year, and more can be processed
once the European Union (EU)-financed rebuilding of
the police academies is completed.
Last month, I was delighted to oversee the
official administrative and physical integration of the
divided Mostar City Police. After six years of
international effort, this is the first physically
integrated administration at the cantonal and city level.
It is a tangible precedent for all other cantonal and
municipal institutions to follow.
Furthermore, we have now disbursed or
committed all of the $16 million contributed by donors
to the United Nations Trust Fund for the Police
Assistance Programme for provision of basic
equipment and facilities for the local police forces. In
addition, the United Nations Trust Fund for the
Restoration of Essential Public Services has supported
471 projects, costing over $17 million. This year we
will complete the remaining 64 projects, at a cost of
$4 million.
On institution-building, the State Border Service
has made extraordinary progress. By the end of April,
some 88 per cent of the border, and all airports, will be
under State Border Service control. The effective
operation of the State Border Service, together with the
introduction of a partial visa regime and an airport
landing card, resulted in a 66 per cent decrease in
illegal migration through Sarajevo airport in 2001 —
down from 24,000 to 8,000. This year we have
witnessed even further reductions and an estimated 20
per cent increase in customs revenues.
Working with the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we expect the new State Information and
Protection Agency (SIPA) to be established in the
coming months. SIPA will be the first national
organization responsible for the collection, analysis
and distribution of data to other law enforcement
agencies to improve the fight against international and
inter-entity crime. We have also established the
mechanisms for regional police cooperation through
the regular ministerial-level meeting on police and the
trilateral Regional Law Enforcement Agreement.
Successful operations have been conducted in Bosnia
9
S/PV.4484
and Herzegovina and in Yugoslavia against arms
smugglers and traffickers of women. The success of
these joint operations has encouraged Hungary,
Bulgaria and Slovenia to seek to join the Agreement.
We are continuing to aggressively combat human
trafficking. In the past six months, under the STOP
programme, special teams of international and local
police have monitored 270 raids and interviewed 800
women and girls involved in prostitution. Since March
1999, some 410 trafficking victims have been assisted
and repatriated to their home countries.
We are now focusing on prosecuting traffickers
and brothel owners. With the assistance of our
Criminal Justice Advisory Unit, over 50 criminal
charges against traffickers have been brought.
Sentences have ranged from 4 to 36 months
imprisonment and substantial fines have been imposed.
For the traffickers, the days of impunity are over.
I would also like to emphasize that we have
investigated every single claim of alleged involvement
by International Police Task Force (IPTF) members in
trafficking. Despite media sensationalism, not one
allegation has been substantiated and no additional
information has been forthcoming. UNMIBH pursues a
rigorous zero-tolerance policy. It is indeed
disappointing that, despite our intensive efforts and the
consistent, outstanding work being done by the IPTF
officers, these unfounded rumours continue to
circulate.
Turning now to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
evolving engagement in the international arena, the
second rotation of Bosnia and Herzegovina police
officers to East Timor has been completed. The first
nine-person contingent of United Nations Military
Observers (UNMOs) is serving in Ethiopia and Eritrea;
a second cadre of UNMOs has completed training and
is about to deploy to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo; and in the past three months, the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Composite Transport Unit for United
Nations peace operations has been trained and fully
equipped and is ready to deploy this spring.
Those are just some of the milestones that make
me confident that UNMIBH will achieve its core goals
this year and hand over a successful operation to the
EU Police Mission. They are not just abstract
achievements. The bottom-line proof that police reform
is working is that over 92,000 refugees and displaced
persons returned to their homes last year, with very few
security-related incidents. Two weeks ago, several
hundred Bosniacs celebrated their Bajram at the site of
the destroyed Ferhadija mosque in Banja Luka and in
other previously difficult areas in the eastern Republika
Srpska without incident.
But much remains to be done in the next
10 months, and some challenges go beyond the
resources or authority of UNMIBH. First, there are
some major projects that depend on additional funding.
We are short by $3.5 million for capital and equipment
costs to complete the State Border Service this year.
About $1.5 million is required for the United Nations
Trust Fund for Police Assistance to complete basic
police equipment and facilities. And SIPA will require
a mix of local and international funding for start-up
costs. These shortfalls were the subject of two recent
UNMIBH donor conferences.
Secondly, the political support of the High
Representative has been and remains vital for the
completion of police restructuring. Our Police
Commissioner Project is fundamental to removing
political interference from police structures. Most
cantons and the Republika Srpska entity are on track,
but we are facing determined obstruction in the
Federation and in Canton Sarajevo from a political
party that claims it wants to be a partner of the
international community while it seeks to politicize and
suborn the police forces.
We are now in a situation where, if we do not act,
we risk jeopardizing success in the other cantons.
Therefore, I have sought and received my colleague
Ambassador Petritsch’s commitment to helping us take
all necessary measures to ensure the full
implementation of the Police Commissioner Project.
Thirdly, I remain deeply concerned about the
inability or unwillingness of the local judiciary to do
its work. There is a grave imbalance in the rule of law,
whereby police standards have vastly improved but the
judicial system, as Ambassador Petritsch has said,
remains dysfunctional. Arresting criminals is useless if
they are freed by timorous or corrupt judicial officials a
few hours later and then intimidate witnesses or
threaten families of police officers.
Band-aid measures are not enough. As I stated
last Thursday to the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council, immediate radical reform of
the judiciary and prosecutors is key to everything the
10
S/PV.4484
international community is trying to achieve in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Finally, I ask for the Council’s support for
Srebrenica. While most of Bosnia and Herzegovina has
progressed, Srebrenica remains a tragic symbol of
underdevelopment and enduring hardship for displaced
Serbs and Bosniac returnees alike. Eighteen months
ago, the Secretary-General asked me whether the
United Nations could play a special role in that
desolate and tragic area. Step by step, through the
multi-agency Srebrenica Action Plan, the United
Nations Trust Fund and the opening of a model police
station, we have reduced the level of insecurity.
Returns have begun.
But, in essence, we have attended to the
symptoms of post-conflict paralysis without treating
the underlying causes. Towards this goal, we are
working closely with experts of the United Nations
Development Programme to establish a multi-year
sustainable economic and social recovery plan for the
wider area to facilitate two-way returns, recognizing
the special circumstances and needs of families without
men. A donors conference will take place in New York
this spring. Srebrenica is one area that cannot be
allowed to become, yet again, a victim, but this time a
victim of compassion fatigue.
Allow me to conclude with some brief
observations about other matters that will affect our
mandate implementation.
We have actively participated in the streamlining
exercise initiated and led by Ambassador Petritsch. A
conclusion has been reached which the High
Representative will now implement. Nonetheless,
bringing all of the elements of the rule of law together
in one task force is a positive initiative. As we have
learned yet again, the elements of the rule of law are
inseparable and can be achieved only through a holistic
approach. In our remaining months, we look forward to
participating in a revitalized effort in this entire arena.
But our biggest contribution to streamlining and
local ownership will be to successfully complete our
mandate and the smooth transition to a much smaller
and more specialized mission. With this in mind and in
accordance with the Secretary-General’s instructions,
UNMIBH has been equally open and helpful to both
the European Union and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe technical missions that have
produced reports on the expected international policing
requirements beyond 2002. We are gratified that both
these missions shared our assessment that around 480
highly skilled police monitors, plus civilian support,
would be required to preserve UNMIBH’s
achievements while also coping with the inevitable
crises of a country that remains politically fragile, with
substantial unreconciled groups.
On the basis of our knowledge of UNMIBH and
our experience elsewhere, we consider that there is
sufficient time to fully plan and deploy the new
European Union mission in a seamless transfer,
providing that key pre-planning personnel begin work
in March or April and that financial resources are made
available to them to begin procurement of essential
equipment and facilities.
Our downsizing and mission liquidation planning
is well advanced. We intend to retain around 1,600
IPTF monitors until immediately after the October
elections and then to downsize to around 600 IPTF in
preparation for the transition to the European Union
mission. However, even with a seamless transfer, the
presence of SFOR will remain essential until there is
full political stabilization and substantial progress in
reconciliation. Of great importance to both these goals
is the arrest of Karadzic and Mladic. In this respect, I
fully support the recent robust actions of SFOR to find
these two war criminals. I wish them better success at
the earliest possible opportunity and full cooperation
from the local authorities.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, I wish to thank the members of the
Council for their tireless support for UNMIBH and for
having made their staff available to the Mission. It is
their work that has made the Mission what it is today.
The successful completion of our mandate ends
the peacekeeping phase of one of the largest police
reform and restructuring operations that has ever been
undertaken. We are on the verge, key in hand, of
closing an operation that has established new
conceptual and technical parameters for the
development of a culture of competence and integrity
for police forces within a structure and organization
that is based on the principles of transparency and
professionalism.
The termination of UNMIBH will also mark the
end of a decade of United Nations involvement in
peacekeeping in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In this
11
S/PV.4484
connection, I am committed to completing the work of
UNMIBH and of shutting it down with head held high.
We must not forget, however, that, in the long run, our
legacy will be in the hands of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the leaders they will elect in the
forthcoming elections. I very much hope for a future in
which the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina will make
wise choices and succeed in securing their due place in
Europe.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Spain, in his capacity as
Presidency of the European Union, who will introduce
Mr. Javier Solana, Secretary-General of the Council of
the European Union and High Representative for the
European Union’s Common Foreign and Security
Policy.
I invite the Permanent Representative of Spain to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): The
importance which the European Union ascribes to the
issue under discussion today is underscored by the
presence here of the High Representative for the
European Union’s Common Foreign and Security
Policy, Mr. Javier Solana. I would request you, Sir, to
grant him the opportunity to speak.
The President: I invite Mr. Javier Solana to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Solana: I should like to thank you, Sir, and
all the members of the Security Council for this
opportunity to speak here today.
It is very appropriate that we should devote time
and attention to the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina today. There are so many issues and
events competing for our attention in the Balkans that
sometimes we risk neglecting all but the most
immediate of crises. I welcome therefore the
Presidency’s initiative in organizing today’s debate.
Now is a crucial time for all of us — Bosnians and the
international community alike — to reflect on our
responsibilities and to commit ourselves to meeting
them.
The human and political tragedy of the war that
began 10 years ago is still a vivid memory for me
personally and, I believe, for most Europeans. I have
closely followed the events in Bosnia and Herzegovina
in different capacities during that period of time.
Today I believe that Bosnia and Herzegovina is at
a crossroads. Fundamental choices have to be made,
and responsibilities assumed, by its people and by its
politicians. On the one hand, Bosnia and Herzegovina
could make a positive choice to make a determined
effort rapidly to implement reforms and join the path
that leads towards the European Union. Alternatively,
the country could choose the path that will, I believe,
lead to ever-greater isolation, to missed economic
opportunities, and to a political wilderness where it
will be left behind by more ambitious and more far-
sighted neighbours.
Progress has no doubt been made during recent
years. Indeed, a number of very important and
significant achievements can be recalled: the adoption
of important pieces of State-level legislation, an
increase in minority returns and the steady
strengthening of the country’s institutions. All of these
are very important steps forward, and constitute proof
that real progress is possible given the political will.
That progress has been due in no small part to the
outgoing High Representative, my friend Wolfgang
Petritsch. I would like, on behalf of the European
Union, to pay tribute to him, his skills and tenacity, and
the encouraging progress he has made.
The European Union very much welcomes the
fact that, last week in Brussels, the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board designated
Lord Ashdown as successor to Wolfgang Petritsch. I
look forward to the confirmation of his appointment by
the Security Council. The new High Representative
will inherit a situation where, despite the enormous
progress to date, much more remains to be done. The
European Union expects the authorities at all levels to
cooperate fully with the new High Representative.
Let me add that, as has been mentioned before,
there also needs to be decisive progress as regards the
war crimes indictees. I am convinced that the painful
chapter in Bosnia’s history that began a decade ago
will never be properly closed until justice is done, and
is seen to be done. That means that all indictees must
answer the charges made against them. State and entity
Governments must therefore cooperate fully, in deed as
well as in word, with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.
The International Community must also meet its
responsibilities. Here, the European Union is playing
an increasingly important role: first, in terms of
12
S/PV.4484
financial assistance; secondly, in terms of providing a
longer-term political perspective; and thirdly, in terms
of a concrete contribution to peace and stability.
The European Union has provided, and will
continue to provide, an important amount of financial
assistance. In total, the European Union has provided
more than 3 billion euros in financial assistance to
Bosnia and Herzegovina since 1991. This year alone
the European Union is likely to contribute a further 200
million euros.
The European Union has provided Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the wider region the prospect of
eventual integration with the European Union. A new
phase has begun, and a new perspective has been
opened. While the Dayton/Paris Accords were designed
to guide the country away from war, the prospect of an
eventual stabilization and association agreement offers
a clear route towards a European future. But the pace
of progress towards that European perspective is
entirely in the hands of Bosnia and Herzegovina itself.
One needs only to consider the relative progress of
other States in the region to understand what I have just
said. If a determined effort is not made soon by
Sarajevo and Banja Luka, Bosnia and Herzegovina will
be left behind.
The European Union is preparing to take on an
important new responsibility as part of the international
community. Let me take this opportunity to say a few
words about the new European Union police mission,
which will be ready to take over from the International
Police Task Force (IPTF) on 1 January 2003. This is
the first crisis-management operation undertaken by
the European Union in the civilian crisis management
field.
First, it will build on the remarkable
achievements of the IPTF under the leadership of
Jacques-Paul Klein and Mr. Coeurderoy. The mission
will follow, but not replace, the IPTF. It will be a
different mission, but it will draw extensively on
IPTF’s experience — and not least on Jacques Klein’s
help and advice — reflecting what the IPTF will have
achieved by the end of the year and what else needs to
be done in the coming year. It will also draw from the
very good and important cooperation established on the
ground with the Stabilization Force (SFOR).
The European Union police mission will seek to
establish sustainable policing arrangements under
Bosnia and Herzegovina ownership in accordance with
best European and international practice, thereby
raising current Bosnia and Herzegovina police
standards. The European Union police mission,
entrusted with the necessary authority to monitor,
mentor and inspect, should achieve its goal by the end
of 2005. Its strength would be around 480 police
officers and 70 civilians, as has already been
mentioned by Jacques Klein.
Our aim is a broad approach to the whole range
of rule of law needs, including police activities. The
European Union police mission, supported by the
European Community’s institution-building
programmes, would therefore contribute to overall
peace implementation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as to the achievement of the European Union’s
overall policy in the region, notably the stabilization
and association process.
The Secretary-General has stressed on many
occasions that a regional actor should assume the
follow-on to the IPTF, to preserve what has been
achieved and to continue monitoring and assistance.
The rapid development of the European security and
defence policy and the work done by European Union
member States on capabilities, including on police
capabilities, have made it possible for the European
Union to assume that follow-on.
I very much welcome the fact that this very first
mission of ours serves to emphasize at least two things:
first, the openness of the European security and
defence policy and, secondly, the willingness and
ability of the European Union to work closely with the
United Nations. We have decided to invite 20 countries
to make offers of contributions to the European Union
police mission. Moreover, the transition from the IPTF
to the European Union police mission appears to me to
be a concrete example of the kind of cooperation
between the European Union and the United Nations
that is now feasible, desirable and in line with the
Brahimi recommendations. Both the European Union
and the United Nations are aware of the need to
establish practical arrangements to ensure a smooth and
seamless transition between the IPTF and the European
Union police mission.
The European security and defence policy
strengthens the Union’s contribution to international
peace and security in accordance with the principles of
the United Nations Charter. It also increases the range
of instruments available to the international community
13
S/PV.4484
in response to crises. Given the many commitments
that the United Nations is facing, the follow-on to the
IPTF by the European Union will help the United
Nations to allocate resources elsewhere. It will thus
result not only in a demonstration of cooperation
between the European Union and the United Nations in
this area but also — and this is our shared hope —
bring added value to the efforts of the United Nations
in general.
A little more than 10 years ago it seemed
inconceivable to many of us that a conflict as bitter and
as brutal as that in Bosnia and Herzegovina would ever
break out again in Europe. Many painful lessons have
been learnt in the intervening period. Ten years after
the war began, the European Union has proved its
commitment to the future stability and prosperity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and of the wider region. We
are absolutely determined to play our part in the
establishment of peace, security and stability. We have
offered the prospect of, and concrete assistance in, the
progressive integration into European structures. But
alone our commitment, our determination, our vision is
not enough. We need from the Bosnian people and
politicians a similar degree of commitment,
determination and vision. It is time for us all to fulfil
our responsibilities, and thus to allow Bosnia and
Herzegovina to focus on the decade that lies ahead.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom):
Mr. Minister, it is a special honour to have you
presiding over the Council this week to underline the
importance of this discussion and of other aspects of
our work. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
presence here today and for his introductory statement,
which set exactly the right tone for our discussion.
We have had three very interesting and important
briefings from High Representative Petritsch, from
Special Representative Klein and from the High
Representative of the European Union. The United
Kingdom fully subscribes to the approach of the
European Union set out in Mr. Solana’s presentation.
I should like to commend very warmly the
dedicated and professional work of Special
Representative Klein and High Representative Petritsch
on peace implementation in Bosnia. Those efforts are
really beginning now to bear fruit, marked not least by
the forthcoming membership of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the Council of Europe and also in the
dramatic increase in refugee return.
As this is Ambassador Petritsch’s last address to
us in the Council, I should like to thank him very
warmly for the work that he has done in Bosnia and
Herzegovina at an extremely important time in the
history of that new country. It is the United Kingdom’s
privilege to be providing his successor as High
Representative, Lord Ashdown, and he has a hard act
to follow.
Nevertheless, we all know that a great deal still
has to be done. The year 2002 is a crucial one, with
elections coming up in October. If our speakers this
morning are answering questions later, I wonder if they
could give us a slightly more detailed assessment of the
security situation in the run-up to the October elections
and the key challenges that still remain.
For instance, in spite of the success which
Mr. Klein has recorded in Mostar, does the Croatian
Democratic Community (HDZ) continue to pose a
security challenge? It is important, against that
background, that the International Police Task Force
(IPTF) downsizing does not begin prematurely, and we
hope that numbers and capabilities can be maintained
until after the elections.
We were also glad to hear from Mr. Solana that
there will be careful transition arrangements between
the IPTF and the European Union police mission, and
we hope that this will include the continuation in
service of those European Union police officers who
are serving with the IPTF at the end of the year.
Efforts to establish more firmly the rule of law in
Bosnia have to be the top priority in the immediate
term. This has a very direct impact on Bosnia’s
development and its credibility within the international
community. Progress must encompass judicial and
penal as well as police reform, for the reasons clearly
set out by the Special Representative.
Economic reform also remains a serious concern.
Recent progress in areas such as privatization, the
creation of a single economic space and trade between
the entities has been disappointing. This is stifling
Bosnia’s ability to attract international business
interest, and it also affects unemployment — which is
still far too high — and the immigration of younger
people.
The fight against corruption and criminality has
to be another priority. We welcome the steps that have
been taken so far, but the authorities need to step up
14
S/PV.4484
their efforts to show both the international community
and the Bosnian people that they are serious in these
respects.
As the High Representative has said, there are no
individuals in Bosnia and Herzegovina who are beyond
the reach of the law. The United Kingdom warmly
welcomes recent attempts to capture Mr. Karadzic. We
attach great importance to the apprehension of all
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia indictees, and we are disappointed at the
misguided criticism of these operations from the
Republika Srpska. We regard the operations of the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) as completely legitimate,
because cooperation with The Hague Tribunal is key to
Bosnia’s integration into the international community.
The arrest and transfer to The Hague of Karadzic and
Mladic would signal a new page in Bosnia’s
development.
The implementation of the Dayton/Paris Peace
Accord remains the overall goal. Dayton provides the
constitutional and structural evolution. The High
Representative’s work on a structure to ensure civilian
implementation is a good example of this. We continue
to hope that the entities will be able to reach agreement
on constitutional change, but, if not, the High
Representative should be allowed to use his full powers
to make the changes necessary to help realize the
objective of a Bosnia and Herzegovina that is internally
cohesive and fully democratic.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United Kingdom for the kind words he addressed to
me.
Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to thank you, Mr. Minister, for having
graciously agreed to preside over the work of the
Council this week. We are indeed privileged to have
you here, and this demonstrates the importance that
Norway attaches to its presidency of the Security
Council for the month of March.
I should like also to thank the Secretary-General
for his extremely important statement and also to thank
the High Representative, Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, as
well as the Special Representative, Mr. Jacques Paul
Klein, for their comprehensive briefings on the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Bulgaria fully endorses the analysis and the
conclusions offered by the High Representative for
Foreign Policy and Common Security of the European
Union, Mr. Javier Solana. I shall therefore confine
myself to some brief national comments.
My country commends the work done by
Mr. Petritsch as the High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina and agrees with the views set out and
recommendations made in his report of 22 February of
this year. In addition to warmly thanking Ambassador
Petritsch for his outstanding work, my delegation also
wishes to express its satisfaction at the decision taken
by the Peace Implementation Council on 28 February
to appoint Paddy Ashdown High Representative, as Mr.
Petritsch’s successor. My country is convinced that
Lord Ashdown, who is known as a friend of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, has all the credentials required actively to
work with the international community as well as the
local authorities.
Bulgaria has been supporting the Dayton/Paris
Accord and the actions taken by the international
community under that Accord, which is a decisive
factor for bringing about peace in the former
Yugoslavia and for bringing about a united, multi-
ethnic and democratic Bosnia and Herzegovina.
My country agrees with the ideas and conclusions
contained in the report on the need to pursue the efforts
of the international community in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in order to ensure the full implementation
of the Dayton/Paris Accord.
At the same time, it is our view that this
involvement should gradually decline, with local
authorities progressively taking over all these
responsibilities. That would enable Bosnia and
Herzegovina to become a completely autonomous State
that can take its proper place within the structures of
international integration. Here, we hail the members of
the Election Commission for their work to prepare for
the general elections scheduled for 5 October, which
will be first organized by the domestic authorities. It is
important that the Bosnian authorities be fully involved
in the lead-up to the elections, which will be a sign of
the ability of Bosnia and Herzegovina further to align
itself with the structures of European integration.
We appeal to the authorities to implement the
four decisions handed down in 2000 by the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
especially that relating to the electorate, which will
make possible equitable representation of the entire
15
S/PV.4484
constituency in the establishment of the State and will
facilitate integration into European bodies.
Implementation of that decision will enable the general
elections to go forward properly and will signal the
ability of Bosnia and Herzegovina to become an active
member of the Council of Europe. I recall that Bulgaria
fully supports such membership.
My country supports the international community
in its strategy of gradually transferring United Nations
responsibilities to the European Union. We welcome
the decision of the European Union to name the next
High Representative as a special representative of the
European Union. Here, Bulgaria endorses the European
Union strategy for a seamless transition from the
International Police Task Force to a European Union
police mission. My country believes that the Bosnia
and Herzegovina peace process has reached the point
where its European dimension should be emphasized,
because of the fact that Bosnia and Herzegovina
naturally belongs to Europe and because of Bosnia’s
European inclination.
At the same time, we believe that the issue of the
possible participation of countries not members of the
European Union in the follow-on police mission to
replace the International Police Task Force should be
decided in the future, taking account of the
contribution that such participants had already made,
along with their interest and their capacity to continue
their participation.
The High Representative’s plan for reorganizing
the United Nations international presence, which
envisions the rationalization and improved
coordination of the work of international civilian
organizations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, deserves the
Security Council’s support. The functions, structures,
composition and financing of that presence should
accord with the political situation on the ground.
Bulgaria welcomes the commitment of the
Bosnian authorities to the fight against terrorism,
including through their participation in the recently
established coordination team. The measures taken by
the competent authorities of the Federation with
respect to persons suspected of terrorist activities are
one example of that commitment.
We welcome the increased number of refugees
who returned in 2001; this issue is directly linked to
revitalizing the country’s economy. Among the positive
trends of recent months, we should also mention
progress towards normalizing relations between Bosnia
and Herzegovina and its neighbours the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and Croatia.
At the same time, Bulgaria is convinced of the
need for more active and more dynamic cooperation on
the part of the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities with
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. The appearance of Mr. Karadzic and
Mr. Mladic before the Tribunal could only improve the
overall climate in the country.
Bulgaria praises the High Representative for his
efforts to promote dialogue among the three main
religious groups, which have included the rebuilding of
religious monuments that had been destroyed. We call
on the parties in Bosnia to make greater efforts to that
end. Demining must be speeded up; there is an obvious
need for a comprehensive demining strategy, to be
implemented under the control of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities.
In conclusion, I hail the activities of non-
governmental organizations operating in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, especially those working in the field of
human rights.
The President: I thank the representative of
Bulgaria for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
too wish to welcome you, Mr. Minister, to today’s
meeting; we are very appreciative of your having
devoted the time to be with us this week.
We have heard some truly interesting comments
and briefings from our guests this morning. Today’s
discussion reflects the challenge that the international
community faces in balancing its role in Bosnia and
Herzegovina with the responsibility and commitment
required by the leaders and the citizens of Bosnia. The
streamlining plan approved last week at Brussels by the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council is
timely and indeed necessary for the next phase of the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Accords. We
welcome the success in producing what Ambassador
Petritsch described as a leaner and less bureaucratic
structure. We also welcome the decision of the Council
to accept the offer of the European Union to continue
the efforts of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) in strengthening the rule of
law.
16
S/PV.4484
We congratulate Mr. Klein on his success with the
International Police Task Force. We applaud his efforts
to attain the goal of completing UNMIBH’s core
mandate by the end of this year; thanks in large part to
his efforts, the way ahead on police and justice is clear,
if not exactly easy, on the path provided and with the
envisaged cooperation between the European Union
and the United Nations.
But neither the streamlining exercise nor
international assistance alter the central role that
Bosnia’s leaders and its people must play in
implementing the Dayton Peace Accords and in
building a prosperous and secure nation. We know the
priorities; they are the strengthening of State
institutions, refugee returns and economic reform. We
still see too little progress on the part of Bosnia’s
Government towards making the hard choices and
towards reaching compromise on the most critical
issues. Simply put, more has to be done on the
Constitutional Court decision, the upcoming elections
and the current budget, as well as on defence and
judicial reform.
A key point has to be kept in mind for the future,
and that is that economic growth will not be
sustainable until investors are assured that the
Government can address these and other problems on
its own. We urge the Government to take the necessary
steps to implement the Constitutional Court’s decision
and to agree on a budget that provides sufficient funds
for the upcoming elections, for the State Border
Service and for reform of the armed forces, among
other things.
In our view, the upcoming elections are not
premature, but they will require considerable effort and
commitment on the part of Bosnia’s leaders and its
people.
My Government remains committed to Dayton’s
implementation. We actively support the Peace
Implementation Council on the civilian side, as well as
SFOR’s considerable role, including its efforts to
apprehend indicted war criminals still at large, as we
saw last week in the two SFOR operations. The United
States is committed to seeing those responsible for
violations of international humanitarian law, genocide
and war crimes, including Radovan Karadzic and
Ratko Mladic, brought to The Hague. We seek and
expect the cooperation of regional Governments in the
arrest of indicted war criminals and their transfer to
The Hague, and we urge Republika Srpska to fulfil its
obligations under the Dayton Accords to turn over
indicted war criminals.
I want to conclude by congratulating Ambassador
Petritsch, who is with us for the last time, on his effort
and commitment to peace over two and a half years.
Last week, the Peace Implementation Council said in
its statement that as a result of his efforts, Bosnia and
Herzegovina is substantially more stable, more
democratic and closer to Europe. That is testimony to
his efforts and an excellent record to leave to his
successor. As others have noted, there is still a lot to
do. We welcome the designation of Lord Ashdown and
look forward to working closely with him to carry on
the implementation of the Dayton Accords.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United States for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation is pleased to see you, Sir,
presiding over this important meeting of the Security
Council. This is clear proof of the great importance that
Norway attaches to the question of the development of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I would like to express our appreciation to Mr.
Kofi Annan, the Secretary-General, for his lucid
statement, which provided a framework for our debate
today. We also thank him for the report that he
presented to us.
In addition, our thanks go to Mr. Wolfgang
Petritsch, High Representative for the implementation
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We also express our appreciation to Mr. Jacques Paul
Klein, Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his detailed briefing on the achievements of the
United Nations in that country. I cannot but welcome
the decision of the European Union to appoint
Lord Ashdown as successor to Mr. Petritsch. We wish
him every success in his task of achieving peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We would also like to express
our deep appreciation to Mr. Javier Solana, Secretary-
General of the Council and High Representative of the
European Union Common Foreign and Security Policy,
for his efforts to achieve peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
My delegation welcomes the meeting of the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council
on 6 December 2001. At that meeting the Board
17
S/PV.4484
adopted a draft plan, presented by the High
Representative, on streamlining the work of the
international civilian organizations in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It coordinates policies in the fields of the
rule of law, the building of economic institutions, the
return of refugees, and reconstruction.
We thank the High Representative for his efforts
aimed at the return of refugees and internally displaced
persons. The year 2001 witnessed more than 92,000
returns of minorities to the country. This fact will have
a clear effect on the social, economic and political
stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We look forward to the general elections to be
held in October this year. We join the High
Representative’s call to the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to accelerate the preparations for these
elections. Their success will have a major effect on the
political, economic and social life in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, enabling the political administration to
assume its responsibilities after the end of the mandate
of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH), on 31 December 2002.
In this regard, there is an urgent need for the
reform and strengthening of the defence forces and the
army in order for Bosnia and Herzegovina to be able to
discharge its security and defence duties after the full
transfer of power to the Government at the end of this
year. There is also a need to streamline the
international civilian presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as a need to study the High
Representative’s plan for the partnership between the
international community and the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities in various fields.
A cause for concern is the pace of economic
recovery in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which continues
to be extremely slow. This could cast shadows on the
overall development process in the country. However,
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s endeavour to join the
European Union could represent a political and
economic objective that can be achieved through the
implementation of the plan provided by the European
Union. I agree completely with Mr. Petritsch’s
statement a few moments ago that the leaders of Bosnia
and Herzegovina have the responsibility to develop
their Government and administration by themselves, in
a manner consistent with the reality prevailing there. In
my opinion, this is the inevitable result of the process.
We welcome Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
normalization of its relations with neighbouring
countries, in particular its exchange of ambassadors
with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It is our hope
that an appropriate solution to the question of the
border between the two countries will be found. The
1999 Treaty on the State Border must be fully applied
along the whole border. This would undoubtedly
facilitate the rapprochement between Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the European Union in the Stabilization
and Association Process.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic for his kind words addressed to
me.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): It is an
honour to have you, Sir, presiding over our meeting
today, and I would like to express our gratitude.
The Secretary-General set the tone for our
meeting with his clear and realistic statement. France is
particularly pleased at the joint participation in our
meeting of the High Representative, Mr. Wolfgang
Petritsch; the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Jacques Paul Klein; and the High
Representative for Common Foreign and Security
Policy of the European Union, Mr. Javier Solana. This
event has great symbolic importance and underlines the
exemplary cooperation developing on the ground
between the United Nations and the European Union.
A major restructuring of the international
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina will happen soon.
The last meeting of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Conference, which was held on
28 February, took a very clear position in this regard.
Mr. Petritsch, Mr. Klein and Mr. Solana are involved
directly in the restructuring and will continue to play a
decisive part together in the coming months.
As Mr. Petritsch recalled, the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina still requires the constant attention of
the international community. The momentum of reform
must be maintained, and work to implement the Dayton
Agreements must be broadened. Continuing this
process, begun a year ago by the Government of
Mr. Zlatko Lagumdzija, will require courage,
determination and perseverance. Once completed, it
will open up the door for Bosnia and Herzegovina to
join Europe. The imminent admission of Bosnia and
18
S/PV.4484
Herzegovina to the Council of Europe will be an initial
stage.
On the matter of priority tasks, ensuring
development in the country is an essential goal. To that
end, it is essential to improve investor confidence in
the safety of the economic environment. In that light,
promoting the rule of law, combating corruption and
impunity and strengthening the independence and
credibility of the judicial system are tasks that must be
at the heart of public action. This requires, inter alia,
full respect for jurisdictional decisions, beginning with
decisions taken by the Constitutional Court. All
members of the executive power that are involved in
this matter at the State level, in the Federation and in
the Republika Srpska, have the responsibility to ensure
compliance.
It is equally advisable to arrest the indicted
persons and refer them to the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, beginning with
Karadzic and Mladic. France actively supports the
action of the Stabilization Force (SFOR) on the ground
in this connection. We would urge all responsible
officials in Bosnia and Herzegovina to unreservedly
lend their cooperation to this action.
The international community must be prepared to
support the Bosnian authorities in the best possible way
to carry out the needed reforms. The restructuring
agreed last week by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council (PIC) will certainly be helpful.
Actually implementing the PIC’s conclusions must
begin without delay. We would like to thank
Mr. Petritsch and his deputy, Mr. Hays, for the work
they have accomplished over more than a year to
encourage this to happen. The international civilian
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina will be more
compact, more coherent, and thereby more effective.
On the subject of restructuring, I would like to
comment on the future of the International Police Task
Force (IPTF) of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (UNMIBH). At our meeting on
5 December with Mr. Klein, I stressed that, as far as
France is concerned, UNMIBH is an exemplary
peacekeeping operation, with an exit strategy, ready to
hand over at the end of 2002 to a regional organization
that is to follow on with some of its functions. In this
particular case, the organization involved at the
meeting was the European Union, and the offer it made
through the Ministers of Foreign Affairs meeting in
Brussels on 18 February was unanimously accepted by
the PIC Steering Board. I was delighted that the
European Union was thus in the forefront of
institutions actually carrying out the Secretary-
General’s ideas on how to develop coordination and
complementarity between the United Nations and
regional organizations. As Mr. Solana said, in coming
months the United Nations and the European Union
will be cooperating closely to ensure a seamless
transition from UNMIBH to the European Union Police
Mission (EUPM).
Within the context of restructuring the
international civilian presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the European Union will strengthen its
role overall in the area of the rule of law, particularly in
helping to strengthen the judicial system. This should
result in better assimilation of European norms and
requirements in the country.
Mr. Petritsch, Mr. Klein and Mr. Solana have told
us what the international community has been able to
achieve in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Since Mr. Petritsch
comes to the end of his term in a few months, I would
like to extend to him our deep gratitude for the success
he has been able to achieve. Mr. Paddy Ashdown, who
will succeed him as High Representative, will, of
course, be able to count on solid support from France
as he continues in the work of implementation the
Dayton Accords. I would like to extend our best wishes
to Mr. Jacques Paul Klein for his excellent and timely
implementation of the UNMIBH mandate to date.
The President: I would like to thank the
representative of France for his kind words addressed
to me.
Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes your presence here today with us.
We would like to thank you for organizing this
meeting, just at the time that your country is taking
over the presidency of our Council. I assure you of our
full cooperation. Allow me to take this opportunity to
extend our thanks to Mr. Adolfo Aguilar Zinser for the
able manner in which he guided the work of the
Council in February.
Mr. President, I would also like, through you, to
welcome Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, High Representative
for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina; Mr. Jacques Paul Klein,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General; and
Mr. Javier Solana, Secretary-General of the Council
19
S/PV.4484
and High Representative for Common Foreign and
Security Policy of the European Union. Their
statements have certainly given us further information
about the processes under way in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I would like to reiterate my delegation’s
support for the efforts being made by all those involved
in the peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Following consideration of the Secretary-
General’s report on the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) on
5 December 2001, the Council assessed the slow but
steady progress being made on the ground. It regretted
difficulties facing the Mission and expressed its resolve
to continue supporting it. Now would seem the right
time to reflect altogether on follow-on action for
UNMIBH. Here we have to think about the spirit of
Mr. Klein’s words when he said that Bosnia is a test for
us and that to abandon a multi-ethnic Bosnia would
sound the death knell for all States in the Balkans.
It is undeniable that progress has been made by
UNMIBH after six years of major commitment on the
ground. Now comes the question of an exit strategy.
Here, the role of regional organizations, particularly
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and the European Union, can offer
significant support. It would be desirable not just to
work on an exit strategy, but rather to develop a
genuine strategy to ensure that the country can fully
join the international community and European
institutions and structures.
The information given to us by Mr. Solana,
Mr. Klein and Mr. Petritsch show that the European
Union is indeed resolved to take over from UNMIBH.
My delegation welcomes the conclusions of the
General Affairs Council of the European Union on
18 February 2002 and those of the Steering Board of
the Peace Implementation Council of 28 February
2002. We welcome the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board’s acceptance of the European Union
offer to provide a police mission, beginning 1 January
2003, to take over and continue the work done by
UNMIBH. We welcome the appointment by the
Steering Board of Lord Paddy Ashdown as High
Representative to replace Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, who
has done an outstanding job.
My delegation would like to pay tribute to the
electoral commission of Bosnia and Herzegovina for
the work done in preparing for the first general
elections, to be held on 5 October 2002. We appeal to
the leaders of the political parties to ensure that
citizens are able to do their civic duty and exercise all
their rights. The commitment of the political leaders,
the participation of the people and the support of the
international community are all essential in this regard.
The task force initiative referred to by the High
Representative merits our consideration.
My delegation has taken note of the information
contained in the twenty-first report of the High
Representative on the activities carried out from
26 August 2001 to 19 February 2002, within the
context of implementing the Peace Agreement in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Those activities are
extremely important.
In conclusion, I would like to stress the need to
prepare a coherent strategy based on the restoration and
consolidation of peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. My
delegation encourages coordination among the
activities of UNMIBH, the European Union and the
High Representative with a view to ensuring a seamless
transition from the International Police Task Force to
the European Union Police Mission. We believe that
those efforts can be supplemented by the
harmonization of the activities of the United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes, as well as of other
actors.
The President: I thank the representative of
Guinea for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, I would like to join others in
welcoming you, Sir, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Norway, to this very important meeting of the Security
Council today. We are also grateful to Mr. Petritsch,
Mr. Klein and Mr. Solana for their assessments of the
current situation in Bosnia.
The Russian Federation believes that ensuring
stability in Bosnia overall, and in each of its entities, is
the main condition for further successful progress in
the peace process, on the basis of the Peace Agreement,
whose potential is far from exhausted.
We support the efforts of the High Representative
with a view to restructuring the international presence
and, in particular, the plan of action that he has
prepared. We believe that all activities in Bosnia,
including the proposed reorganization of the
international forces there, should be aimed at
20
S/PV.4484
strengthening Bosnia and Herzegovina as a single,
stable and independent State.
We have often emphasized that a solid foundation
for Bosnian statehood can be laid only through the
careful search by the Bosnian parties themselves for
mutually acceptable solutions. To that end, the
representatives of both entities must demonstrate
greater willingness to cooperate, make compromises
and find the strength within themselves to rise above
narrow ethnic interests so as to achieve common
Bosnian goals. Only thus will it be possible to ensure
State structures and organs of authority that function
normally at all levels, as well as an effective legislature
and a single economic space. Progress in that direction
will allow for conditions that will ensure stability and
democracy for the political forces in the country, as
well as economic, social and cultural development and
integration into the European structures.
In that context, the question of constitutional
reform is a priority. A decision in that respect must be
taken by the sides themselves. Any other approach
would necessarily lead to negative consequences for
stability within the country, particularly on the eve of
the Bosnian-wide elections, and would strengthen the
position of nationalist parties in both entities. In this
regard, it is necessary to be extremely cautious; the
imposition on the Bosnians of any solution to this very
significant problem by decree of the High
Representative could, indeed, be counter-productive.
Another important aspect of strengthening the
positive trends in Bosnia and Herzegovina is the
overall regional situation. We believe that a solid,
positive dynamic in the development of Yugoslav-
Bosnian and Croatian-Bosnian relations is extremely
important for the further stabilization of the Balkans. In
this respect, new opportunities are opening up as a
result of the recent signing between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia of
a bilateral agreement on free trade, the exchange of
ambassadors between those two countries and the
resumption of the work of the inter-State diplomatic
commission on border issues of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatia.
Those steps, geared towards establishing
mechanisms for resolving specific problems that have
built up in the relationship between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
and between Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, are
laying the foundations for solid, good-neighbourly
relations. The achievement of that goal is also being
assisted by the efforts of the High Representative to
step up the process of the return, to the places where
they used to live, of refugees and internally displaced
persons from national minorities. Unless that problem
is resolved, we can hardly talk about achieving real
political stability in the country.
We share the concern about reports of the
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina of terrorist bases
for organizations of the Bin Laden and Al-Qaeda type.
We believe it important to take all necessary measures
in order to eliminate from Bosnia and Herzegovina any
environment conducive to extremists and extreme
nationalists.
With regard to the work of the Stabilization Force
(SFOR) and the International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia, such activities must be carried out
strictly in accordance with the mandate that the
Security Council gave SFOR; there must be no
violations of that mandate, including the methods of
cooperation with the Tribunal.
There is another matter relating to security in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We must stress once again
that attempts to establish a single army would run
counter not only to the Peace Agreement but to the
Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which states
that defence matters are within the purview of the
entities. Any effort to rush that process through would
be counter-productive, and could disrupt the rather
fragile balance of political stability that has begun to
build up in the last few years between the Serbs one the
one hand and the Bosniacs and Croats on the other.
We support the outcome of the Brussels meeting
of the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board,
held on 28 February, including that part relating to the
transfer to the European Union, on 1 January next year,
of the functions of the management of the international
police operation. It is important that we achieve a
seamless agreed transition of the operation to the new
format and ensure that the United Nations International
Police Task Force (IPTF) is duly and properly replaced
by the European Union Police Mission, with, of course,
the appropriate authorization by the Security Council.
In this regard, we must remember that the work of the
new Police Mission will not begin from scratch, as
many of the tasks facing the IPTF have already been
discharged, or will have been completed by the end of
21
S/PV.4484
2002. The issue, moreover, concerns the transfer of
authority to the new mission and not a review of the
United Nations operation’s existing mandate, which is
based on the Dayton Agreements.
The Russian Federation intends to continue
providing multifaceted support for the development of
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a single multi-ethnic State
consisting of two fully equal entities — the Republika
Srpska and the Federation — and will make a
constructive contribution to resolving any problems
remaining in the Bosnian settlement.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Russian Federation for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Yap (Singapore): At the outset, we would
like to express how honoured we are to see you, Sir, in
the chair for today’s public meeting on Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Your chairing of the meeting clearly
shows the importance that Norway attaches to the
issue.
We are also honoured by the personal
participation of the Secretary-General and thank him
for his important statement.
We would like to welcome Mr. Wolfgang
Petritsch, Mr. Jacques Paul Klein and Mr. Javier Solana
to the Council and thank them for their useful
briefings. What they have told us today gives room for
optimism as the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
moves forward on various fronts. We are certainly
pleased that there has been further progress in bringing
greater stability to the country and integrating it with
Europe. Preparations for the first general elections in
Bosnia and Herzegovina under local responsibility,
scheduled for 5 October this year, have made progress.
Police restructuring and reform have made much
headway. Last year saw an increase of 36 per cent in
minority returns over those in 2000, and Bosnia and
Herzegovina moved one step closer to joining the
Council of Europe when the Council’s Political Affairs
Committee voted overwhelmingly in favour of the
State’s membership.
At the same time, however, we are concerned
about the slow progress in a number of crucial areas.
The Republika Srpska authorities have not advanced
much the process of reconciliation among the three
constituent peoples. Although the Republika Srpska
passed a law on cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Radovan
Karadzic and Ratko Mladic remain at large because of
the Republic’s refusal to help arrest them. Judicial
reform is still wanting and, in the economic area, the
pace of reform continues to be sluggish.
Hence, while there is light shining through, dark
clouds still hover over Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
situation in the territory is far from being fully
stabilized, which is clearly evident from there not
being one single army. In the public meeting on Bosnia
and Herzegovina six months ago, we noted
Ambassador Kolby’s remark that progress in the
country was incremental and not fundamental. This,
unfortunately, still holds true. As we also stated then,
the underlying causes of the slow process of change for
the better must be addressed. We hope that, with the
efforts being made by all those involved, faster
progress will be made at the fundamental level.
We are therefore encouraged that concerted
efforts have been made to streamline the international
civilian implementation efforts in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We note that the Task Force Model
endorsed by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council at its meeting on 28 February
2002 would raise the efficiency and effectiveness of the
international presence and strengthen the role of the
High Representative. The four Task Forces on the rule
of law, institution building, economic policy, and return
and reconciliation, under a cabinet of lead agencies
chaired by the High Representative, provide the
necessary focuses for tackling the underlying causes of
the slow progress in the various aspects of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. With the state authorities aptly integrated
into these structures, we look forward to closer
coordination and greater improvements in the country’s
situation. Ultimately, it is the parties involved in the
problem that must take ownership. We encourage the
parties to maintain their sights on Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s joining the European Union (EU) and to
use it as a motivating force to pursue an all-inclusive,
multi-ethnic society in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We welcome the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board’s acceptance of the EU offer of an EU
Police Mission to take over from the International
Police Task Force (IPTF) when the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) expires at the end of this year. An early
decision would certainly facilitate a smooth transition
from the IPTF to the EU Police Mission. We urge
UNMIBH, the EU and the High Representative to
22
S/PV.4484
make maximum use of the time available to ensure this.
A seamless transition would bring to a fine conclusion
the clear and well-planned exit strategy that has been
established for UNMIBH. We again congratulate Mr.
Klein and UNMIBH on their farsightedness in laying
out a proper exit strategy that ensures that the rule of
law will continue to be enhanced even when the United
Nations leaves the scene. It is clear that, while there is
no longer active conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the situation there has not reached the level of security
and stability that would allow external security
presences to leave the territory. As much as the EU
Police Mission is required, the Stabilization Force
(SFOR) also has to remain in the country when
UNMIBH winds down.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is fortunate to have the
support of the EU, the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. However, these organizations,
too, cannot maintain their presence indefinitely. We
note the EU’s direction that the EU Police Mission
should achieve its goals by the end of 2005. We also
understand that there are pressures on SFOR to
downsize. The onus is therefore on the leaders and
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina to attain the
fundamental progress needed to establish a fully viable
State integrated with Europe.
Before I conclude, allow me to convey our
appreciation and commendation to Mr. Petritsch for his
commitment and efforts in advancing the peace process
and improving the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In difficult circumstances, Mr. Petritsch
has achieved substantial results during his term as High
Representative. We would also like to join our
colleagues in congratulating Lord Ashdown on being
designated to take over as High Representative when
Mr. Petritsch steps down from the post. As with Mr.
Petritsch, we will give him our full support as he takes
on this demanding and challenging assignment.
The President: I thank the representative of
Singapore for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Corr (Ireland): May I, on behalf of my
delegation, join others in warmly welcoming you here
today, Sir, at the beginning of Norway’s presidency of
the Security Council. I would like to assure the
Norwegian presidency of Ireland’s full support over the
coming month. I would like also to take this
opportunity to thank Ambassador Aguilar Zinser of
Mexico for his excellent presidency during the month
of February.
Ireland would also like to thank the Secretary-
General, High Representative Petritsch and Special
Representative Klein for their comprehensive
statements this morning. Ireland fully endorses the
statement which High Representative Solana delivered
on behalf of the European Union. I will therefore make
only some brief comments in my national capacity.
My delegation would first like to warmly
commend High Representative Petritsch for his
outstanding contribution to the implementation of the
peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina. We wish
him an equally successful final few months as High
Representative. We thank him also for the most recent
report of his activities regarding the implementation of
the peace Agreement.
Ireland welcomes the appointment of Lord
Ashdown as Mr. Petritsch’s successor as High
Representative and we look forward to his further
designation as European Union (EU) special
representative in Bosnia. Lord Ashdown can count on
Ireland’s full support as he prepares to take up his
mandate.
High Representative Solana has outlined in detail
the European Union’s decision to ensure the follow-on
to the United Nations International Police Task Force
(IPTF) as of 1 January 2003, as agreed at the meeting
of the European Union’s General Affairs Council on
18 February. Ireland welcomes the acceptance of the
European Union’s decision by the Steering Board of
the Peace Implementation Council, on 28 February.
Ireland also welcomes the strong statement of support
that the Security Council intends to give to the
European Union’s decision on ensuring the follow-on
Police Mission in the draft resolution that is due for
adoption later today.
The proposed European Union Police Mission, or
EUPM, will be the first mission mounted by the
European Union under the rubric of European security
and defence policy. Therefore, for those of us in the
European Union and beyond, this is an important
development, substantively and symbolically, and one
that my delegation greatly welcomes.
The EUPM is designed to be an element in the
European Union’s broader strategy in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, to cover the whole range of rule of law
23
S/PV.4484
questions as well as institution-building programmes.
The EUPM will contribute to the overall goals of peace
implementation as outlined by High Representative
Petritsch.
We look forward to the cooperation of all the
relevant authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina as the
transition phase approaches, and we once again urge
those authorities to work with High Representative
Petritsch and with the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) to ensure the full
implementation of the Dayton/Paris Peace Accords and
the development, as we have heard emphasized this
morning, of viable State institutions.
It is also right today to warmly thank Special
Representative Klein and all those in UNMIBH,
including in particular the International Police Task
Force (IPTF), for their achievements to date in
restructuring and reforming the law enforcement
agencies in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Ireland welcomes the appointment by High
Representative Petritsch of the members of the
Electoral Commission as part of preparations for the
first general elections, to be held in October 2002. It is
essential that the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina be
able to exercise their democratic rights without
hindrance, and we fully support the work of the
Electoral Commission.
We also welcome the current discussions between
political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina to come to
an agreement regarding the Constituent Peoples
Decision. It is clear that agreement on the
implementation of this and other decisions of the
Constitutional Court must come from the political
leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina itself, so as to
underline the readiness of the country to be admitted to
the Council of Europe. It is important that they address
this task urgently.
Failure to reach rapid agreement on that issue will
have serious consequences for the holding of elections
in October, as well as for Bosnia’s integration into
European structures. We hope that satisfactory
resolution of this issue, as well as enhanced
cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
neighbours, can set the country on a road that leads
towards integration with the European Union. This
itself is in the hands of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Ireland fully supports recent decisions on the
streamlining of the international presence in Bosnia
and Herzegovina based on the task-force model that
has been introduced by High Representative Petritsch,
and especially the extensive consultation process that
has been undertaken with all peace implementation
agencies as well as with the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We look forward to the early
implementation of the process, and welcome the
strengthened effectiveness of the international presence
that will be achieved under that model.
In conclusion, we have many challenges ahead
that will require vigour and determination by the
people of Bosnia: the forthcoming elections,
strengthening civil society, addressing the issue of
reconciliation, developing a strategy for domestic war
crimes prosecutions, the full implementation of the
decisions of the human rights chamber, and respect for
social, economic and gender rights. We have come a
long way on many of these issues, for which my
delegation would like to warmly thank Mr. Petritsch
and Mr. Klein. We greatly appreciate what they have
done in the recent period.
The President: I thank the representative of
Ireland for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Gokool (Mauritius): Allow me, first of all, to
heartily congratulate Mexico for a successful
presidency during the month of February. Let me also
congratulate Norway on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I also extend
to you, Mr. President, our congratulations on presiding
over this meeting. My delegations extends its full
support and cooperation to you and your delegation.
We are pleased to have in our midst at today’s
meeting Mr. Javier Solana, Secretary-General of the
Council and High Representative for Common Foreign
and Security Policy of the European Union. I also wish
to join other speakers in thanking Mr. Petritsch and
Mr. Klein for their comprehensive briefings on
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We have
taken note of the important progress achieved since the
last briefing given to the Council.
The relentless efforts put forth by Mr. Petritsch
and his team in the implementation of the Dayton
Agreement have brought about promising results in the
overall development of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
warmly welcome and congratulate Mr. Petritsch for the
excellent manner in which he conducted his duties as
24
S/PV.4484
the High Representative for two and a half years. As he
decides to retire from his noble post, we wish him
plenty of success in his future endeavours.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
extend our best wishes to Lord Ashdown, who has been
appointed by the European Union as the successor to
Mr. Petritsch. We also congratulate Mr. Klein for
planning a clear-cut exit strategy from Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
As the European Union prepares to take Bosnia
and Herzegovina into its fold, my delegation considers
it appropriate at this stage that the European Union
takes over United Nations police training and
monitoring duties at the expiry of the latter’s mandate,
in December 2002. However, all necessary precautions
should be taken to preserve the achievements of the
United Nations International Police Task Force mission
(IPTF), as well the existing levels of institutional and
personnel proficiency.
In that regard, we encourage all parties
concerned — the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (UNMIBH), the European Union and
the High Representative — to collaborate closely to
ensure a seamless transition of responsibilities from the
IPTF to the European Union Police Mission. Here, I
wish to echo the good words that we have just heard
from the Secretary-General about the laudable works
performed by UNMIBH.
My delegation believes in the continued
involvement of the international community in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to help build a politically and
economically sustainable State that will fully integrate
into Europe, and in enabling it to meet its international
and regional obligations. The report before us
highlights the complexities that exist in the re-shaping
of the international community presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In that respect, we note with satisfaction
the streamlining exercise envisaged by the High
Representative to avoid duplication in the work of
numerous international agencies. That exercise will
certainly help bring about more interaction in a
coordinated and complementary manner, for maximum
benefit for Bosnia and Herzegovina. We welcome the
importance of the role of the High Representative in
guiding and coordinating the activities of civilian
organizations and agencies involved in assisting the
parties to implement the Peace Agreement.
The elections in October 2002 are approaching. It
is in the best interest of local leaders to hold a dialogue
aimed at finding a compromise solution. Political
leaders should think of ways to move their country
further away from the war and towards closer
integration with the European Union. Bosnia and
Herzegovina still has a long way to go to fulfil the
conditions on the European Union road map. It is
therefore imperative that efforts are stepped up at the
local level to complete the outstanding points on the
list so that the benefits of being a member of the
European Union may be enjoyed. Given the
developments on the ground, it is high time that the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina take their destiny
into their own hands.
The President: I thank the representative of
Mauritius for the kind words he addressed to me.
Ms. Lajous (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Before
I begin my statement, I should like to welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway, Mr. Jan
Petersen, and to express once again to him my
country’s support for the Norwegian presidency of the
Security Council. Mexico is confident that Norway’s
enlightened and committed foreign policy will
successfully guide the work of this body. I also thank
you, Mr. Minister, for your words of tribute to
Mexico’s presidency of the Security Council during the
month of February.
Mexico would like also to join those delegations
that have praised the work done by Mr. Wolfgang
Petritsch as High Representative in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We also welcome Lord Ashdown, who
shortly will assume the office of High Representative.
In our view, the work of the High Representative is
vital in coordinating the efforts of the institutions of
Bosnia and Herzegovina with those of the international
community. Mexico therefore thanks Mr. Petritsch for
his efforts and dedication.
For a number of years now, Mexico has been
following with particular attention the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and has reviewed with interest
the conclusions of the Peace Implementation Council
with regard to a follow-up to the International Police
Task Force and to the coordination of international
efforts.
We look forward with interest to the holding of
general elections on 5 October this year. We encourage
the political leaders of the country to reach agreement
25
S/PV.4484
by the middle of this month on the enactment of the
Constituent Peoples’ Decision. We take note of the
acceptance by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council of the European Union’s offer
to provide a police mission, starting 1 January 2003,
which would replace the International Police Task
Force.
In supporting the draft resolution before us,
Mexico appeals to the principal political actors in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to come up with solutions that
would be inclusive of minorities, democratic and
respectful of human rights, in order to lay the
groundwork for a future of harmonious coexistence.
The President: I thank the representative of
Mexico for the kind words she addressed to me.
Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in
French): Mr. President, Cameroon is extremely pleased
to see Norway presiding over the Council this month,
and we appreciate in particular your having convened
this meeting on Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Today the Council is considering the report of the
High Representative for the Implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina. This
consideration is of particular importance, for it is clear
that this is a pivotal moment for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. On 5 October 2002, the elections will be
held, and, on 31 December 2002, the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) will end.
In this connection, we welcome the presence at,
and the participation in, this meeting of Mr. Solana,
High Representative for Foreign Policy and Common
Security of the European Union. We also appreciated
the statements made at the beginning of this meeting,
which enabled us to assess how far we have come and
what has been done, as the Secretary-General said, to
maintain the momentum for peace and reconciliation,
and to establish a State based on the rule of law that
respects human beings, their dignity and their rights.
Above all, those statements showed what action
has to be taken in future. We were particularly
enlightened by the statement made by the Secretary-
General, whose vision and well-thought-out proposals
will be helpful to our future work.
Having said this, my delegation would like to pay
tribute to Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch and to Mr. Klein for
the commitment they have demonstrated, for their
creative imagination, for their very balanced approach
and for their spirit of cooperation. We would like to
commend the methodical work they have done, which
has been very helpful.
That work has been especially noteworthy in the
following areas: training of the police, education,
promotion of human rights, the establishment of State
institutions based on the rule of law, and, lastly,
facilitating Bosnia and Herzegovina’s integration into
Europe. They helped to set up a multi-ethnic police
force that respects human rights, trained those
policemen and provided their equipment. We also
commend the decision of the European Union to take
over, as of 1 January 2003, from the International
Police Task Force.
The second important area they have been
working in is education. The report before us today
shows clearly the importance of the contribution that
was made in the preparation of textbooks and curricula
that help to consolidate understanding and harmony.
Cameroon believes that those efforts are important to
the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As the Constitution of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
states, since wars begin in the minds of men, it is in the
minds of men that the defences of peace must be
constructed — hence, the importance of education.
The third important area, we believe, is that of the
promotion of human rights. The progress made in the
implementation of the Human Rights Chamber’s
decisions, as described in the report, is important and
encouraging. It is most promising.
The fourth area is the establishment of State
institutions based on the rule of law. We welcome the
measures taken to hold elections on 5 October 2002.
We would like to hear a response to the question asked
by the representative of the United Kingdom about the
pre-election atmosphere, particularly with respect to
security.
We welcome the decision by the Council of the
European Union to recommend membership of the
Union for Bosnia and Herzegovina, because in our
view this would be a factor to lay the groundwork for
the country’s future.
Finally, I wish every success to Lord Ashdown,
who is replacing Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch as High
26
S/PV.4484
Representative. We renew our thanks to Mr. Petritsch
for the work he has done.
The President: I thank the representative of
Cameroon for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Let me begin by welcoming you, Mr. Jan Petersen,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway. We are
honoured that you are in the Chair at this meeting. Let
me also reaffirm Colombia’s support for your
delegation during its presidency; we know your
leadership is a guarantee of success.
We also welcome Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
Mr. Jacques Klein, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and we thank them for their
informative briefings today. In addition, we are pleased
to welcome Mr. Javier Solana, Secretary-General of the
Council of the European Union; we are very grateful
for his major announcements, which reflect the
European Union’s decisive cooperation with the United
Nations and its coordinating and complementary efforts
as a regional body.
As other delegations have noted, this meeting
marks the beginning of a new stage in the work of the
international community in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We welcome the European Union decision of
18 February to create the European Union Police
Mission, which beginning in January 2003 will replace
the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) in bolstering the professional development
of the Bosnia and Herzegovina police force and in
establishing institution-building activities and
programmes.
As the Secretary-General has noted in his most
recent report on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (S/2001/1132), regional actors should
become more active in the successor mission to
UNMIBH with a view to preserving what the Mission
has achieved and to continuing its work in a regional
framework.
Peace and sustainable development in Bosnia and
Herzegovina continue to hinge on joint efforts by
international entities such as UNMIBH, SFOR and the
Office of the High Representative, among others, and
by the Government and the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is therefore important that, before the
official transition between missions next January, there
be coordination among the various bodies in order to
facilitate the transfer of functions. In our view, there
must be close cooperation with the Government and
civil society in Bosnia in order to link them to the
transition process and ensure that it is a concerted
process that will ensure the success of future
programmes.
Mr. Petritsch’s work as High Representative has
been key in creating administrative structures and
coordination programmes that have enabled Bosnia and
Herzegovina to attain the political, economic and social
development that today allow it to be a viable
candidate for membership of the European Union;
Mr. Petritsch has made mention of Europeanization as
part of that process. We thank him for his work and
wish him every success in his future endeavours.
We note the appointment of Lord Ashdown as the
new High Representative; we wish him every success
in his work. We welcome the European Union decision
to name the new High Representative as its special
representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, which in
our view will facilitate coordination and exchanges of
information between the new Police Mission and the
Office of the High Representative. It also reflects the
commitment of the European Union to centralizing the
international community’s endeavours in Bosnia and
Herzegovina under its leadership.
In the light of that new regional context, the
United Nations is redefining its role in the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Accords. Clearly,
there must be continued commitment to implementing
the agreement, but in this new framework the
responsibility of the United Nations, and especially
that of the Security Council, will change. There must
be agreement on the new cooperation structure as soon
as possible to facilitate the transition.
Among the issues brought out in the introductory
briefings today, what stood out was the need to insist
on bringing to trial those responsible for crimes
committed during the conflict. We share that priority,
and thus we stress the need for SFOR to help capture
those individuals and to send them to The Hague to
appear before the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia. We will therefore continue to
call for greater cooperation by local authorities in
seeing that due justice is done. It is therefore essential
to spare no effort to strengthen the judicial system,
27
S/PV.4484
both to effect institutional enhancement and to bring
about true reconciliation.
The President: I thank the representative of
Colombia for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
My delegation welcomes you, Mr. Minister, and
expresses its pleasure at seeing you in the Chair at
today’s meeting. We thank the Secretary-General for
his statement, and our thanks go also to Mr. Petritsch
and Mr. Klein for their comprehensive briefings. We
welcome Mr. Solana, and we thank him for his
statement.
In recent years, the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) has made
progress in police reform and training, and in the
judicial field. This has laid a good foundation for the
reconstruction and development of Bosnia. We hope
that all the international agencies active in Bosnia and
Herzegovina will work to enhance their coordination
and cooperation so that, together, they can create the
conditions necessary for the orderly departure of
UNMIBH when it has fulfilled its core mandate.
With the help of the international community,
Bosnia and Herzegovina has made remarkable progress
in the political, economic, social and development
spheres. The general elections, which will mark the
people’s true ownership of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
are to take place in October. Yet there are still
differences on key issues among the various ethnic
communities and the main political parties. We believe
that the urgent tasks for reconstruction and for the
restoration of peace and stability in the region are to
eliminate differences among ethnic communities, ease
social tension and promote national reconciliation.
Here, the international presence faces difficult tasks
and has a long way to go. We hope that through
reasonable streamlining, the international presence in
Bosnia and Herzegovina can improve the efficiency
and effectiveness of its work and speed up the process
of national reconciliation there.
The peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
at a critical stage. We welcome the European Union’s
decision to send a Police Mission following the end of
UNMIBH’s mandate. China will continue to support
UNMIBH in its work, and we favour the adoption of a
Security Council resolution in this respect.
In conclusion, we would like to express our
appreciation to High Representative Petritsch, who for
more than two years has accomplished much in
coordinating the work of the agencies in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in the reconstruction of that country.
We welcome the European Union’s designation of a
new High Representative and hope that he will also
play a constructive role in the reconstruction of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and in promoting peace and stability
in the region.
The President: I thank the representative of
China for his kind words.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the representative of Norway.
But first, on behalf of the Security Council, I
would like to thank High Representative Wolfgang
Petritsch for having represented the international
community in Bosnia and Herzegovina in an exemplary
manner. Norway commends the High Representative’s
balanced approach: on the one hand, taking charge of
the implementation of the Peace Agreements; on the
other, encouraging the Bosnian authorities to show
constructive leadership.
It is evident that local, entity and State officials in
Bosnia and Herzegovina must increasingly take upon
themselves the primary responsibility for progress in
the reform process. At the same time, the international
community must remain engaged. I agree with the High
Representative that more focus should be given to
strengthening institutional capacities and Bosnian
“ownership” of the implementation of the Dayton
Accords.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is on course for
membership in the Council of Europe in the coming
months. The elections scheduled for October will be
the first for which the Bosnian authorities have the sole
responsibility. These are important expressions of
confidence by the international community. However,
despite significant results thus far, extensive reforms
are still needed to put Bosnia and Herzegovina firmly
on the path to European integration. It rests with
Bosnian leaders to demonstrate the political will to
move forward. A case in point is the Constituent
Peoples Decision. We strongly support the High
Representative’s call to the Bosnian leaders urgently to
find a compromise solution.
28
S/PV.4484
We welcome the decisions of the Steering Board
of the Peace Implementation Council on 28 February,
including the decision on streamlining the international
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is vital that the
international community act in a unified manner.
Norway commends Special Representative Klein
and the personnel of the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina for their strong contribution to
the promotion of police reform and a self-sustaining
peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are
proud of the International Police Task Force, which
will leave behind it a legacy of professionalism and
dedication. We warmly welcome the readiness of the
European Union, as stated by Mr. Solana, to provide a
European Union Police Mission to follow up the good
work of the United Nations in this field. Norway
strongly supports the development of a European crisis
management capability. I am pleased to note that the
European Union will also invite non-member States to
participate in its Police Mission.
We support the efforts to strengthen the rule of
law, including the judiciary, in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Much work remains to be done. Political
extremists and common criminals continue to hamper
the return process throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Individuals indicted by the International Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia have yet to be brought to justice.
Norway is pleased by the recent actions taken by the
NATO-led Stabilization Force in this regard. We expect
local, entity and State authorities and courts in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to act to fulfil their obligations to
cooperate fully with the Tribunal.
I support the High Representative’s emphasis on a
regional approach to integration. Neighbouring
countries can make vital contributions to political
stability and economic development in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Ethnic tensions, organized crime, illegal
trafficking and political extremism must be dealt with
in a regional framework. In recent months, we have
seen progress in the normalization of political relations
among the countries of the region. These relations must
be based on mutual recognition of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of each State. There are also signs
of cooperation among business communities and
societies. This is promising.
In conclusion, I welcome the designation of Lord
Ashdown as the future High Representative in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as also expressed in the Council
resolution to be adopted in this meeting. I am
convinced that he will enjoy the Council’s full support
in carrying on Mr. Petritsch’s excellent work.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
Mr. Kusljugić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Thank
you for the opportunity to participate in today’s
discussion on the occasion of the twenty-first report by
the High Representative for the Implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.
The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina
welcomes the report and considers that today’s session
of the Security Council has a particular importance, not
only for the peace-building process in my country, but
also for stability in general in the region of South-
Eastern Europe. We expect that the planned follow-on
mission to the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) will mark a new, European
phase in the peace implementation process and will
open European Union perspectives for Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
I thank the Secretary-General for his presence
and introductory statement and the High
Representative, Wolfgang Petritsch, for his address. I
also thank the Special Representative, Jacques Paul
Klein, and the High Representative, Javier Solana, for
the comprehensive updates and comments in their
briefings.
Bosnia and Herzegovina became a full member of
the United Nations on 22 May 10 years ago. In May
this year, when the final positive decision concerning
its membership is expected, Bosnia and Herzegovina
will be ready to become a full member of the Council
of Europe. This time gap clearly indicates that for
almost a decade, my country was a major global and
regional problem. It is now obvious that the ideology
of exclusive ethnic territories was at the core of the
conflict.
During the last year, substantial progress was
recorded in the peace implementation process in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. This progress was achieved
both as a result of more focused and coherent activities
of the international community and because, for the
first time since 1992, a democratic, multi-ethnic
Government, committed to work in partnership with
the international community in building a functioning,
29
S/PV.4484
democratic, multi-ethnic, European-oriented Bosnian
State, was finally established. The role of UNMIBH
has been substantial in achieving progress in the rule-
of-law sector, and the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina considers UNMIBH to have been
successfully implemented. We thank Mr. Klein for his
leadership and commitment.
We especially emphasize the assistance and very
constructive role of UNMIBH in supporting the
activities concerning the fight against terrorism
initiated after the terrorist attacks on 11 September.
The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina has shown
by its deeds a commitment to contribute to
antiterrorism activities. In this regard, we have really
proved to be a part of the solution to this global
problem.
We clearly recognize UNMIBH’s activities as an
integral part of the international community’s
assistance to the institutions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina within a recently developed partnership
concept. We also acknowledge the efforts and
contributions of the other United Nations agencies,
especially concerning refugee returns. However, we
consider the progress achieved in the last year to be
only the first step in the process of building a
sustainable country. In this process, the current
priorities of the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina are those of institution-building,
improvement in the rule of law sector and
implementation of economic reforms.
Considering the long-term orientation of
UNMIBH towards the self-sustainability of local
institutions, we emphasize the need for further
assistance from the international community, since the
progress achieved so far is still fragile. In this context,
we expect that the transition from the present
UNMIBH mission to the European Union Police
Mission (EUPM) will be both smooth and efficient. We
would like to thank the European Union for accepting
the challenge of working together with the local
institutions in this important sector of the peace
process implementation. The commitment and
determination of Bosnia and Herzegovina institutions
in this matter was confirmed in a letter to the Peace
Implementation Council (PIC) and to the European
Union, signed by the President of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Government and the Presidents of both
entities, in which the EUPM is very welcome.
The European Union experience in the
Europeanization process concerning the necessary
structural reforms to be made in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in accordance with European standards,
is of utmost importance. We expect that EUPM
assistance will be focused on the further education of
police and judiciary officials, as well as on the
monitoring of the process of restructuring institutions
and reform in the rule of law sector. In this regard, we
welcome the proposed strategy for judicial reform in
2002-2003 and emphasize the need for more decisive
and firmer measures to be taken by the international
community for its implementation.
I would like to use this opportunity to stress the
most important current issues in the process of political
stabilization in my country.
First, it is expected that by the end of this month
the implementation process of the Constitutional Court
decision regarding equal rights of all constituent
peoples on the whole territory of Bosnia and
Herzegovina should be finalized. The implementation
of the Court’s decision will prove that the ideology of
exclusive ethnic territories has been defeated. The
outcome of this process will have a decisive impact on
the results of the forthcoming general elections, too.
Secondly, the activities of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY),
especially the trial against Slobodan Milosevic,
substantially influence the current political situation in
my country. We expect the trial against Milosevic to
prove his individual responsibility for the wars in the
last decade and thus contribute to inter-ethnic
reconciliation in the region.
However, we emphasize that a viable
reconciliation process is not possible while indicted
war criminals remain at large and while political
leaders in the region refuse to cooperate fully with the
Tribunal. Real reconciliation can be based only upon
truth and justice. Six years after the signing of the
Dayton Peace Agreement, the failure to apprehend
indicted war criminals — above all Radovan Karadzic
and Ratko Mladic, who are the symbols of suffering,
pain and humiliation of the civilian population —
prevents the beginning of a sincere inter-ethnic
reconciliation and sustainable peace-building process.
We want to emphasize that the leading role of the
international community regarding arrest of the already
indicted war criminals is of crucial importance and at
30
S/PV.4484
the same time a test of its credibility in the region. Its
readiness to give utmost priority to making their arrests
happen will be proof of its commitment to support the
work of the ICTY and to the establishment of a system
of international justice.
I would like to welcome the decision of the Peace
Implementation Council and the proposed resolution of
the Security Council regarding the appointment of Lord
Paddy Ashdown as the new High Representative for
the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina. I also want to thank Mr. Wolfgang
Petritsch for his commitment and leadership
demonstrated during his mandate. I know that
sometimes the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
looks very complicated and confusing for
representatives of the international community. But, for
the Bosnians, some activities of the representatives of
the international community also look misleading and
confusing.
Therefore, we expect that the mandate of the new
High Representative will be based on a clear vision,
strategy and concept of how to support the process of
building a sustainable multi-ethnic Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We also expect a more coherent policy
and more coordinated work of the international
institutions, and we welcome the proposed model to
streamline their operations.
The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina is
also committed to working towards increasing the
efficiency and effectiveness of the local institutions.
We expect to work together with representatives of the
international community to find new models of
institutional structures, especially at the level of State
institutions, in order to achieve objectives that have
been set.
Because the termination of UNMIBH’s mandate
by the end of this year is now certain, we think that the
United Nations should prepare a comprehensive
evaluation of its involvement in the Dayton/Paris Peace
Agreement implementation. This evaluation could
serve as a basis for further evolution of the peace
process and guidance for an upgrade and update
process of the current Bosnia and Herzegovina Dayton
constitutional structure, in accordance with European
human rights standards.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
whom I invite to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Šahović (Yugoslavia): Before addressing the
subject under discussion today, I would like to
congratulate Norway on the assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. It is a particular
honour to participate in today’s deliberations under
your guidance, Your Excellency.
We are grateful for the Secretary-General’s very
important statement. I would like to thank
Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch for his comprehensive report
on the developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as for his briefing today, and to avail myself of
this opportunity to convey the appreciation of my
Government for his achievements as High
Representative. Also, I extend our appreciation to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Jacques Klein, for his efforts and accomplishments
in leading the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH), as well as for his detailed
analysis today.
We are all aware of the importance of this
meeting. It signifies the announcement of a new and
significant phase of international commitment in
Bosnia and Herzegovina in which the European Union
will play a pivotal role. We have just heard Mr. Javier
Solana’s inspired assessment of this task. Indeed, this
is yet another example of the European Union’s
involvement, which is so crucial to the entire region.
On this special occasion, allow me to reiterate
that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as a signatory
of the Dayton/Paris Agreement, remains a staunch
supporter of its full implementation. Yugoslavia has
respected, and will continue to respect, the territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and has
demonstrated its readiness to develop cooperation with
it. The relations between our countries are
characterized by a dynamic political dialogue,
exemplified by many contacts between the highest
representatives of the two States.
As a follow-up to an earlier decision to establish
an inter-State council, a meeting of the Council was
held on 18 December 2001 to institutionalize all-round
cooperation between the two countries. During the
recent visit of Prime Minister Lagumdzija to Belgrade
on 19 February, the Standing Committee of the Inter-
State Council decided on a joint approach to projects
financed by the international community, particularly
31
S/PV.4484
within the framework of regional cooperation and the
Stability Pact. Close contacts between the parliaments
of the two countries have been established as well. In
November 2001, a delegation of the Assembly of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia paid the first visit to
Bosnia and Herzegovina. A return visit followed in
February this year.
In the area of political deliberations, bilateral
relations between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and Bosnia and Herzegovina are gradually being
expanded into the field of economic and other forms of
cooperation of the most immediate practical interest for
the citizens of the two countries. A free trade
agreement was signed in Belgrade on 1 February 2002,
a significant step along the road of regional
cooperation among Balkan States. An agreement on the
encouragement of mutual investments and a customs
cooperation agreement were also signed, as were a
number of other accords that will enhance ties between
the two economies and help secure a free flow of goods
and capital. Dual citizenship issues are in the process
of being regulated, as are the delineation of the
borderline between Yugoslavia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. To that effect, an Inter-State Commission
for the State Border has been established, and its work
is progressing well.
Special parallel relations between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and Republika Srpska should
also be understood in the overall context of relations
between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina. They are firmly based on the
Dayton/Paris Agreement, their framework was
prepared in cooperation with the High Representative,
and they are fully transparent.
One of the outstanding issues that requires
sustained attention is the return of refugees. In this
connection, I would like to point out that, as a result of
my Government’s initiative, the heads of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) missions to Yugoslavia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatia have agreed on the principles
for refugee returns. The document they signed in this
connection was confirmed by the OSCE Standing
Committee, as well as by a joint statement by the
delegations of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and
Yugoslavia in Vienna, which was strongly welcomed
by the OSCE. We hope that this important development
will be reflected on the ground.
Yugoslavia has made its relations with
neighbouring countries one of its foreign policy
priorities. Through this lasting, strategic determination,
we are contributing to the strengthening of regional
stability, which is a prerequisite for, and the best means
of, speeding up the process of integration into
European and Euro-Atlantic structures — a goal that
all of us in the region share. The further development
and improvement of our relations with Bosnia and
Herzegovina constitutes an extremely important
element of such an approach. My Government also
looks forward to working closely with Lord Ashdown,
the newly designated High Representative, towards the
fulfilment of this aim, and we wish him success in
discharging the important responsibilities that he will
soon assume.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia for his kind words
addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Croatia. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): At the outset, I would
like to welcome Ambassador Wolfgang Petritsch, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
Ambassador Jacques Klein, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH). I
would also like to welcome Mr. Javier Solana,
Secretary General of the Council and High
Representative for Common Foreign and Security
Policy of the European Union, whose presence here is a
clear sign of the European Union’s commitment to
ensuring the stability and prosperity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
On number of occasions during his mandate,
Mr. Petritsch found himself in virtually impossible
situations — Bosnia and Herzegovina has a reputation
for being the ultimate challenge for international
officials. But his will and determination to perform his
task prevailed over all difficulties.
I would like to assure his successor,
Lord Ashdown, that Croatia is committed to continue
to contribute to the stability and prosperity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and that he will be able to rely on our
help while performing his role.
32
S/PV.4484
I have known Jacques Klein, and successfully
cooperated with him, in various capacities for many
years. His contribution to the success of the two
completely different United Nations missions in South-
East Europe — the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium in Croatia, and UNMIBH in Bosnia
and Herzegovina — represents an unprecedented
accomplishment.
The United Nations has decided that, at this
particular moment, its presence is needed more
elsewhere than it is in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
proposal has been made that it should be replaced by a
regional organization. The European Union acted
quickly, deciding to take over. In our view, that
decision was the most appropriate. Taking into account
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s European aspirations, it is
appropriate that the European Union should continue
the daunting task of carrying out police reform in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We wish the European Union
every success in its endeavours. As Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s neighbour and friend, and as aspirants to
future European Union membership, we stand ready to
provide assistance, if needed.
On the other hand, it will be possible for the
United Nations to continue its presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina by monitoring human rights through the
Special Representative of the Commission on Human
Rights in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, Mr. Cutileiro, whose future
mandate will be discussed during the forthcoming
session of the Commission in Geneva.
With regard to the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Prevlaka — which, in its administrative
aspect, is linked to UNMIBH — my Government
believes that its mandate should, in its own right,
expire by 15 July this year.
This year will be filled with important events for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and I have already briefly
mentioned some of them. However, one of those events
will have special importance for the future of the
country: the admission of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
the Council of Europe on 2 May. That is going to
accelerate democratic processes, the rule of law and the
protection of human rights — developments that we in
Croatia have experienced since the moment we joined
the organization in 1996. Throughout the whole
process of accession, Croatia was one of the staunchest
advocates of the need for Bosnia and Herzegovina to
join the Council of Europe. We are delighted to see this
process coming to an end, and we wholeheartedly
congratulate our neighbour on this well-deserved
success.
If Bosnia and Herzegovina wants to fully
embrace European standards with regard to the
protection of human rights, it will have to adapt its
institutional structure. Further efforts need to be made
towards implementing the Constitutional Court’s
decision on the equal rights of all three constituent
peoples throughout the whole territory of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We simply cannot expect the authorities
in Sarajevo to implement all the requirements
stemming from membership in the Council of Europe,
while at the same time still struggling for the bare
survival of an ethnically divided State.
My Government would like to see the parties in
Bosnia and Herzegovina working together to bring
about an evolution of the present constitutional
arrangement so that it can respond to the new political
environment and the new challenges arising from it.
We hope that the forthcoming elections in October will
represent another step in the development of a
sustainable, European-oriented Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is our hope that these will provide a
smooth transition from the “Dayton” Bosnia and
Herzegovina, aimed at stopping the conflict and
pragmatic life-saving, towards a “European” Bosnia
and Herzegovina — a sustainable State, corresponding
to European standards of good governance, the rule of
law and the protection of human rights.
On the same note, we see acceptance in the
Council of Europe only as a first step towards the
further and deeper inclusion of Bosnia and
Herzegovina into European integration. Hopefully in
the near future, Bosnia and Herzegovina will start
negotiating a stabilization and association agreement
with the European Union — the type of agreement that
Croatia recently signed. My Government stands ready
to share our experiences of that process.
We firmly believe that the recently opened trial
against Slobodan Milosevic, the former President of
Serbia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, marks
the beginning of a new era for our region. It is closing
a chapter for hundreds of thousands of those in Croatia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo who lost their
loved ones and had to continue to live with the bitter
33
S/PV.4484
memories. The trial of Slobodan Milosevic will also
serve to benefit a better understanding of the course of
events in the former Yugoslavia and, consequently, to
benefit reconciliation among the people of South-East
Europe.
Unfortunately, last week’s attempts by the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) to apprehend Radovan
Karadzic, another notorious war criminal, were not
successful. He is still at large and, together with Ratko
Mladic, should remain at the priority list of The Hague
Tribunal. The presence of Radovan Karadzic in Bosnia
and Herzegovina constitutes a permanent threat to the
stability of the country and creates a danger that has to
be dealt with. The lack of success — or the lack of
political will — to arrest Karadzic also negatively
reflects on the credibility of SFOR and undermines
international efforts in Bosnia and Herzegovina overall.
I reiterate what I have said on previous occasions: there
can be no sustainable Bosnia and Herzegovina with
Karadzic and Mladic at large.
Croatia will continue to broaden the scope of
bilateral cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina,
with which we share a wide range of common interests.
This cooperation, like every process, has its ups and
downs, good periods and periods of missed
opportunities. It is crucial that the general trend of
bilateral relations remain positive. Just yesterday, the
Croatian Deputy Foreign Minister visited Sarajevo and
had a very constructive dialogue with the Bosnian
leadership, while the Prime Minister of Bosnia and
Herzegovina will be visiting Zagreb later this week.
Let me conclude. Bosnia and Herzegovina is
crucial to Croatia as our neighbour, as the homeland for
Bosnian Croats, as our economic partner and as our
friend. Therefore, Croatia is willing to fully support
international efforts to facilitate a sovereign, stable and
sustainable Bosnia and Herzegovina. Fully respecting
that its constitutional arrangement is a matter for the
three constituent peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and of all its citizens, we sincerely hope that its new
constitutional arrangement will truly reflect the equal
rights of the three constituent peoples on all of its
territory as a prerequisite for the successful return of
refugees, for the protection of human rights, stability
and sustainability, and for further successful inclusion
into European integration processes.
The President: I thank the representative of
Croatia for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Ukraine. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): I am glad to welcome
you, Sir, to this Chamber, where the Norwegian peace
philosophy — depicted in the famous mural before our
eyes — has for decades inspired the Security Council’s
members. I would also like to join other speakers in
congratulating your delegation upon its successful
beginning of the Security Council presidency.
It is my special privilege to thank Secretary-
General Kofi Annan, Secretary General/High
Representative Javier Solana, High Representative
Wolfgang Petritsch and Special Representative and
Coordinator Jacques Paul Klein for their important
statements today.
My delegation is also pleased to greet here the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, a country
that had to go through the ordeal of war to become, I
believe, a symbol of peace, inter-ethnic reconciliation
and religious tolerance.
Ukraine welcomes the decision of the European
Union (EU) to take on the United Nations-led
international mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
starting its first crisis-management operation under the
new Security And Defence Policy. The intention of the
European Union to make a leading contribution to the
streamlining of the overall civilian and police presence
in Bosnia and Herzegovina is a fundamental step,
which should accelerate further positive changes in that
country. The EU activities in Bosnia and Herzegovina
are not only a test case for the European ability to
preserve what has been achieved in that country and to
promote Europe-oriented development; it is also a clear
political and economic challenge to the European
Union’s new crisis management strategies and
methods.
In this context, Ukraine welcomes the agreement
of the European Union to invite non-EU member States
to participate in the future Police Mission. Having
already expressed our interest in being involved in the
EU-led military crisis-management operations and in
the European Security and Defence Policy-related
processes, including military and civilian aspects, my
Government reiterates its readiness to contribute to the
EU Police Mission. Having participated in all the
international peacekeeping efforts in Bosnia and
Herzegovina — from the United Nations Protection
34
S/PV.4484
Force, the Implementation Force and the Stabilization
Force to the International Police Task Force — Ukraine
remains committed to achieving the goals of peace and
stability in that country.
I would like to inform the Council that, early next
week, the special representative of the Ukraine in the
Balkans, Deputy Secretary of State Ihor Kharchenko,
will pay an official visit to Bosnia and Herzegovina to
discuss practical forms of bilateral cooperation as well
as other issues related to Ukraine’s participation in
international efforts in the region.
It is with regret that we learned of the decision of
Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch to step down from his post at
the end of May 2002. As was stated in his lucid
briefing, visible results have been achieved in
implementing priority tasks endorsed by the Peace
Implementation Conference in May 2000.
My delegation notes with particular satisfaction
positive changes in economic reform. Tangible
progress has been made in the consolidation of state
institutions. The implementation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s Constitutional Court’s “Constituent
Peoples’ Decision” is in a crucial phase.
Comprehensive reform of the judicial system has been
instituted. In the past two years alone, there have been
more than 130,000 returns of citizens to areas where
their ethnic group was a minority. Finally, Bosnia and
Herzegovina seems to be ready to hold general
elections in October that will be the first since the end
of the war to be organized by the local authorities.
In all these achievements, Ukraine recognizes the
valuable contribution made by Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch.
Appreciating his useful efforts during the past two and
a half years, we wish Mr. Petritsch every success in his
further endeavours. We also welcome the decision of
the Peace Implementation Council to designate Lord
Ashdown as the new High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina and pledge our full cooperation with
him.
On behalf of the Government of Ukraine, I would
like to pay tribute to the men and women of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH), led by Mr. Jacques Paul Klein.
My delegation is encouraged by the important
good news from the field highlighted today by Mr.
Klein and welcomes the valuable results obtained in
the spheres of police reform, police restructuring,
institution-building and inter-police force cooperation.
We hope that all these positive developments will be
preserved in the future and we strongly believe that the
practical goals determined by UNMIBH will be
successfully implemented by the EU follow-on
mission.
Let me conclude by reiterating my country’s
utmost support for the intense efforts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to build a democratic and prosperous
society with respect for the rights of each and every
citizen. We look forward to further steps aimed at
strengthening the principles of the rule of law and at
fostering processes of institution-building and
economic transformation.
My delegation also pays special attention to the
protection of the rights of persons that belong to
national minorities, in particular the Ukrainian
community. This issue is still a matter of concern to us
and we count on the further assistance of the High
Representative/EU Special Representative in further
improving the situation in this sphere. We also believe
that Bosnia and Herzegovina’s political leaders will
demonstrate the necessary resolve to guide that country
into a European community led by the European
Union, the North Atlantic Alliance and the Council of
Europe.
The President: I thank the representative of
Ukraine for his kind words addressed to me.
I now give the floor to Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch to
respond to the comments made and the questions
raised.
Mr. Petritsch: As the time is already quite far
advanced, I would like to just quickly respond to the
issues of overall security prior to the elections and to
the Croatian Democratic Community (HDZ).
With regard to the security situation, I believe
Jacques Paul Klein will be able to give the Council
more details as to the police and law-enforcement side
of the overall situation there. I would like to take this
opportunity to stress the fact that, in order to provide
for a safe and secure environment, the continued
presence of the Stabilization Force (SFOR) is of the
utmost importance, both for the upcoming elections as
well as for the immediate period thereafter.
I also believe that, ultimately, it is up to the local
authorities to provide the necessary safety and security
for their citizens. The reform of the judiciary and that
35
S/PV.4484
of the civil service, which is still ahead of us, are two
very important aspects in fostering civilian security.
The reform-oriented, multi-ethnic Government is very
much aware of the fact that, in the immediate post-war
era, security and, of course, personal safety are of great
importance.
One of the continued security risks in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, so to speak, is political and other types of
extremism. But again, in this area the change has been
quite considerable. That change can also be
demonstrated even when it comes to the radical
tendencies that prevailed in the course of last year in
the HDZ. That is the second question I am trying to
answer.
When I talk about extremism in the HDZ I am
basically and exclusively referring to the radical top
leadership, not to the great number of decent members
of that party who are seriously, and rightly, concerned
about the status of Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Again, I am confining myself to the radical top
leadership that has tried to split away from the
Constitutional Framework in the course of last year,
when it was out-voted by the incoming reform-oriented
Government, the Alliance for Change; when it called
for a total boycott of Federation institutions; when it
established extra-constitutional, illegal institutions;
when it called for desertion and 7,000 ethnic Croats left
the entity armed forces within days; when they called
for a tax boycott — that, in fact, was the gravest crisis
since Dayton — and when they also started to boycott
the legislative bodies in the Federation and at the State
level.
Things have changed very considerably since
then. I have had to intervene forcefully. I had to
dismiss the party President, who was also a member of
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina at the time.
I had to put the Hercegovacka Banka, which served as
a money-laundering institution for the radicals, under
provisional administration. At the same time, I also
continued the dialogue with the moderate forces in the
Croat community and inside the HDZ.
The crisis has been basically over since
November. The HDZ has returned to legislative bodies.
It is very clear that there is now a split inside the party.
The sidelined extremists realize that their time is over.
It is also very clear now that this party will have to
come up with new leadership. Changes are therefore
imminent, thanks to the continued support that the
Government in Zagreb is lending to reform and
moderation inside the Croat community in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In this regard, things are on the upswing.
I believe we will see a better future for the Croat
constituent people in Bosnia and Herzegovina once
these decisions have been taken by the HDZ.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank you,
Mr. President, for your very kind words. I also wish to
thank speakers for their kind words about my work and
the achievements in more than two and a half years in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. I think what is more
important, of course, is the Council’s continued
support; because I am convinced that Bosnia and
Herzegovina can indeed become a full-fledged member
of the European community of sovereign States, as
well as of the international community, of course. That
will be the ultimate proof that our work in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has not been in vain.
Ambassador Šimonović pointed out that this job
is the ultimate challenge, and I fully agree with him.
But we will ultimately be successful. That is also my
conviction. I believe that, now that my mandate is
drawing to a close, the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is far more promising than it was. That is
thanks to the concerted efforts on the part of the
international community, in conjunction with the
partnership that has been built over the past couple of
months. I again urge the Security Council to fully
continue to support Bosnia and Herzegovina. I
personally urge the Council to give its full support to
my successor.
The President: I thank Mr. Petritsch for the
clarifications he has provided.
I now give the floor to Mr. Jacques Paul Klein to
respond to the comments made and questions raised.
Mr. Klein: I will also be brief.
Police professionalism is improving, but we need
to pay the police a living wage. A food basket for a
family of four in Bosnia and Herzegovina costs 450
convertible marks. Many policemen are paid less than
that. We know, obviously, that in all of our countries,
when you pay the police and civil servants a reasonable
wage, you minimize corruption. Our major goal this
year is the rationalization of police salaries. We will be
working closely with the leadership of the Federation
and the Republika Srpska to discuss, and address, that
issue.
36
S/PV.4484
With regard to Herzegovina, I think much
depends on the constitutional decisions that will be
made in the coming weeks. As I said three weeks ago
in Mostar, the Croats needs to engage constructively
with the State institutions to use the power they have.
Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot work as a European
State without Croats and Serbs, but they have too often
been misguided and misled by leaders who put their
own financial interests above the interests of their
people. We have an old Alsatian proverb that says “If
you ride a dead horse, you’re not going to get very far.”
It is time they got off the dead horse. We still have all
too many leaders who led them into war and not into
peace. They have addressed a past that they cannot
change; there is a future they cannot yet see. Some
people still vote too “ethnically”; they still do not vote
economically or politically, as we wish they would.
In closing, let me say that progress in Bosnia and
Herzegovina may be slow. It is, at times, hesitant. But
there is real progress. Obstructionists remain, but there
is an old Bosnian proverb that says “The dogs may
bark, but the caravan moves on.”
Finally, let me also thank and congratulate my
colleague Wolfgang Petritsch for the work he has done
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I also thank the President
and the members of the Council for their generous
comments directed at my people. I will take those back
to Sarajevo with me, and let them know that you think
kindly of them.
The President: I thank Mr. Klein for the
clarifications he has provided.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution (S/2002/221) to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bulgaria, Cameroon, China, Colombia, France,
Guinea, Ireland, Mauritius, Mexico, Norway,
Russian Federation, Singapore, Syrian Arab
Republic, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1396 (2002).
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.
