United Nations S/PV.4614
Security Council
Fifty-seventh year
4614th meeting
Monday, 23 September 2002, 10 a.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.
02-59939 (E)
*0259939*
President: Mr. Tafrov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bulgaria)
Members: Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Belinga-Eboutou
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wang Yingfan
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Valdivieso
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Levitte
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Traoré
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ryan
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Koonjul
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Aguilar Zinser
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Kolby
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mahbubani
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wehbe
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . Sir Jeremy Greenstock
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Negroponte
Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
Letter dated 20 September 2002 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2002/1055)
Note verbale dated 20 September 2002 from the Permanent Representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2002/1056)
2
S/PV.4614
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
Letter dated 20 September 2002 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2002/1055)
Note verbale dated 20 September 2002 from the
Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2002/1056)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Cuba,
Denmark, Egypt, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Israel, Jordan, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sudan,
Tunisia and Turkey, in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lancry
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Baali (Algeria), Mr. Buallay (Bahrain),
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh), Mr. Rodgríguez
Parrilla (Cuba), Ms. Løj (Denmark), Mr. Aboul
Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Nambiar (India), Mr. Zarif
(Islamic Republic of Iran), Prince Zeid Ra’ad
Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan), Mr. Dorda (Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia),
Mr. Khalid (Pakistan), Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar),
Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Kumalo (South
Africa), Mr. Erwa (Sudan), Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia)
and Mr. Pamir (Turkey) took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
20 September 2002 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document S/2002/1058 and which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council to be held
on Monday, 23 September 2002, regarding the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure and with
previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting today in response to
the requests contained in a letter dated 20 September
2002 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations and Chairman of the Arab Group,
document S/2002/1055, and a note verbale dated 20
September 2002 from the Permanent Representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic, document S/2002/1056.
Members of the Council also have before them a
letter dated 19 September 2002 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2002/1049) and
a letter dated 20 September 2002 from the Permanent
Observer of Palestine to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/2002/1052).
I welcome the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, and I invite him to take the floor.
The Secretary-General: Less than a week ago,
the Quartet met in this building and agreed on the need
for a road map to achieve a permanent settlement of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We agreed that it was
essential and urgent for the Palestinians to take all
possible steps to improve security by bringing an
immediate end to violence and terror. But we also
agreed that it had to be done within the context of an
overall plan, which must address the political,
3
S/PV.4614
economic, humanitarian and institutional dimensions of
the problem.
We agreed that the plan must spell out reciprocal
steps to be taken by the parties in each of three phases,
with a Quartet mechanism to monitor and assess each
party’s progress against specific benchmarks,
culminating in the negotiation of a final and
comprehensive settlement by 2005.
We agreed, in short, on the need for a process
driven both by performance and by hope. That linkage
is essential, and I cannot emphasize it too strongly.
Yes, we need performance. But there must be hope,
too. For without hope there will be no performance.
So, far from seeing the first steps towards
implementing the Quartet’s vision, the events of the
past few days represent a tragic step in the opposite
direction. Until last week, there had been six weeks of
relative calm in Israel itself, but during the same period
in the occupied territory at least 54 Palestinians were
killed in Israeli military operations. Then, in the space
of three days, 17 to 19 September, we saw a bomb
explode in a Palestinian school and two new suicide
attacks perpetrated against Israeli civilians inside
Israel.
I have said over and over again that such acts are
morally repugnant, and I say it again today. Each time
those words have to be repeated, they become even
more grimly apt. These acts are to be condemned both
for the utterly unjustifiable loss of life, the pain and
misery that they cause to innocent people and because
they set back even further the prospect of a just and
lasting settlement. They strike directly at that very
hope which, as the Quartet agreed, is an essential
driver of political progress.
Once again, I urge all Palestinians, especially the
leaders of all political factions, to renounce this wicked
instrument of terror, clearly and irrevocably, now and
forever.
Last week, the Quartet recognized Israel’s
legitimate security concerns and repeated its demand
that terrorist attacks be stopped once and for all. It also
repeated its call on the Palestinian Authority to work
with the United States and regional partners to reform
security services and combat terrorism.
But how can the Palestinians respond to that call
if what is left of the civil and security infrastructure of
the Palestinian Authority, which is already gravely
weakened, is now in the process of being destroyed?
Surely, such destruction will only set back even further
the prospects for implementing necessary reforms and
ensuring real improvements in the Authority’s security
performance.
Similarly, the continuing destruction of the
capacity of ministries and municipalities to provide
basic services such as water, electricity and education
will hamper and even undermine efforts to meet
humanitarian needs, whether by Palestinian or by
international organizations. Further misery is hardly a
basis for progress, whether political, security or
economic.
The Quartet and our Arab partners in the region
are working intensively with the Palestinian Authority
to see that security and institutional reforms are
implemented. But we can succeed only if the
Government of Israel actively supports the process
rather than hindering it. The systematic and literal
grinding down of the Authority’s headquarters in
Ramallah, in which a further 10 Palestinians have been
killed, is also likely to cause greater political instability
in the West Bank and Gaza. Despite the re-imposition
of curfews in most West Bank towns, it has already
prompted mass demonstrations in a number of
Palestinian cities, including Ramallah, and efforts to
address key reform issues have been postponed as a
result.
This too will set back the prospects for resuming
the peace process. Once again, I appeal to Israel to take
greater care to protect the lives of Palestinian civilians
and to refrain from policies and actions that are in
violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention.
My Special Envoy is in constant contact with
both parties and has repeatedly spoken to Chairman
Arafat and other senior Palestinian officials in
Ramallah. He met this morning with Foreign Minister
Peres and is now in Ramallah with the Secretary-
General of the Palestine Liberation Organization, Abu
Mazen. He is working in close coordination with the
other members of the Quartet and key actors in the
region.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is not going to be
resolved by military might alone, or by violent means
of any kind. A policy based on forcing the other side to
capitulate is a bankrupt policy. It is not working, and it
will never work. It only encourages desperation. It
weakens moderates and strengthens extremists. In the
4
S/PV.4614
end there will have to be a political settlement,
negotiated between the two peoples on an equal
basis — a settlement in which, as this Council has said,
two States, Israel and Palestine, live side by side within
secure and recognized borders.
Why not reach that end sooner rather than later?
How many hundreds or thousands more have to die,
how much more pain and misery must be endured
before leaders on both sides find the vision and the
courage to accept the inevitable?
Only a settlement on that basis can bring real
peace and security to both peoples, and only a
comprehensive approach can bring a settlement on that
basis nearer.
The so-called sequential approach, which insists
on full security as a precondition for progress on the
political, humanitarian and institutional fronts, has
clearly failed. Israel needs to understand that there will
be no lasting security without a political settlement.
And therefore, even while defending itself against
terrorist attacks, Israel should cooperate actively with
the Quartet’s efforts to reach such a settlement within
the next three years.
The Palestinians, on their side, need to
understand that there will be no settlement without
lasting security for Israel.
Both sides must be urged by all who have any
influence over them to accept and act on those
understandings so that at last there can be peace and
security for both peoples, as part of a just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement in the Middle East.
But I fear this vision will remain a distant mirage
so long as our television screens — and the minds of
all those involved — are filled with ugly scenes of
death and destruction, whether in the streets of Tel
Aviv or at the Muqata’a in Ramallah.
More than 80 years ago, the great Irish poet
William Butler Yeats wrote of a time in his country
when
“Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold;
Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world ...
The best lack all conviction, while the worst
Are full of passionate intensity.”
Alas, those words have been true of many times
and many places since, and they seem all too true of
the situation between Israelis and Palestinians today.
But let us not resign ourselves to that state of
affairs. Let us help the best on both sides, Palestinian
and Israeli, to regain their passion for peace and the
conviction that brought them so close to agreement two
years ago.
Let us resist the downward spiral into anarchy.
Let us rebuild a centre that can hold.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his participation in the work of
the Council today and for his statement.
The next speaker is the Permanent Observer of
Palestine. I now call on him to take the floor.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the current
month. I also thank your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America, for his
stewardship of the Council last month. In addition, I
should like to join you in welcoming the Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and I thank him for his
tireless efforts to bring about peace in the region. We
urge him to pursue those efforts, including his work
with the Quartet.
Last Thursday, 19 September 2002, Israel, the
occupying Power, sent its forces and tanks to reoccupy
the compound of President Yasser Arafat in the city of
Ramallah. The forces of occupation razed some
buildings within the compound and blew up others,
digging a trench around the only remaining and now
damaged building, in which President Arafat and other
officials and security officers remained. Israeli forces
also built a barbed wire fence around that building.
Meanwhile, the Israeli occupying forces opened fire on
the area, resulting in at least one death and an unknown
number of injuries and, of course, directly threatening
the lives of President Arafat and those with him. The
explosions, the razing and other forms of threat and
coercion have continued for days.
Those grave and illegal criminal acts, which are
yet another assault on the entire Palestinian people,
were accompanied by announcements from Israeli
officials that the Palestinian President would be
deported from Palestinian territory and that he would
be harmed, along with other statements concerning the
5
S/PV.4614
wish of Israel, the occupying Power, to arrest a number
of the officials who remained with the President.
Needless to say, those announcements are absolutely
unacceptable, as they represent an escalation of the
aggression and an attempt to further humiliate our
leadership and our officials. Israel’s repetition of such
lies will amount to an encouragement of aggression.
After those events, the population of Ramallah
and of many other Palestinian cities defied the curfew
imposed upon them and took to the streets to express
their rejection of the new Israeli criminal aggression.
The reaction of the Israeli occupying forces was
typical: they fired directly on the demonstrators,
resulting in the martyrdom of five civilians and the
injury of scores of others.
Clearly, there is no limit to the crimes committed
by Mr. Sharon, by his Government and by his army in
the series of war crimes and acts of State terrorism
committed against the Palestinian people.
Unfortunately, it is all being carried out with total
impunity while the international community,
represented by the Security Council, fails to fulfil its
obligations because of the position of a permanent
Council member.
Despite everything, we officially call on the
Council to adopt a clear resolution demanding that
Israel withdraw immediately from the headquarters of
President Arafat, in addition to whatever other action
the Council might deem appropriate in order to put an
end to the humanitarian crisis being endured by our
people and to the tragic confrontation between the two
sides. It is not too late to do that, despite the regrettable
and unwarranted delay of this Council meeting from
last Friday until today. I express that position not only
in my national capacity, but also as this month’s
Chairman of the Arab Group, which had requested an
immediate Council meeting to consider this grave
situation.
Throughout the years, the Palestinian people have
been subjected to uprooting, displacement, denial of
their existence, destruction, murder and confiscation of
their land and property. They have been the target of
massacres, from those at Deir Yassin and Kafr Qassem
to that at the Jenin refugee camp. During the past two
years in particular, since Mr. Sharon assumed power,
Israel, the occupying Power, has not stopped its
extrajudicial executions, its collective punishments
such as home demolitions, the deliberate murder of
civilians and the infliction of maximum injury,
continuing its abductions and arrests and causing
widespread, deliberate destruction to property and
farmland. Israel has continued to severely restrict the
movement of persons and goods, including those of
United Nations agencies and other humanitarian
organizations, imposing closures and, most recently,
imposing a curfew on hundred of thousands of people.
In brief, Israel, the occupying Power — even
during periods of calm on the Palestinian side,
including over the past six weeks — has continued to
destroy the Palestinian Authority and its institutions
and to destroy the entire life of the Palestinian people.
Israel has reoccupied the areas under Palestinian
control, as if to return the situation to what it had been
before the peace process.
The political objectives of the Israeli side, in
particular those of Mr. Sharon, are very clear: to
destroy the Palestinian Authority and to break up the
Palestinian leadership in order to create a situation of
vacuum and anarchy with a view to subjugating the
entire Palestinian population.
Its purpose is not only to prevent permanent
settlement that would ensure Israel’s withdrawal from
occupied Palestinian territory, but to ensure the
continuation of occupation and colonial settlement. In
fact, Mr. Sharon, and unfortunately some of his
supporters, do not want a different Palestinian
leadership, but total absence of any leadership. He does
not want a solution with the Palestinian people, but
wants to force it to abandon its rights.
What I have just said is not an analysis.
Mr. Sharon has been very clear in his public statements
for those who want to listen and understand.
Mr. Sharon has repeatedly said that he rejects any final
settlement and that he wants long-term interim
arrangements. Mr. Sharon has repeatedly said that
Palestinians had to be harmed and totally defeated. He
objected to the Mitchell recommendations until he
managed to bury them. Mr. Sharon said that he had
hoped to have killed President Arafat in Beirut.
Mr. Sharon rewrote resolution 242 (1967) in open
defiance of the Security Council and all those who
supported the peace process, and he was categorically
clear when he recently said that the Oslo Accords no
longer exist. This is the very same Mr. Sharon who is
the hero of the massacres of Sabra and Shatila, Qibya
and Khan Yunis. He is the person responsible for all
6
S/PV.4614
kinds of war crimes and State-sponsored terrorism
committed by the Israeli occupation forces during his
premiership of the Israeli Government. He is the person
who is pushing the entire region towards catastrophe.
For its part, Israel is trying to deny these political
objectives and is waging psychological warfare against
our people and leadership, in addition to a systematic
global campaign of falsehoods and misleading lies.
One major component of this is an attempt by Israel to
project that all of the atrocities committed against our
people are a reaction against suicide bombings,
projecting the entire conflict as having started with all
these explosions. Nothing could be further from the
truth.
For our part, our position has been clear. We
condemn these bombings against civilians in Israel. We
condemn them as acts of terrorism that are harmful to
the Palestinian national interests. In any case they are
being committed by groups that oppose the peace
process and the accords signed between the two sides.
However, I would like to state here that the first suicide
bombings took place towards the end of 1994. That is
27 years after the gruesome Israeli occupation began,
and after Israel, the occupying Power, had already
transferred about 350,000 Israeli settlers to occupy
Palestinian land in order to settle there, colonize it and
take it over.
No, the Israeli occupation and its reprehensible
practices have not resulted from the suicide
bombings — it actually created them. When the Israeli
political position favoured the continuation of the
peace process and efforts to achieve a final solution,
those acts were not allowed to derail the peace process
but rather were used to strengthen cooperation with the
Palestinian Authority.
When the political position became Sharon’s
political position, the peace process was halted and the
suicide bombings were used as a pretext to hit the
Palestinian Authority and to revert to the pre-Oslo
situation.
Why is the Palestinian Authority being targeted
instead of assaulting the perpetrators of the suicide
bombings? Why are the lives of the entire Palestinian
people being destroyed instead of convincing them that
there is a viable path to peace to fulfil their rights.
Even if we accept the Israeli version of the story, how
can a State be allowed to prevent attacks against its
own civilians through ferocious and destructive attacks
against an entire other population?
If Mr. Sharon wanted a solution, he should have
known by this time that there was no military solution.
He is pursuing a military solution through suppression
and brutality, because he does not want a political
solution.
If we examine all of Israel’s actions in the context
of international law and Security Council resolutions,
we find a clear case. It is a case of three decades of
defiance of Security Council resolutions. Three
decades and more. Twenty-eight resolutions have been
adopted by the Council with regard to Israeli practices
and measures in our occupied territory. All were
rejected by the occupying Power; it did not comply
with even one of them. These include resolutions on
Israeli violations and breaches of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949; resolutions on illegal Israeli
measures in Jerusalem; resolutions on the settlements;
resolutions on deportations; resolutions on providing
protection to the Palestinian civilians; and resolutions
on dispatching envoys and fact-finding missions. All
have been rejected and, in fact, defied through
continued Israeli occupation.
Israel is the only State in the world that is
officially recognized as an occupying Power by the
Security Council. Israel is the only State engaged in
settlement colonialism in the post-colonization era. It is
the only State that has systematically violated and
breached provisions of international law and
international humanitarian law. It is the only country in
the world that has openly rejected all relevant Security
Council resolutions. As if that is not enough, Israel is
the only State in the region that has illegally acquired
nuclear weapons, in addition to other weapons of mass
destruction. What has the Security Council done?
Unfortunately, not much. What does the Council intend
to do now? We hope that the Council will show the
necessary seriousness in shouldering its responsibilities
towards the implementation of its own resolutions.
Another classic component of Israeli campaigns
is the attempt to divert attention to issues other than the
main issue at hand and to shift the onus onto the
Palestinian side. We see this clearly in focusing on the
question of reform. It is true that this is a very
important issue for us, but it remains a Palestinian
matter and is not part of the international agenda that
deals with the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
7
S/PV.4614
Unfortunately, some appear to want to implement
Mr. Sharon’s plans through this approach. They are
trying to give democracy a new meaning that does not
recognize free elections and are trying to impose a
political system, even an electoral system, on our
people. This crude intervention in the affairs of our
people is unacceptable. In any case, this issue cannot
substitute for addressing the main issue — namely, the
continuation of the Israeli occupation and the need to
end this occupation.
Yes, we will proceed with our second round of
national elections, and we will do our best to rebuild
our institutions and reform them. We welcome any
international assistance in this regard. But at the same
time, we understand the limitations of this process, and
we know that no true, full democracy can exist under
foreign occupation, and we know that we cannot build
and maintain stable and effective institutions while
killing, destruction and aggression continue.
Demanding that the Palestinian side fulfil its
duties in the area of security following the destruction
of its security apparatus, expecting it to complete
reforms and establish true democracy while under
occupation and continued oppression is ludicrous and
impossible to achieve. Either intentionally or
unintentionally, this for all practical purposes provides
a new cover for Mr. Sharon and his policies, while
blaming the Palestinian side for failure.
All this is happening while the peace process is
being marginalized and extremist forces are rising.
This hysteria must come to and end and the moment of
truth must be faced, namely the truth of Mr. Sharon, his
Government, his army and their policies. Otherwise,
we are drifting to a course that will drag the entire
region into a worse situation.
The only viable way to end the current tragedy
and to return to the peace track is to pursue a
comprehensive approach along with an effective
international presence on the ground. What is meant by
a comprehensive approach is not only how to deal with
political, economic and security dimensions all at once,
although these are important; but also to have a prior
declaration of the form of the final settlement, not only
on the basis of two States — Israel and Palestine — but
also by identifying the borders between the two States,
with the possibility of the two sides agreeing to some
specific amendments thereto.
This border is, of course, the armistice line that is
now commonly known as the 1967 border. On this
basis, there would be specific stages and steps that
would lead us from here to our final destination, the
final settlement. This is the only approach that would
create a different dynamic on the two sides and
inevitably lead to support by the overwhelming
majority of both sides for this settlement.
This approach also requires a genuine and
effective international presence on the ground. This
could be in the form of official observers in sufficient
numbers and having a clear mandate, or, even better, in
the form that was proposed by Secretary-General Kofi
Annan: the establishment of a multinational force
under Chapter VII of the Charter.
The parameters of the final settlement are widely
known, and our direct experience has taught us that the
only possible and available way to achieve peace is
that just described. What, then, is the obstacle to this
settlement? I do not want to get into that from my
official position of responsibility, because, like every
Palestinian, I am angry and furious at everything that is
happening in our country and in our region. But we, the
Palestinian people, have not lost hope, and we await
your measures.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Permanent Observer of Palestine for the
congratulations that he extended to me.
Mr. Lancry (Israel): Mr. President, at the outset I
would like to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency for this month and to extend my
congratulations to Ambassador John Negroponte on the
outstanding manner in which he guided the
deliberations of the Council last month. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Kofi Annan, for his permanent contribution and
concerted efforts to bring an end to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict and to anchor peaceful coexistence
in the Middle East.
The Security Council is meeting just days after a
Palestinian suicide bomber turned an ordinary Tel Aviv
street into a scene of horrific carnage. As workers and
shoppers were going about their business, a Palestinian
terrorist boarded a public city bus and detonated a
powerful explosive charge that ripped through the
crowded downtown district. When the dust settled, five
Israeli civilians lay dead and more than sixty others
were wounded, several of them seriously.
8
S/PV.4614
The Tel Aviv bombing followed a day of hell in
which three Israelis were killed and three wounded in
three separate incidents. Early in the morning, security
forces discovered the charred body of David Buhbut.
Buhbut, who was reported missing on Tuesday night,
had gone shopping in an Arab village near his home.
He was abducted and tortured for several hours, and his
body was discarded in a dumpster where it was later
found.
In the afternoon, Palestinian terrorists shot and
killed Yosef Ajami, an Israeli civilian who was driving
his car to Baka al-Gharbiya. And in the evening, Israeli
policeman Moshe Hizkiyahu was killed as he
responded to a report of a suspicious individual near
the Umm el-Fahm Junction. As Officer Hizkiyahu
approached, the man blew himself up. Two others were
wounded in the attack, for which Islamic Jihad claimed
responsibility.
These attacks come after a six-week period of
relative quiet resulting from the extraordinary efforts of
Israeli security forces. In recent weeks, Israeli forces
have intercepted or thwarted scores of attempted
attacks, including one in which a truck filled with
hundreds of kilograms of explosives was seized, more
than enough to bring a skyscraper crashing to the
ground.
During this same period there have been some
encouraging signs of internal Palestinian dialogue,
including the voices of those who are beginning to
question the value of the Palestinian campaign of
terrorism and suicide bombings. Israel is following
these discussions with great interest, and we are
cautiously optimistic that they may signal a new
direction for the Palestinian people.
As a result of this period of quiet, and out of
genuine concern for the plight of the Palestinian
population, Israel had begun to scale back some of the
security precautions it had implemented. Various steps
were taken to ease the freedom of movement of
Palestinians, particularly the suspension of curfews.
It is no coincidence that terrorist attacks have
resumed at precisely the moment that Israel has relaxed
some of its security precautions. Steps that were taken
to improve the humanitarian conditions of the
Palestinian population have been cynically viewed by
terrorists as opportunities. Any relaxation in Israeli
security policy is seized upon, and in the past few days
we have all witnessed the catastrophic result. This is
the clearest affirmation of what we have constantly
asserted: that the only thing which stands between
Palestinian terrorists and their Israeli victims is the
preventive actions of the Israeli military.
These attacks have also affirmed the terrorists’
violent rejection of any efforts at reconciliation
between the parties, as they come amidst resurgent
efforts of responsible parties to help stop the violence
and bring the parties back to the negotiating table.
Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres and Defence
Minister Benjamin Ben-Eliezer have met a number of
times with Palestinian officials and the meetings
appeared promising. The Quartet met in New York in
still another effort to revive the peace process. And yet,
with every hopeful step forward, terrorism forces us to
take an even greater step backward.
As Foreign Minister Peres observed in his recent
speech before the General Assembly, despite the
complexity of the conflicts in the Middle East, if it
were not for terror we could have already resolved
them. Terror, however, does not solve conflicts, it
entrenches them.
Time and again Palestinian terrorist groups have
shown their eagerness to scuttle any attempts to
energize the peace process and restore hope to the
people of the region. If the Palestinian leadership is
unwilling to confront these demonstrated enemies of
peace, then it undermines its claim to be a partner for
peace.
The responsibility of the Palestinian leadership is
clear. It must act decisively and resolutely to combat
Palestinian terrorism. It must end the financial,
logistical and moral support it has provided to terrorist
organizations. It must dismantle the infrastructure upon
which Palestinian terrorists depend. It must confiscate
their weapons, arrest their leaders, shut down their
offices and cut off their sources of funding. It must end
the relentless incitement to violence in the official
Palestinian Authority-controlled media. It must stop
the glorification of violence and martyrdom in
Palestinian schools. It must stop hanging portraits of
terrorists from buildings, naming streets after them and
holding them up as role models for other Palestinians
to follow. In short, it must completely de-legitimize
terrorism and suicide bombing in the eyes of its people.
Every one of these obligations stem from specific
Security Council resolutions, signed commitments and
9
S/PV.4614
the requirements of international law, which the
Palestinian leadership has repeatedly flouted.
Instead of respecting its legal obligations, the
Palestinian leadership, even to this day, continues to
harbour terrorists and refuses to arrest them and bring
them to justice. Inside the leadership compound in
Ramallah are 50 individuals who have planned, funded
and orchestrated scores of terrorist attacks and who are
responsible for countless deaths of innocent civilians.
Rather than take action against those it knows are
complicit in acts of terrorism, the Palestinian Authority
grants them immunity within its headquarters and
protects them.
The Palestinian leadership must establish itself as
the only party with the authority to exercise the use of
force. It can no longer tolerate the existence of
numerous armed groups, each with its own agenda,
methods and doctrine, acting independently of one
another. The monopoly of the use of force is one of the
most basic responsibilities of national leadership. A
leadership that fails to exercise that responsibility has
also lost its legitimate right to lead.
These steps, which are expected by the
international community, are more than within the
power of the Palestinian leadership to undertake. That
it has utterly refused to do so, even after more than two
years of hostilities, is a most telling indication of the
status of its commitment to ending violence and
returning to a political process.
The only enduring solution to the conflict in the
region is the one articulated by President Bush and
endorsed by the Council, one in which two States live
side by side in peace, security and coexistence. The
Foreign Minister of Israel, addressing the General
Assembly just a few days ago, again expressed Israel’s
enduring commitment to that vision.
Additional Security Council resolutions,
particularly one-sided ones, are more than unhelpful;
they are counterproductive. Resolutions that fail to
address the context of terrorism, specifically demand
the dismantling of terrorist organizations such as
Islamic Jihad, Hamas and the Fatah Al-Aqsa Brigades
and condemn suicide bombing in the strongest possible
terms are simply a further incentive for the
continuation of the Palestinian terrorist campaign. If
international support can be garnered for one-sided
resolutions, why should compromise be sought at the
negotiating table?
As we know from history, achieving a vision of
two States living in peace and security depends not on
entertaining partisan initiatives, but on genuine and
meaningful dialogue. But if violence and terror
continue, it will be impossible to arrive at a political
settlement.
Ending the terror, incitement and hatred, and
engaging in genuine face-to-face negotiations, in a
spirit of good faith and partnership, is the only way we
can achieve the vision the Council has endorsed and
pave the way for a brighter future for all the peoples of
the region.
I would like to conclude by drawing the Council’s
attention to a story that I believe should serve not only
as an inspiration, but also as a reminder that, even in
the face of the devastating reality Palestinians and
Israelis face each day, there remains among the peoples
of this troubled region the basic need for coexistence.
Jonathan Jesner was a teenage student who was
among those killed in Tel Aviv on Thursday. The
Jesner family donated his kidney to a 7-year-old
Palestinian girl, Yasmin Abu Ramila, who was
suffering from a debilitating disease. This act provided
her with a life-saving transplant.
In the past, the families of Palestinians who have
lost their lives in the conflict with Israel have made
similarly life-affirming and courageous gestures,
donating their organs to Israelis suffering from illness
and disease. These contributions are the very antithesis
of terror. They provide a glimmer of hope that, despite
the bitterness, death and mourning, we can still
recognize common humanity and common destiny.
Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): Last
Friday morning, the Security Council members
gathered in this Chamber for a briefing by the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process to brief us on the recent meeting of the Quartet
at United Nations Headquarters last week. Members of
the Council expressed their support for the statement
issued by the Quartet on 17 September 2002. That
statement described some of the concrete, practical and
forward-looking steps Quartet members, including
United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan, Russian
Foreign Minister Ivanov, European Union High
Representative Solana and Secretary of State Powell,
are taking with the parties to end violence and to
advance political negotiations aimed at realizing
President Bush’s vision of two States, Israel and an
10
S/PV.4614
independent, viable and democratic Palestine, living
side by side in peace and security. The parties and key
regional Arab States also participated in the Quartet
meetings, which contributed to restoring confidence
and trust in the Middle East. The Quartet meeting
coincided with what appeared to be a terrorist bombing
at a Palestinian school near Hebron that wounded five
Palestinian children. The Quartet deplored and
condemned morally repugnant violence and terror.
Palestinian extremists reacted immediately to the
Quartet’s efforts with more devastating acts of terror:
Hamas and the Palestinian Islamic Jihad competed in
their claims of responsibility for two suicide bombing
attacks in Israel on 18 and 19 September 2002. The
second, in Tel Aviv, killed six Israelis and one Scottish
national on a civilian bus. Sixty people were injured,
many of whom were mutilated by the blast. Nearly all
Security Council members condemned these attacks
publicly, and privately within the Security Council
consultations room. Most of the Governments
represented in this Chamber have also made timely
statements condemning these attacks and the groups
that continue to perpetrate them. We encourage others
to join us in condemning these acts of terror in the
strongest possible terms.
The United States is intensively engaged in
efforts to calm the situation in the Middle East. Israel’s
recent actions in the Ramallah Muqata’a are not
helpful, either in achieving a lasting end to violence or
in promoting vital reforms. The United States has made
this clear at the highest levels of the Israeli
Government. It is essential that Israel consider
carefully the consequences of its actions and avoid
further measures that escalate rather than reduce
tension and violence. The further destruction by Israel
of the Palestinian Authority’s remaining civilian and
security infrastructure will not improve Israel’s
security situation; on the contrary, it will only set back
further the prospects for implementing the reforms
necessary to ensure real improvements in the
Palestinian Authority’s security performance. It is also
likely to have serious negative consequences for
political stability in the West Bank and Gaza, and
therefore for the prospects of resuming the political
process.
The United States objectives are clear: ending
terrorism, promoting Palestinian civil reform, restoring
active security cooperation, alleviating the
humanitarian situation inside Palestinian areas and
working towards a resumption of a political dialogue
that leads to a lasting peace. Progress on these
objectives is critical to restoring trust and confidence
between the two sides. A common front, exemplified
by the Quartet and those that support its efforts, can
make a real difference in resolving the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. I call on all members of the
international community to support and encourage
steps on the ground that will contribute concretely and
objectively to meeting these objectives.
We will not support the adoption of a one-sided
text that fails to recognize that this conflict has two
sides, that fails to condemn acts of terror and the
groups that perpetrate them and that fails to call for the
dismantling of the networks that threaten all the people
of the Middle East, both Arab and Israeli.
Mr. Kolby (Norway): After six weeks, innocent
Israelis again became the victims of terrorist acts.
Terrorism builds nothing, destroys everything and must
be fought vigorously. Terrorism works against the
interests of the Palestinian people. President Arafat and
the Palestinian Authority must do everything they can
to stop Palestinian terrorism and eliminate terrorist
structures. Those responsible must be brought to
justice.
During the same period, dozens of Palestinians
have been killed by Israeli military action, among them
many innocent civilians. Norway has appealed to Israel
to stop the ongoing military operation against the
headquarters of President Arafat. We do not think that
the military actions against him will stop terrorism; nor
do we think that they will further Israel’s long-term
security needs.
Norway supports the conclusions of the Quartet
meeting held on 17 September. We support the work
done to formulate a road map that can identify a way
out of the present crisis. Security for both Israelis and
Palestinians has to be restored. But equally important is
the need to restore the political dialogue. The Middle
East conflict cannot be solved through the use of arms.
The solution has to be political.
Norway fully supports the Palestinian reform
process. It is now more important than ever to create an
accountable and efficient Palestinian Authority.
Progress has been made despite the very difficult
circumstances in which the reform efforts are being
carried out.
11
S/PV.4614
However, reforms cannot be implemented in a
vacuum. The present security situation undermines the
reform efforts. The renewed attacks on President
Arafat’s compound have jeopardized these efforts. The
success of the reforms also depends on Palestinians
seeing improvements both in living conditions and in
political prospects. The Palestinians must be given
hope. Norway therefore urges Israel to stop actions that
undermine the Palestinian reform efforts and to assist
in creating an environment that is conducive to
supporting the reform efforts.
Norway is deeply alarmed by the deteriorating
humanitarian situation of the Palestinians. We were
pleased to hear high-level assurances from Israel of
increased cooperation with humanitarian agencies, but
we have to note that officials of those agencies are
reporting only marginal improvements on the ground.
Norway recognizes Israel’s legitimate security needs,
but the humanitarian needs of the Palestinian
population must also be safeguarded.
The humanitarian plight of the Palestinian people
is now quickly deteriorating. The curfews continue to
confine to their homes, on average, almost half a
million Palestinians in more than 20 cities and towns,
sometimes for days at a time. The business sector is
paralysed. Malnutrition among children is increasing to
unacceptable levels, and unemployment rates are above
50 per cent. Norway therefore supports the
recommendation of the Bertini report to dispatch a
mission to develop a detailed plan on how to deal with
humanitarian needs. Norway urges Israel to fully
cooperate with aid agencies and to lift the harsh
restrictions imposed on the Palestinians. The
humanitarian situation should continue to be followed
closely by the international community. We therefore
welcome the decision by the Quartet to hold a
ministerial meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
in December, in parallel with the holding of a new
Quartet meeting.
The present situation is deeply tragic for all those
who wish for peace and who are held hostage by
extremist and brutal action. Norway urges maximum
restraint and calls upon the parties to allow the Quartet
to continue to work out a road map that can bring about
new positive momentum in the efforts to establish
security, peace and a lasting political solution.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): France
fully endorses the statement to be made shortly by the
representative of Denmark on behalf of the European
Union.
The situation in Israel and the Palestinian
territories has tragically deteriorated in recent days.
Given the responsibilities conferred upon the Security
Council by the Charter, the gravity of the situation
fully justifies the Council’s meeting today to hear the
views of the parties and to carefully review the
situation and respond to it accordingly.
Renewed hopes of returning to the path of
dialogue and peace negotiations have been dashed by
the recent terrorist attacks against Israel in Jerusalem
and in Tel Aviv, which have claimed many innocent
victims, as well as by the terrorist act last week that
deliberately targeted Palestinian schoolchildren in
Hebron. France condemned in the strongest possible
terms these heinous and unjustifiable acts. They
discredit the cause they claim to serve. I reiterate here
in the Council France’s solidarity with and condolences
to the families of the victims of these barbaric acts.
Hope was destroyed also by those who, blindly or
deliberately, were unable, or did not wish, to put to
good use the relative calm that had prevailed for almost
six weeks. By continuing its military operations during
that period — when no attacks took place against
civilians in Israel — and in so doing killing many
Palestinian civilians, the Israeli army played right into
the hands of the most extremist Palestinian factions.
Ongoing military operations aimed at the offices
of the President of the Palestinian Authority in
Ramallah are unacceptable. France demands that they
cease immediately, and it has said so to the Israeli
authorities. Meeting violence with more violence,
laying siege to the Palestinian Authority and destroying
its infrastructures can in no way contribute to the fight
against terrorism or to meeting Israel’s legitimate
security concerns. Rather, these acts further impede the
Authority’s ability to combat the terrorist scourge.
They prevent the implementation of the reforms
entered into with the unanimous support of the
international community and which are essential to
establishing a new partnership for peace. Reforms must
be encouraged, not slowed down. The current operation
against the Palestinian presidency can only delay them.
It is, of course, essential that the Palestinian
Authority use every means at its disposal to prevent
terrorists from acting and to arrest and bring to justice
the perpetrators of, and masterminds behind, terrorist
12
S/PV.4614
acts, and punish them as severely as possible. France’s
message in this regard is unambiguous.
It is equally essential that Israel realize that the
security imperative — which is entirely legitimate —
cannot serve as its only strategy. I would echo the
words of the Secretary-General, as well as the
statement made by his Special Envoy to the Council
last Friday, in saying that the approach taken, which is
based on security alone — the so-called sequential
approach — has failed. We must rekindle hope. This
will require not only an improvement in the security
situation but also a commitment to, and the
implementation of, parallel progress in other areas and
in the political area in particular.
From this perspective, the most recent meeting of
the Quartet made it possible to chart a course towards
the resumption of the peace process. France, like many
other countries, welcomed this positive development.
The general framework for a three-phase plan leading
to the settlement of the conflict has been defined. The
framework sets out the stages of the plan and the
measures that are expected of the parties as well as a
timetable for their implementation. It gives the Quartet
a key monitoring role.
In the current context of mutual defiance between
the parties, we deem essential the creation of a third-
party mechanism to assess and monitor the
implementation by each party of the measures expected
of it. The early holding of an international conference
could also make a useful contribution to defining
parameters as well as the role of each party, thereby
enhancing the chances of success of future peace
negotiations.
The course set by the Quartet must be maintained
and its various elements further defined. The members
of the Quartet are committed to doing so, and they will
continue to work towards that end in the coming
weeks. But it is the parties themselves which must
demonstrate in the field, above and beyond words and
professions of faith, their dedication to the goals set by
the international community. This will require, among
other things, implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, all of which are equally binding,
in their entirety, upon all parties.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): Let
me first make very clear the strength of the United
Kingdom condemnation of all terrorist attacks. We
deeply regret the loss of life and extend our sympathies
to the families of the recent victims, which on this
occasion included a 19-year-old British national,
Jonathan Jesner, to whom the Permanent
Representative of Israel referred just now. There can be
no valid excuse for the indiscriminate and deliberate
taking of civilian lives, of any nationality, under
whatever circumstances.
Both Palestinians and Israelis must take action to
break the cycle of violence and to help the other party
to do likewise. We should be clear that such attacks are
aimed at the search for peace itself. We should not let
rejectionists succeed in derailing what progress has
been achieved and what we want to achieve in the
future. If the logic of peace were the priority, the Israeli
Government and the Palestinian Authority would be
working together to deal with the threat to the peace
which they both claim to seek.
We are seriously concerned by the worsening
humanitarian situation. The desperation of the
Palestinian population fuels the extremists and stifles
hopes of a political process. While the Palestinian
Authority needs to take concrete steps against
terrorists, Israel should do more to ease restrictions on
Palestinians and to enable economic life to recover and
the humanitarian situation to improve. We are working
with others to help alleviate the suffering and to agree a
long-term resolution to this crisis.
The United Kingdom’s diplomacy in all its forms
is aimed at achieving an end to the violence and at
restoring the political process. But we have learnt by
now that the international community cannot impose
peace. We are all now close to disgust that the parties
continue to fail to appreciate that there can be no
military solution. Only a return to the negotiating table
will provide the peaceful solution which we are
convinced both peoples want and deserve.
Israel has a right to exist in security. It is entitled
to take steps to protect itself from terrorist attack, but
these should be neither disproportionate nor excessive.
Deployment of Israeli tanks in Ramallah and Gaza, and
further destruction of President Arafat’s compound, are
not the answer. The blockade is unjustified and should
end. Not only is it counterproductive for the search for
long-term security for Israel; it also flies in the face of
the Security Council’s sensible and widely supported
prescriptions for eventual peace, most recently
expressed in resolution 1397 (2002).
13
S/PV.4614
The Palestinians have a right to establish a
sovereign, viable and independent Palestinian State.
The Palestinian Authority must do all in its power to
prevent terrorist attacks. We welcome its condemnation
of the latest bombings and recent pleas to the
Palestinian population to renounce violence. We stand
ready to help it rebuild and reform itself so that it can
regain the confidence of the international community in
its work to clamp down on violence.
The Quartet set out on 17 September its
commitment to a concrete three-phase implementation
road map. It did this after consultation with Israel, the
Palestinian Authority and representatives of the Arab
League follow-up committee. We fully support the
Quartet in its efforts because they represent the hope of
which the Secretary-General spoke so eloquently to us
this morning. Our focus now should be on agreement to
a detailed road map and its implementation. Bad
decisions and extremist action are standing in the way.
Mr. Ryan (Ireland): Ireland is fully associated
with the statement that will be made later in the debate
by the Permanent Representative of Denmark on behalf
of the European Union.
At a time when prospects for political progress in
the Middle East appeared on the increase and when the
international community has been actively engaged in
nurturing these tentative hopes, the events of recent
days — suicide bombings that have again taken Israeli
lives, a terrorist attack on Palestinian schoolchildren
and the attack on President Arafat’s compound in
Ramallah — have come as a bitter disappointment.
The Secretary-General recalled earlier that only
last Tuesday, the Quartet, here in New York, committed
itself to the early completion of a road map that would
guide the parties to a settlement that would secure the
legitimate rights of both parties. Israel would gain full
recognition by its neighbours and guarantees of its
national security, and the Palestinian people would see
an end to occupation and the realization of their right
to sovereignty.
Such a road map would be the beginning of a
process, not its conclusion, but it offers a real hope for
progress towards the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and
towards realizing the vision enshrined in the
declaration of the Beirut Arab Summit, in statements
by world leaders, including President Bush, and in
Security Council resolution 1397 (2002).
We have seen in recent months a strong and
encouraging movement towards reform in Palestinian
political life. This movement holds great promise for
the establishment of a democratic and accountable
Government in a future Palestine. The demand for this
movement arose from within Palestinian society itself,
and it has attracted the deserved support of the
international community.
We have seen a gathering consensus in large parts
of Palestinian society and political life against
terrorism, not only as a self-defeating tactic but as
wrong in itself and as a danger to prospects for the
early achievement of a Palestinian State and a region
truly at peace.
We have seen over recent weeks a clear lull in
terrorist actions and tentative moves towards a broad
ceasefire. If such a ceasefire had been allowed to take
root, it would have done more for the security of Israel
and Israelis and for the security of Palestinians than
any number of security measures, closures, curfews,
security structures or withdrawals. Further suicide
bombings, attempted suicide bombings and the reaction
by Israeli forces against President Arafat’s
headquarters have dealt those hopes a severe blow.
The Minister of Foreign Affairs of Ireland
deplored the despicable attacks against Israeli civilians,
saying that they were clearly intended to wreck
progress towards restoring the peace process.
Mr. Cowen pointed out that those attacks had been
carried out against the express wishes of the Palestinian
Authority and despite its efforts to prevent such
attacks. They came after a period of six weeks during
which there were no Israeli civilian casualties inside
Israel, while, as we heard from Special Coordinator
Roed-Larsen last Friday, more than 50 Palestinians,
mostly innocent people — men, women and
children — died in Israeli military operations,
including extrajudicial killings.
The actions of the Israeli armed forces in
Ramallah in the past three days have also dealt hopes
for peace a severe blow. The almost complete
destruction of the centre and symbol of Palestinian
national life can only convey the message that the
Israeli Government is not interested in any renewal of
Palestinian political life that comes from within
Palestinian society but is intent on imposing its own
terms on any such renewal.
14
S/PV.4614
My Foreign Minister has called on Israel to
withdraw its forces from President Arafat’s
headquarters and to exercise the greatest restraint. He
said that terrorist attacks on innocent Israeli civilians,
for which there can be no justification, must not be
allowed to provoke a reaction that in turn causes
civilian casualties and is totally counterproductive and
damages the prospects for resolving the conflict.
Ireland considers that these actions by the Israeli
security forces are completely unacceptable. They must
end immediately.
Ms. Catherine Bertini’s recent report on the
humanitarian situation in the occupied territories and
the latest socio-economic report by the Office of the
United Nations Special Coordinator in the Occupied
Terroritories paint a truly grim picture. The Palestinian
economy has, according to Ms. Bertini, by and large
collapsed. Most of the Palestinian population is now
living at levels of severe poverty, with increasing
malnutrition and serious interruptions in children’s
education.
The international community also has a
responsibility to act to redress the situation, and Ireland
looks forward to the detailed plan that United Nations
agencies will submit to the ministerial-level meeting of
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee in December. Above
all, however, Israel itself has a clear responsibility to
address immediately, in a manner consistent with its
security, the effects of its closures and curfews. The
impact of Israeli measures has had severe
consequences for the daily lives of Palestinians. And
this is no small point. Hope abandoned is no basis for a
lasting peace. And the presence of hope is surely an
indispensable basis for building the peace that both
peoples want and deserve.
Israel also has a responsibility to halt the process
of settlement expansion and consolidation, which
undermines hope among Palestinians that Israel will
ever agree to a sovereign Palestine.
Grievance, bitterness, insecurity, victimhood,
manifest injustice: these are the great enemies of
achieving peace in the Middle East. Israel wants and
deserves the security and peace its people need.
Palestinians want and deserve a sense of hope, a sense
of belonging and a home that is fully theirs and that
will allow Palestine and its people an honourable place
in the world.
And we here in the Security Council must meet
our responsibility in helping to achieve these goals.
Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in
French): First, Mr. President, I would like to thank you
sincerely for agreeing to the Arab Group’s request for
this public meeting because of the renewed violence in
the Middle East and the extremely grave situation in
Ramallah. The delegation of Cameroon is deeply
concerned. We would like to reaffirm the need to
respect the physical integrity and the political survival
of Palestinian institutions. Two sides are needed to
build peace and to have dialogue.
Three days ago, I unambiguously condemned the
escalation of violence and the recent attacks in the
Middle East. Today, given the tragic and terrifying
increase in bloodshed, there is a serious danger that we
and our peoples will be overwhelmed by despair. It
seems that the chance for peace is yet again drifting
further and further away and that the region may yet
again be caught up in madness and confrontation.
Despite all this, however, we have to hope, for, as the
Secretary-General just said, we need hope. His words
sound even more tragic today.
Just three days ago, Cameroon was hopeful about
the peace plan offered by the Quartet, which takes the
Council’s concerns and the requirements for a lasting
settlement into account. It seemed to us then, as it
seems to us today, to be capable of restoring peace to
Palestine, the land of peace. At that time, Cameroon
drew attention to the difficulties that would inevitably
arise. More specifically, I called on the sides to adhere
fully to the peace plan prepared by the Quartet. We
insisted that neither party, on the basis of some
contingency or other, should be able to call the plan
into question.
Unfortunately, this was at a time of relative calm
that had lasted several weeks. Now, just when real hope
seemed to be emerging, further violence is jeopardizing
the new momentum. I would recall Tolstoy’s words to
the effect that no reform imposed by violence will set
the wrong to rights. Wisdom has no need of violence.
Thus, I call on the parties once again to respect
human life, to act with moderation and to exercise
restraint. We still believe in the virtues of dialogue and
negotiation. Only dialogue and negotiation can bring a
just and lasting peace to the Middle East. We call on
the Palestinians and Israelis to demonstrate more
courage and a greater sense of history by deciding
15
S/PV.4614
resolutely to return to the path of dialogue towards a
lasting peace.
Is there any need to point out that a legal
framework already exists that could ease tension and
lead to a comprehensive settlement? I refer to the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council —
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002) —
which are the bases of the Quartet’s road map. We
believe that action undertaken in respect for
international law would help to bring about a real, just
and lasting peace. It is only through a political
settlement that the legitimate aspirations of both sides
to live in peace, within secure and recognized borders,
can actually be realized. Let us therefore give the
Quartet’s peace plan a chance. It offers a methodical
and comprehensive settlement that takes account of the
political, security, economic and humanitarian aspects
to be addressed in parallel, not in sequence.
History is what men and women make it. It is up
to the men and women of Israel and Palestine to write
and to make their history together. To that end, as
Cameroon has said before and will say again, it is
essential for the men, women and young people of the
Middle East to launch the process of developing and
transforming their ways of thinking and acting so as to
stem this mindless tide of violence and to prime the
well of love.
Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
We are meeting in this Chamber once again to lament
and reject the recent escalation of violence in the
Middle East. Following a few weeks of relative calm,
the enemies of peace have once again achieved their
aim. There has been new bloodshed and renewed
terrorist acts, leading to scenes of horror. The Israel
Defence Forces are again laying siege to the
headquarters of President Arafat and imperilling not
only his life, but the very possibility of reform in the
various components of the Palestinian Authority.
Let there be no doubt that Colombia rejects
terrorist attacks in Israeli territory and the recent attack
against a school in Palestine. Israel’s excessive use of
force and the siege of Arafat’s headquarters do not
contribute to establishing the political climate
necessary to overcome the stalemate in a process that
began two years ago.
The members of the Security Council have
supported the diplomatic activities of the Quartet, of
which the United Nations is a participating member.
The Quartet’s plan, put forward about a week ago, is
comprehensive and includes various aspects that will
have to be developed in parallel with one another. As
we have said previously in this Chamber, the political,
security, economic and humanitarian aspects must be
addressed simultaneously. While the first phase of the
Quartet’s plan touches on all these aspects, we must
ensure that one will not prevail as a precondition for
the others.
The Quartet, with the participation of other
States, has also established some working groups to
assist the Palestinian Authority in making reforms in
various areas. There can be no doubt that acts of
violence and terror impede this process, as do actions
taken to undermine the Palestinian Authority, which fly
in the face of the forces for change supported by the
international community.
The elections in Palestine scheduled for early
next year will be a decisive moment. The leadership
chosen in those elections should enjoy the international
community’s support, as it will be responsible for
implementing the next phase of the plan — the
establishment of the Palestinian State.
The establishment of the Palestinian State is not
just an option, it is a necessity. It means recognizing
the right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination, as acknowledged in many United
Nations resolutions.
The last phase of the Quartet’s plan provides for
direct negotiations between the parties with a view to
reaching a definitive solution. Both the reforms and the
political process must be accompanied by measures
implemented by Israel to improve the living standards
of the Palestinian people, thereby making it possible
for economic activities to resume, facilitating the
movement of goods and peoples and lifting blockades
and curfews. Both parties must make a great effort to
avoid being overwhelmed by the violence, or, rather,
not to give way to the extremists who see violence as
the only course of action.
A few days ago we received a report from Mrs.
Catherine Bertini, the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-
General, assessing the humanitarian situation in the
territories. That report is worrying and confirms what
we all feared. The lack of mobility is having an impact
on the people, as they are unable to get to work. Their
health has deteriorated, in addition to the fact that in
some emergency situations ambulances have been
16
S/PV.4614
denied access. Education has also been affected, as
neither teachers nor children can get to the schools.
The lack of income is causing a food crisis, and
approximately 300 localities have no regular water
supply. In the words of the report, there is a serious and
growing humanitarian crisis in the West Bank and
Gaza.
The report contains a series of recommendations
that must be taken into account by both the Palestinian
Authority and Israel, including the obligation to respect
international humanitarian law and the applicability to
the occupied territories of the provisions of the Fourth
Geneva Convention.
Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Over the past few days, the efforts of the Quartet to
draw up a plan of action leading finally to peace in the
Middle East has borne fruit. A time frame was
prepared, with a three-phase plan designed to obtain a
lasting peace built on the vision of two States, Israel
and Palestine, living side by side in peace within secure
borders and with normal, productive working relations
with all their neighbours.
The Quartet’s efforts also led to the search for a
mechanism to implement, monitor and verify
agreements to be arrived at on the basis of the three-
phase plan. Agreement was reached on considering the
idea of setting up a monitoring system, to be carried
out by parties from outside the region who could
confirm that the commitments entered into by the
parties were being implemented.
Under those circumstances, the international
community began to feel that the peace effort might
bear fruit. Those expectations have been once again
thwarted, however, by the violent developments of the
past few days. The resumption of suicide attacks and
reprisals by Israel are two elements that show clearly
the endless vicious cycle. The terrorists who carried
out those acts did so with the clear intention of
undermining the peace process that could have been
under way. But it is also clear that the reprisals carried
out by Israel, whatever their objective, also represent
an obvious movement backwards and a means to thwart
hopes for peace.
Mexico condemns and repudiates the terrorist
acts that have claimed Israeli victims in the past few
days. Nothing could be more effective in preventing
the recurrence of such acts than resolute action by the
Palestinian Authority to isolate and neutralize armed
groups, such as Hamas, which resort to and glorify
terrorism. The Palestinian Authority must dissociate
itself, actively and definitively, from terrorism. It must
make a genuine and sincere effort to prevent the
continuing dissemination of hatred. We should ask
ourselves, however, how the Palestinian Authority can
do so if it is being subjected, as it clearly is, to constant
harassment and destruction.
Time and again my delegation has expressed my
country’s conviction that reprisals and efforts to
destroy the Palestinian Authority simply encourage
violence and escalate hatred. Israel should be betting
on peace and assuming all the risks of such a wager.
My country appeals to Israel to act in such a way
as to help build confidence. This would include
facilitating and supporting humanitarian assistance to
alleviate tension in the occupied Palestinian territories
so that acceptable living conditions could gradually be
established there. It is imperative that we face up to the
economic and humanitarian situation, which has been
deteriorating in an unacceptable manner because of the
actions of Israel.
Mexico once again reaffirms its support for the
efforts being made by the Quartet. We will be
considering the draft resolution that is before Council
members with a view to seeking consensus and, indeed,
demonstrating the clear will of the Council and
reiterating our desire for peace.
Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): The Council is meeting
today to discuss once again the situation in the Middle
East following the escalation of the violence in the past
few days. We have seen such violence before, but
today, if the current situation is not brought under
control, we run the risk of completely compromising
the peace process, and we even face the possibility of
wide-scale conflict.
Mauritius condemns all violence, be it in the form
of reprehensible terrorist attacks and suicide bombings
or in the form of the unchecked and disproportionate
use of military force. Mauritius condemns, in the
strongest terms, the continued siege and the systematic
destruction of Chairman Arafat’s compound in total
defiance of resolution 1402 (2002), and we demand an
immediate end to the blockade as well as the
withdrawal of the Israeli Defence Forces from
Ramallah.
17
S/PV.4614
We fully understand and support Israel’s need to
provide security to its people, and we deplore and
condemn the attacks on its civilians. What we cannot
understand is the unwarranted and unjustified siege on
the Palestinian Authority, which still represents the
only authority with which any peace agreement can be
contemplated. The surgical destruction of the buildings
around Chairman Arafat’s compound, aimed at
isolating and humiliating him, constitutes a serious act
of provocation that, in the mildest terms, not only is
most unhelpful and will not stop the cycle of violence,
but in fact will lead to more uncontrolled violence and
more terrorist attacks. Mauritius recognizes Chairman
Arafat as the elected and legitimate leader of the
Palestinian people; subjugating the latter will only
incite hatred and violence and will therefore serve only
the motives of the extremist groups.
Mauritius is convinced that Israel’s legitimate
concerns will be met only through cooperation and
dialogue, rather than by destroying the Palestinian
Authority. The continued siege on the Palestinian
headquarters will also seriously undermine and slow
the reform process, the importance of which we all
underscore. The need to build a new and efficient
Palestinian security capability on a sound basis of
unified command, transparency and accountability
should be the number-one priority. We call on Israel to
review its conduct and strategy in dealing with the
Palestinian Authority. Israel must realize that an
improvement in the security situation can come about
only if the Palestinian security institutions are not
undermined and if they are allowed to operate freely
and effectively.
A few months before the January elections, it is
all the more important that all necessary precautions be
taken to create an atmosphere conducive to the
organization of those elections, in respect of which we
call on all parties to ensure that they are free and fair
and that nothing is done that could potentially
predetermine their outcome.
As long as we do not address the root cause of the
Middle East problem, we will not be able to find a
long-term, durable solution. The problem of occupation
and the need for the Palestinians to have their own
homeland must be seriously considered. While we fully
support the vision of the two States living in peace
with secure borders, it is imperative that that vision be
given some material shape.
In that respect, we support the efforts of the
Quartet for a solution to the Middle East crisis based
on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 1397 (2002), as well as the road map outlined at its
meeting last week. We equally support the Quartet’s
vision of a three-phase plan of action for achieving a
two-State solution. But we believe that the first priority
after the elections of January 2003 should be a
declaration of statehood for the Palestinians, with
provisional borders. Such a step will be the single most
effective confidence-building measure, which, in our
view, will go a long way in curbing the violence, as the
people of Palestine will thus be given a real ray of
hope.
In order to make that happen, however, there
must be strong commitments on both sides to achieve
those goals. Israel should immediately stop the siege of
the Palestinian Authority, withdraw its forces from the
occupied areas and return to positions held prior to
September 2000. It should also stop the illegal
settlements. We call on the Palestinians, on their side,
to honour their commitment to renounce violence and
terrorist attacks.
The chilling briefing by Mr. Roed-Larsen on the
humanitarian situation in the occupied territories last
Friday highlighted the need for urgent action by the
international community. It is important that we take a
fresh look at the recommendations contained in the
Bertini report and that we harness all efforts towards
the alleviation of the sufferings of the innocent
Palestinians. The statistics showing 50 per cent of the
population living on food hand-outs, a 50-per-cent
unemployment rate, 70-per-cent poverty levels and an
acute shortage in the food supply should not go
unheeded. We call on the international community to
assist the Palestinian people by implementing without
delay the recommendations of Ms. Bertini, the Personal
Humanitarian Envoy of the Secretary-General. We also
call on Israel to lift the restrictions imposed on the
Palestinian people and to continue releasing funds —
collected as tax revenues — that are due to the
Palestinians, in order to relieve their economic
hardships.
Six weeks of calm in the Middle East has not
helped in making any significant headway in the peace
process. It proves that a sequential approach is not
going to work. Mauritius therefore supports the
strategy outlined by the Secretary-General for a
parallel approach, rather than a sequential one, to deal
18
S/PV.4614
with the Middle East situation in a comprehensive
manner. The diplomatic and political process should
continue, along with discussions on the security and
economic dimensions.
Mauritius believes that the Council must send a
clear message to both sides that violence will not help
to bring peace; it must be stopped, and negotiations
must continue. At a time when so much importance is
being given to the need for Members to respect and
comply with all Security Council resolutions, it is
essential that the centrality and the credibility of the
Council be made to be unreservedly and
indiscriminately respected by one and all.
Mr. Traoré (Guinea) (spoke in French): After a
brief period of calm that gave rise to hope for a return
to peace in the Middle East, the region, sadly, is again
plunging into a cycle of violence. For several days, we
have witnessed a resumption of suicide bomb attacks
and a disproportionate reaction by the Israeli
authorities. Those reprehensible acts, which are
contrary to the spirit of international legality,
encourage the extremists on both sides and lead to a
resurgence of the old demons of intolerance.
It is obvious that the Palestinian groups targeting
Israelis are harming the cause of self-determination and
the creation of an independent Palestinian State. In the
same manner, the prolonged siege on the headquarters
of President Arafat and the near-destruction of existing
infrastructure are part of a process of weakening the
Palestinian Authority, which, under such conditions,
cannot meet Israel’s security demands.
My delegation vigorously condemns the suicide
attacks that are killing innocent Israeli civilians, as
well as the continued siege and destruction of
Palestinian infrastructure. Such policies serve neither
the interests of the Palestinian people nor those of the
Israeli people. The only solution for putting an end to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict — and we will never
stop repeating it — is the cessation of hostilities and
the return to the negotiating table, in accordance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Such negotiations must be part of a
comprehensive framework that takes account of both
the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people and
of Israel’s right to security. They must also take into
account, simultaneously and equally, the political,
humanitarian and security aspects of the question. To
do so — above and beyond the necessary political will
of the Israeli and Palestinian leaders — the
international community in general and the Security
Council in particular must continue their efforts to
reach a rapprochement between the two parties. In that
context, let me mention the recent meeting of the
Quartet, held in New York on 17 September, which laid
down a road map that we find reasonable and that we
support. That three-phase plan, if followed consistently
and implemented with conviction, will be one of the
surest ways of restoring confidence and leading the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples towards a way of
extricating themselves from the crisis, in a way that is
honourable, just and lasting.
My delegation does not doubt for a single minute
that with the joint efforts of the international
community, whose praiseworthy initiatives and
commitment are not lacking, we will together attain our
objective and contribute to the strengthening of
international peace and security.
Mr. Wehbe (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset, Mr. President, to thank you for convening
this meeting of the Security Council, although it was
somewhat delayed, since we had requested it on Friday.
We do not understand the delay, in view of the fact that
the situation in the region is boiling.
All of us have stated our views about the grave
danger in the region, noting especially that recent days
have witnessed catastrophic developments on the
Palestinian scene, developments without precedent
since the war crimes of the Second World War. Many
of us thought that, especially with the advent of the
new millennium, we had seen the last of the deliberate
destruction of buildings with their residents —
including children, women and old people — still
inside and the wide-scale destruction of infrastructure.
But that is the reality in the occupied Palestinian
territories, where the Israeli occupying forces commit
the most heinous and atrocious crimes against
Palestinian civilians, without being deterred by any
party, and without even the minimum of respect for
international law and international humanitarian
values. In addition, they have no respect for standards
on which the peoples of the world have agreed, as
embodied in conventions that have become symbols of
human values and civilization.
Israel is armed to the teeth with all kinds of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, which
constitute an arsenal of weapons of mass destruction
19
S/PV.4614
and murder; in full view, its bulldozers demolish the
homes of the children and the dispossessed among the
Palestinian people. Israel is pursuing its daily hobby:
killing and destruction. This represents the worst kind
of defiance and contempt for international legality and
ethical norms and values.
We have heard that the Security Council has
adopted 28 resolutions on this matter. Israel has paid
no heed to those resolutions. Can there be any greater
defiance of international legality? If another State had
failed to comply with only one resolution, the world
would have been up in arms.
Syria has warned over and over again that what is
currently taking place in the occupied Arab territories
is part of a strategy pursued by the Israeli Government,
which has made its defiance of international law and of
Council resolutions a regular policy. We have stated
before, and we state again here that the Israeli
Government has no peace strategy. Its strategy does not
require in-depth analysis: it is built on waging wars,
perpetuating occupation and suppressing the
aspirations of our people in the occupied territories to
realize their hope for freedom, dignity and an end to
the occupation.
A case in point with regard to the anti-peace
Israeli policy is the statement made by the Israeli Prime
Minister a few days ago. He said that Arabs have no
right to the territories occupied in 1967. He added that
Israel has sovereignty over those territories. Do we
really need further proof that the Israeli Government
does not want peace, that it insists on occupation and
that it resorts to military force, which is nothing but a
bankrupt policy, as His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan
said this morning?
Today the Palestinian people is facing the worst
kind of unjust occupation, siege and systematic
assassinations, without seeing any serious initiative to
put an end to the atrocious modern-day massacre that
Israel is committing before the eyes and ears of the
world. More than 70 days have gone since the
beginning of the monstrous siege of Nablus, without
the international community doing anything to save
those hundreds of thousands of women, children and
other innocent civilians. This applies also to other
cities in the territories.
We are talking about the destruction of
Palestinian institutions. Israel has killed over 80
Palestinians in a month and a half. It was not asked to
put an end to its machine of death and vengeance. No
one made a move, even though the world knows that
the Israeli pretext of fighting Palestinian violence no
longer holds. Does this silence indicate a new
international law in progress? One based on condoning
war crimes and violations of human rights to satisfy
Israel and accommodate the whims of its leaders in
shedding more Palestinian blood? Is this a new
international law that has replaced existing
international law, international humanitarian law and
the Geneva Conventions?
The Arabs and the international community
agreed on the conditions for the establishment of a just
and comprehensive peace in the region on the basis of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), as well as on the principle of land for peace. At
the recent Beirut Summit, the Arab leaders adopted a
comprehensive peace initiative based on international
law and relevant Security Council resolutions.
Nonetheless, Israel insists on occupation and daily acts
of aggression against the Arabs. Against this
background, the Arabs are more determined than ever
to uphold their inalienable rights and continue to
believe in international legitimacy as the road leading
to a just and comprehensive peace.
Before Council members is a draft resolution that
the Arab Group has endorsed unanimously. It expresses
grave concern over the tragic and violent events
engulfing the Palestinian territories since the year
2000, including the re-occupation of the Palestinian
Authority’s headquarters. The draft resolution reiterates
the need to respect international humanitarian law,
including the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of 1949.
The draft resolution demands that Israel withdraw its
forces from the Palestinian cities. Syria supports this
draft resolution and believes that it is the lowest
common denominator on which Council members can
agree. Would our Council then open a window of hope
to the Palestinian people who have been living under
an unjust siege and unacceptable practices?
This is what we urge the Council to do. We hope
that we will be able to open this window of
opportunity, and we urge the Council members to
support the minimum requirements included in this
draft resolution.
Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
In recent days, violent clashes once again have
20
S/PV.4614
exploded between Israel and Palestine. We condemn
the fact that the Israeli army once again besieged
Ramallah and has destroyed Chairman Arafat’s
headquarters, thus directly endangering his safety and
security.
We demand that the Israeli side put an immediate
end to this siege of Chairman Arafat and ensure his
dignity, as well as his safety and security. We also
condemn the incidence of suicide bombings within
Israel. We call on both Israel and Palestine to exercise
restraint, stop responding to violence with more
violence and collaborate with the mediation efforts of
the international community.
During the recent vicious cycle of violence, both
Israel and Palestine suffered terrible losses, especially
Palestine, where the humanitarian situation has become
extremely serious. The Israeli authorities put blind
faith in force. However, their excessive, violent
retaliation has not obtained peace and security for
Israel. The Israeli-Palestinian conflict also
demonstrates that to put an end to violence and to
promote the peace process in the Middle East, the
active participation of international community is
indispensable.
Not long ago the Arab League Summit adopted
and endorsed a peace proposal for the Middle East put
forward by Saudi Arabia. Recently the Quartet put
forward a three-phase, three-stage plan. The reform and
election in Palestine have also been put on the agenda.
All of these developments are positive, but we also see
that the vicious cycle of violence between Israel and
Palestine has not been broken.
Without an end to violence, the reform in
Palestine cannot continue, and all the road maps and
programmes for the settlement of the problem between
Israel and Palestine will become mere dead letters.
Therefore, the international community must exert
greater efforts, and the Security Council should
shoulder its responsibilities all the more.
The Chinese Government attaches importance to
peace and stability in the Middle East and hopes to see
an early easing of the conflict between Israel and
Palestine. In order further to participate in and promote
the peace process in the Middle East, the Chinese
Government has already designated a special envoy on
the question of the Middle East. We will strengthen
contacts and consultations with all parties concerned
and make unremitting efforts for the realization of
peace in the Middle East.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The situation around the Palestinian
territories continues to deteriorate and is threatening to
get out of control. The large-scale terrorist acts in
Israel were followed by harsh action by the Israeli
army against the residence of the head of the
Palestinian National Authority, Yasser Arafat, in
Ramallah. Now, in response to that, currently there are
mass protest demonstrations under way in the
Palestinian territories. In clashes with the Israeli troops
in Ramallah, Tulkarem and Nablus, there are dead and
wounded.
All of this happened at the very moment when a
drop in the level of violence in the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict was being noted. It happened when there were
prospects for emerging from the crisis on the basis of
the proposals agreed by the Quartet of international
mediators in New York on 17 September. Their
proposals had been supported by the Security Council.
The extremist forces are not interested in a
settlement of the conflict in the Middle East. They
want to undermine the situation again and thrust the
Palestinians and the Israelis into another spiral of
bloodshed and confrontation. It is extremely important
not to let the opponents of the peace process achieve
their goals. We would strongly urge both sides not to
yield to the emotions and provocations of the
extremists, not to allow the unfolding of this scenario
of violence.
Last weekend the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Russian Federation, Igor Ivanov, had telephone
conversations with the head of the Palestinian National
Authority, Yasser Arafat; Shimon Peres, the Deputy
Prime Minister of Israel; Amre Moussa, the Secretary-
General of the League of Arab States; the United States
Secretary of State; the Foreign Ministers of Saudi
Arabia, Egypt and Denmark; the United Nations
Secretary-General; and Mr. Javier Solana, the High
Representative of the European Union. They
exchanged views about what steps should be taken to
resolve this crisis.
Russia is convinced that it is now extremely
important to do everything possible to achieve an
immediate halt to the violence. It is important to end
the blockade and the destruction of the headquarters of
the head of the Palestinian National Authority, and to
21
S/PV.4614
give the Palestinian Authority some real possibility of
introducing order into the territory, first of all by
halting extremist attacks and arresting persons guilty of
terrorist acts.
At this critical moment, it is important to make
use of all existing mechanisms to swiftly stabilize the
situation. It is necessary to make use of the potential of
the Security Council, of international mediators and of
key Middle Eastern countries in order to halt this
escalation of the conflict and clear the way for
negotiations on the basis of what the Quartet has
agreed upon, which opens the way to a comprehensive
settlement based on the resolutions of the Security
Council. Today, those resolutions are not being
implemented.
The Security Council must respond to this
challenge to its authority. We must actively and firmly
seek to achieve an immediate halt to this absolutely
unacceptable development of the situation in the
Palestinian territories, which is a real threat to peace
and security.
Russia, as a permanent member of the Security
Council, will be guided by those principles in
considering the draft resolution that will be introduced
in the Council.
Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): When the
Secretary-General spoke to us earlier this morning, he
ended with this sentence: “Let us rebuild a centre that
can hold” (supra). I think he was referring to the
rebuilding of a centre in the Middle East, but his
remarks might apply to the Security Council as well,
which, as we know, has not often been united on the
Middle East question. We also need to rebuild a centre
within the Security Council.
One practical suggestion we have is that it might
be useful to review the many thoughtful statements the
Secretary-General has made on the Middle East
question, including the one he made today. If we use
his statements as a basis for action, then I think we can
rebuild the centre we need in this Council.
Speaking now in my national capacity, I note that,
as the fourteenth speaker, we will probably repeat or
endorse many of the points that have been made so far,
but some of them are worth repeating. We will make
five points.
The first point is that Singapore deplores in the
strongest terms all acts of violence and terror that
target civilians, and it calls for an end to extreme acts
by both sides. The Israeli forces must stop their
frequent military incursions into Palestinian cities and,
as virtually every other speaker has said, its siege of
Ramallah. At the same time, the Palestinian Authority
must undertake resolute efforts to put a stop to the
suicide bombings and other acts of terror against the
Israeli population. In this regard, we welcome the
categorical condemnation by the Palestinian Authority
of the recent spate of suicide bombings.
The second point we would like to make is that,
like several other speakers, we would like to strongly
support the efforts of the Quartet. Indeed, it is hard to
believe it was only three days ago that Mr. Terje Roed-
Larsen came here and briefed us on the significant
progress made by the Quartet.
It is also noteworthy that the latest Quartet
meeting included consultations with the Foreign
Ministers of Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia and
Syria, as representatives of the Arab League follow-up
committee, as well as representatives of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority. At the same time, the Quartet
spelled out detailed and specific time lines and targets
within the three-phase road map. It is also significant
that the Quartet has decided to set up a third-party
mechanism to monitor and assess progress in the three
phases; the assessments will be strictly based on the
parties’ compliance with specific performance
benchmarks. We look forward to receiving more details
as the Quartet develops its monitoring and assessment
mechanism.
One point we wanted to make to the Quartet was
that we hope that as the Quartet carries out its work it
will bear in mind that it must also deliver results,
because if the Quartet describes its plan of action
without delivering results, our fear is that this process
too may be damaged.
Our third point is that we hope the international
community, as well as the Quartet, will not be held
hostage by the actions of extremists on both sides who
are clearly determined to disrupt the peace process. In
this difficult moment we should not lose sight of the
larger process, which, as Mr. Roed-Larsen pointed out
to us, must be based on the parallel pursuit of the
various humanitarian, security, political tracks, as well
as on reciprocity.
The fourth point we would like to raise relates to
the humanitarian dimension, which, as several speakers
22
S/PV.4614
have said, is extremely important. Mr. Roed-Larsen
gave us statistics on how bad the humanitarian
situation is currently. We support immediate relief
efforts to alleviate the humanitarian crisis, including
implementation of the recommendations made by Ms.
Catherine Bertini, the Secretary-General’s Personal
Humanitarian Envoy. Israel’s obligations under
international law are clear: it must allow and facilitate
immediate access by humanitarian agencies to mount
emergency rescue operations in the affected areas.
My fifth and final point is that we continue to
believe that the situation demands the continued and
sustained engagement of the Security Council. Again,
as virtually every speaker has said, the best way of
addressing the situation is through implementation of
relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002),
1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002). Each of those
resolutions came about through painful negotiations.
Their words were carefully chosen, and we have them
before us. Our challenge is to implement them.
Again, as other speakers have said, long term
progress depends on the political will of both sides to
move beyond short-term security measures to the broad
vision set out in resolution 1397 (2002) where two
States, Israel and Palestine, live side by side within
secure and recognized borders.
We also believe that the Arab peace initiative
adopted at the Beirut Arab Summit offers a historic
opportunity that should not be squandered.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity.
Bulgaria supports the statement that will be
delivered by the representative of Denmark on behalf
of the European Union. I would like to make a few
additional comments. Bulgaria stands up indignantly
against this new cycle of violence in the Middle East.
We unambiguously condemn the acts of terror and
violence that have caused the death of innocent
civilians and the destruction of homes and other
property.
Bulgaria condemns terrorist acts in Israel, in
particular those that took place in Jerusalem and Tel
Aviv. At the same time, we deplore the decision taken
by the Israeli Government to isolate President Arafat.
These acts are causing a crisis in the Middle East and
leading to a new vicious circle whose hostages are both
the Israeli and Palestinian peoples. We insist that those
acts of violence, including the killing of innocent
civilians, cease immediately. Bulgaria appeals to the
Palestinian Authority to redouble its efforts to stop all
terrorist acts and suicide bombings. They are directed
against the national interests of the Palestinian people,
the establishment of the Palestinian State and peace.
The fight against terrorism and security measures must
be aimed at establishing lasting peace, rather than at
encouraging another cycle in this conflict.
What the Israeli army is doing in Ramallah and at
President Arafat’s headquarters is unacceptable. Those
acts and policies do not help put an end to terrorism. In
fact, they encourage extremists and impede reform of
the Palestinian Authority and the establishment of
lasting peace in the Middle East. Therefore, we call
upon Israel to end the siege immediately. What is
important now is to create a true atmosphere of
security in the region that could promote direct
contacts between the parties. From that standpoint, we
are encouraged by information we have received in the
past few hours reporting direct contact between Israelis
and Palestinians.
Bulgaria welcomes in particular the statement
made by Mr. Hani al-Hasan, a member of the Fatah
Central Committee, stating that Palestine is seeking
peace with Israel and that “the Palestinians seek
peaceful coexistence and partnership and are prepared
to create mutual security”.
We welcome with satisfaction the Fatah pledge to
prevent attacks against Israeli civilians and we call on
the other Palestinian groups to speak out in favour of
that initiative. At the same time, we believe that
Fatah’s appeal for a strike in Gaza to show solidarity
with the besieged does not foster a climate of
partnership to help create a climate of security. This is
the right time to emphasize the importance Bulgaria
attaches to resolving the humanitarian crisis that the
Palestinian people are experiencing. We support
unreservedly the conclusions reached by Ms. Bertini in
her report and consider it a matter of urgency that the
right balance be struck between Israel’s security
requirements, on one hand, and, on the other hand, the
need to put an end to the ongoing humanitarian crisis in
the occupied territories.
My country calls on both parties to sit down at
the negotiating table, in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1397 (2002), which envisages
23
S/PV.4614
peaceful coexistence between two States, Israel and
Palestine.
This morning, the Secretary-General, Kofi
Annan, has rightly spoken of the absence of hope in the
Middle East. The absence of hope is real on the Israeli
side, where the Israelis feel their security continuously
threatened, and on the Palestinian side, where the
Palestinians do not see an end to occupation. In that
context, the Quartet and its adopted road map, a real
peace plan, provides a real hope. Bulgaria supports
unreservedly the Quartet’s New York statement of 17
September 2002, and we insist that both parties work
together to achieve a lasting and peaceful solution
before 2005.
I conclude by reiterating my country’s appeal for
greater political judgement and greater compromise by
both sides. We reaffirm our determination to give our
full support to all those who seek peace and security in
the Middle East.
I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Egypt. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): In a
few days, the third year of the intifada of the
Palestinian people will begin. This week, the occupied
Palestinian territories witnessed an escalation in the
brutal violence being perpetrated by the Israeli
occupation forces. It witnessed the destruction and
siege of the headquarters of the Palestinian President,
Yasser Arafat. That violence, which has gone on for the
past six weeks, comes at a time when the Palestinian
people, in all their groupings and factions, have
exercised self-restraint, hoping to achieve real détente,
leading to a quieting of the situation in general, thus
opening the way to serious negotiations for the two
parties to achieve peace. Everyone has taken note of
the Palestinian self-restraint, which has continued for
six weeks — not just seven days — despite the ongoing
operations and acts of violence and oppression by the
Israeli army during that prolonged period.
The world has witnessed the ongoing killing of
Palestinian civilians. We have all heard with
amazement and anger many statements by Israeli
officials, not about peace efforts, ending confrontation
and returning to constructive dialogue, but ecstatic
repetitions of their visions of the coming full victory
over all Palestinians, breaking their will and
extinguishing the torch of Palestinian resistance.
Unfortunately, there are trends in Israel that
envisage that military action, the use of force, killing,
siege, starvation and destruction of the human and
economic infrastructures of the Palestinian society will
achieve their objective through domination and
continuation of the occupation.
However, we would like to tell them very clearly
that they will fail. We reject their policies and actions
and advise them to learn from the lessons of history
and of resistance against occupation and colonialism.
This resistance cannot be broken. Violence can only
lead to violence.
Here we would like to say clearly to the people of
Israel that they cannot overcome the will of the
Palestinians to resist occupation, regardless of Israel’s
military might or equipment or its oppressive policies.
On the contrary, Israel’s actions will only lead to more
pain and suffering for both parties. This state of affairs
will continue until Israel recognizes that goodwill,
negotiations, a return to trust and an end to the
occupation are the key to stability, peace and security.
A hand covered in Palestinian blood has raised
the Israeli flag over the headquarters of the Palestinian
leader, thereby challenging not only the will of the
Palestinian people but that of the international
community as a whole and the norms of international
law. The Palestinian people will take this flag down.
Egypt, which along with the rest of the
international community has condemned all forms of
violence against civilians on both sides, cannot but
condemn Israel’s actions against the headquarters of
President Arafat. We call on Israel to put an end to all
oppressive practices that harm the Palestinian people
and their national leadership.
Security cannot be achieved through arrogant and
indiscriminate use of force. True, stable and lasting
security can be achieved only through a peace that is
based on justice and on respect for the rights of others.
Egypt reiterates that peace between the Israeli
and the Palestinian peoples can be achieved only if
Israel refrains from acts of aggression and withdraws
from the occupied Palestinian territories to the line of 4
June 1967, and if a Palestinian State is established,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. This is the path to
24
S/PV.4614
peace, security and stability in the Middle East and the
path to relations of good-neighbourliness and
cooperation.
The international community, represented in the
Council, is called on today to shoulder its
responsibility to put an end to the tragedy that is
tearing apart the Holy Land. It must enforce
international humanitarian law and facilitate the return
of both sides to the negotiating table. This would help
to open the way towards the desired settlement.
One of the basic steps we deem important and
necessary is the provision of international protection
for the Palestinian people in a manner decided on by
the international community.
I wish to make one last, important point, which
concerns the manner in which the Council has been
dealing with the situation prevailing in the occupied
territories and the actions of the occupying Power. In
our opinion, the Council has been merely witnessing
the events of the past few days, as if this matter did not
concern it or as if these events were taking place on
another planet. The Council must intervene to remedy
the situation and to put an end to the actions of the
occupying Power. If it does not, its failure to act will
send a dangerous signal to all those who have put their
trust in international law and in the role of the United
Nations in today’s world.
The President (spoke in French): I welcome Mr.
Reaz Rahman, State Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Bangladesh. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Rahman (Bangladesh): As we speak here
this morning, President Arafat is under siege, with
Israeli tanks destroying his headquarters and
surrounding what remains of them.
It is a matter of grave concern, because the latest
Israeli military aggression threatens President Arafat,
elected leader of a nation, Nobel Laureate for peace
and embodiment of the Palestinian cause.
It is a matter of extreme anxiety, because the
policy pursued by Tel Aviv seems to be aimed at
destroying not only the physical infrastructure of the
Palestinian Authority, but also the entire edifice of
peace constructed through Oslo and Madrid.
It is outrageous that Israel continues to flout
resolutions of the Security Council with virtual
impunity. The Geneva Conventions are being wilfully
ignored. All norms and mores of international law are
being breached.
Israel forced a large percentage of Palestinians
out of their homes and confined them to refugee camps
or forced them into diaspora. For several decades, the
people of Palestine have been subject to massacres, to
deportation, to daily humiliation, to systematic
persecution.
More than a generation of Palestinians has seen
nothing but occupation, bombings, missiles, incursions,
demolitions, killings, arrests and humiliation. No other
nation on earth has suffered so much for so long.
Today, in a sinister reversal of values, the people
of Palestine are criminalized for their resistance, for
their struggle for self-determination and for claiming
their inalienable right to return to ancestral hearths. Yet
the free world was supposed to uphold the principles of
the Charter — the values of justice, democracy and
international law — that constitute the norms of our
civilization.
Suicide bombings are used as pretexts for attacks
on the Palestinian Authority. Despite President Arafat’s
public and unequivocal condemnation of such acts.
The Palestinian Authority cannot be held
responsible for these individual actions. Experience has
amply demonstrated that the security of Israeli civilians
is enhanced neither by retaliation, nor by destroying
the Palestinian institutions.
Just the other day, the Quartet issued a
communiqué. It reiterates the fundamental principles of
a comprehensive settlement. It proposes a calendar. It
asks Israel to release its stranglehold of the Palestinian
economy. Obviously, the Quartet plan can be executed
only if Israel is engaged in the peace process.
Bangladesh welcomed the initiative for an
international peace conference. We urged its early
convening. To arrest the despair and desperation there
must be a process; there must be a prospect in view. We
must deny the extremists a reason. We must not allow a
void. As we have insisted on earlier occasions, the
Security Council should revisit the Secretary-General’s
proposal for an international force, in favour of which
there have been indisputable arguments.
25
S/PV.4614
The response must be sought in the root-causes;
not by trying to make la lois des plus forts prevail. The
practice of that law has resulted in wars among nations,
bloodshed and denial of all civilized norms. The
Security Council should act to prevent imposition of
that law.
Resolving the conflict will require courage —
courage to recognize the truth and courage to defend it,
courage to confront the demand of justice and courage
to uphold the principles of this Organization. The path
to justice, and to peace, was laid down in Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1978). A
meaningful beginning could be the implementation of
the Security Council’s own resolutions, namely, 1397
(2002) and 1402 (2002).
The Bangladesh Prime Minister Begum Khaleda
Zia has strongly condemned the Israeli attack on the
Palestinian Headquarters in Ramallah and has
expressed grave concern for the security and safety of
President Arafat. She has also said that Israel would be
solely responsible should any harm befall the
Palestinian leaders.
The Security Council needs to secure Israeli
compliance with its resolutions, to have its forces
withdraw from Palestinian territories and to end its
aggression against the people of Palestine. The
Security Council must act. It must act to meet its
Charter responsibility. It must act to save the people of
Palestine from a perpetual war waged against a people.
It must act to preserve its credibility and moral
authority.
The President (spoke in French): I intend to give
the floor to one more speaker before suspending the
meeting. The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of South Africa. I invite her to take a
seat at the Council table and to make her statement.
Ms. Ndhlovu (South Africa): During the fifty-
seventh session of the General Assembly, speaker after
speaker has stressed the need for full and unconditional
compliance with Security Council resolutions. The
Foreign Ministers of the 115 member States of the
Non-Aligned Movement also called on all States to
abide by Security Council resolutions. They pointed
out that if the Security Council’s resolutions are not
enforced, the very legitimacy and credibility of the
United Nations is threatened. Furthermore, they called
for conflict situations to be addressed multilaterally,
through the United Nations.
We are meeting here today in response to the
Israeli military onslaught on the headquarters of the
Palestinian Authority in Ramallah. This is the same
Israeli military force that the Security Council ordered
to withdraw six months ago. Israel has yet to comply
with Security Council resolutions that call for the
withdrawal of its forces from Palestinian towns and
cities.
The life of President Arafat, the elected leader of
the Palestinian people, is under threat. Once again,
President Arafat’s condemnation of the attacks against
Israel, which he regards as both morally unacceptable
and counter-productive to the Palestinian cause, has
fallen on deaf Israeli government ears. It seems that
there is a blind impulse towards violence and
vengeance that prevails over the logic of dialogue and
peace. More innocent civilians continue to die. We
unreservedly condemn the killing of civilians, whether
they are Israelis or Palestinians.
The sense of despair, frustration and hopelessness
in the Middle East is brought about by the occupation
and by the fact that no land has been returned in
exchange for peace as required by Security Council
resolutions. For too long, Israel has ignored the
decisions of both the Security Council and the General
Assembly. Israel continues to illegally occupy
Palestinian lands, settlements continue to expand at an
alarming rate and extrajudicial executions, arbitrary
arrests and the destruction of private Palestinian
homes, farms and institutions continue unabated. Israel
routinely violates even the most basic provisions of
international humanitarian law and the Fourth Geneva
Convention and has yet to withdraw its forces as
required by Security Council resolutions 1402 (2002)
and 1403 (2002) and General Assembly resolution
ES-10/11. Israel also continues to illegally occupy
Syrian and Lebanese territory and to violate the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon.
The draft resolution being circulated seeks to
address the fundamental requirements for the
resumption of a meaningful political process that
would lead to a comprehensive solution of the Middle
East crisis. It is in line with the Arab peace plan and
the recommendations of the Quartet. For any lasting
peace in the Middle East to take hold, the Israeli
military must withdraw immediately to the positions
held prior to September 2000 and all acts of violence,
including military acts; destruction and terror must
cease immediately.
26
S/PV.4614
We call on the Security Council to immediately
adopt this resolution. As the Non-Aligned Movement
Ministers made clear, the Security Council must ensure
the implementation of all its resolutions. Otherwise, its
credibility will be undermined.
The President (spoke in French): The brevity of
the statement by the representative of South Africa
allows me to give the floor to two further
representatives. The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of Jordan, whom I invite to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): First,
I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and wish you every success in your
presidency. I must also extend my thanks to your
predecessor, Mr. John Negroponte, the Ambassador of
the United States, for his efforts during his presidency
of the Council last month.
It is regrettable that we are meeting to discuss
once again the Israeli practices against the Palestinian
Authority and people, which have been continuing
since our last meeting in July 2002. Israel is still
attempting to subjugate the Palestinian Authority and
has been practising all forms of violence against the
Palestinian people, arbitrary sieges, closures and
curfews, ever since it reoccupied the Palestinian
territories in September 2000.
We support and welcome the progress that has
been achieved during the past few weeks, particularly
the Gaza-Bethlehem agreement, and we viewed with
great hope the calm that prevailed while international
efforts were made to bring the peace process back to its
right track. We call on all parties to commit themselves
to the results of the last meeting of the Quartet, held in
New York a few days ago, which resulted in a plan of
action and a timetable to realize the American vision of
establishing two States living side by side in peace
with an independent Palestinian State established
within the borders of 4 June 1967, and to put an end to
the Israeli occupation of all Palestinian and Arab
territories. At the same time, we strongly condemn all
acts by Israel to undermine the political process and to
escalate the situation, particularly the recent military
acts against the headquarters of the Palestinian
Authority and president Yasser Arafat. I would also
like to reiterate my country’s position of condemning
all forms of suicide attacks against Israeli civilians,
which are used as a pretext by certain groups to hinder
international efforts to revive the peace process. We
believe that those acts are perpetrated not only against
Israeli civilians but against all the peoples of the region
who wish to live in security and who want a
comprehensive and just peace.
We would also like to reiterate that Israel’s
practices and its siege of the Palestinian Authority have
weakened the Palestinian side’s ability to shoulder its
responsibilities. We therefore call upon all the parties
concerned to enable the Palestinian Authority to
rebuild its security institutions in order to carry out its
duties.
We call on all parties concerned to bring calm to
the situation, to exercise self-restraint and to shoulder
their responsibilities to support the efforts made by the
Quartet and the brotherly Arab countries to bring the
peace process back to its right track, based on the
Madrid terms of reference, Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002)
and the Arab peace initiative.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Turkey, whom I invite to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Pamir (Turkey): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
Security Council in a fairly critical period and, as the
representative of our neighbour and close friend,
Bulgaria, we wish you every success in your efforts.
Our warm thanks also go to Ambassador Negroponte,
the representative of the United States, which held the
presidency of the Council during the month of August.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the representative of Denmark on
behalf of the European Union. Likewise, we fully
subscribe to the eloquent speech delivered this morning
by Mr. Kofi Annan. The wisdom of his words should
inspire us all.
We are gathered here today after a six-week
period of relative calm in Israel, which was
undermined by the two brutal suicide attacks of last
week on Israelis in Umm el-Fahm and Tel Aviv and by
the bomb planted at a Palestinian school in Hebron. We
extend our deepest condolences to the bereaved
families of the victims. We are dismayed to see that the
tension in the Middle East grows and the situation in
27
S/PV.4614
the Palestinian territories deteriorates as the siege in
and around the compound of the President of the
Palestinian Authority, Yasser Arafat, continues. All
these remind us of the desperate days of the vicious
cycle of violence.
Turkey strongly and unequivocally condemns all
acts of terror and violence. We reiterate our firm stance
that there is no justification for any such actions under
any pretext. Terror and violence lead nations to
darkness and misery and only help kill the hopes of
their future generations. Fighting terrorism is not only
a sovereign right of States but also a moral obligation
incumbent upon each and every member of the
international community. In this respect, we welcome
the call of President Arafat to the Palestinian people
and to all other parties to halt any violent attacks inside
Israel.
Turkey deeply regrets the morally repugnant
suicide attacks targeting civilians and deplores that
Israel has once again used harsh military measures in
the Palestinian cities, in particular in Ramallah. We are
gravely concerned at the Israeli actions in and around
the Muqata’a, the headquarters of President Arafat,
who is the elected leader of the Palestinian people.
Here, we call upon the Israeli Government to put an
immediate end to reoccupation. We urge the Israeli
Government to stop destruction in the Palestinian
cities, which serves only to aggravate the dire and
strained humanitarian conditions of the civilian
Palestinian population. Indeed, a more forthcoming
attitude from Israel towards its Palestinian counterparts
would brighten political prospects.
In this vein, we call upon the leadership of Israel
to think over the possible consequences that isolating
Mr. Arafat might have on the ongoing Palestinian
reforms in particular, and the fragile peace process, in
general.
The rise in tensions amid the siege, suicide
bombings and street protests have further damaged
hopes of ending two years of violence, which has taken
a heavy toll on innocent lives, most of them
Palestinians. We wish to hope that the opponents of
durable peace in the Middle East will not be given
another opportunity to undermine the intensified efforts
of the international community towards achieving a
final settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict based
on the common vision of two States, Israel and an
independent, viable and democratic Palestine, living
side by side in peace and security.
Turkey supports all efforts, including those of the
Quartet, towards this end and as a regional facilitator is
ready to provide its assistance in whatever way may be
necessary. Finally, we wish to encourage all parties to
assume their responsibilities to seek a just and
comprehensive settlement of the conflict based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 1397 (2002), along with the Madrid terms of
reference, the principle of land for peace and the
implementation of all existing agreements between the
parties.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Turkey for his kind words addressed
to me.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m.

United Nations S/PV.4614 (Resumption 1)
Security Council
Fifty-seventh year
4614th meeting
Monday, 23 September 2002, 4.35 p.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.
02-60144 (E)
*0260144*
President: Mr. Tafrov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bulgaria)
Members: Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Belinga-Eboutou
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wang Yingfan
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Valdivieso
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Levitte
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Traoré
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ryan
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Koonjul
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Aguilar Zinser
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Kolby
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mahbubani
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wehbe
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . Sir. Jeremy Greenstock
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Negroponte
Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
Letter dated 20 September 2002 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2002/1055)
Note verbale dated 20 September 2002 from the Permanent Representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2002/1056)
2
S/PV.4614 (Resumption 1)
The meeting resumed at 4.35 p.m.
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Cyprus, Indonesia, Iraq, Mauritania,
Morocco and Nepal, in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zackheos
(Cyprus), Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia), Mr. Aldouri
(Iraq), Mr. Ould Deddach (Mauritania),
Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) and Mr. Sharma
(Nepal) took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
23 September 2002 from the Permanent Representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations,
which will be issued as document S/2002/1060 and
which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that His
Excellency Mr. Yahya Mahmassani, Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States to the
United Nations, be allowed to participate, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the
United Nations Charter and rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council, in the discussion of the item presently
on its agenda.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite the
Permanent Observer of the League of the Arab States
to the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the rules of procedure and the
previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite the Permanent Observer of the League of
Arab States to the United Nations to take the seat
reserved for him at the side of the Council Chamber.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 23 September 2002 from the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, which
reads as follows:
“In my capacity as Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, I have the
honour to request that I be invited to participate
in the debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, under rule 39
of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council.”
On previous occasions, the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In accordance with past practice
regarding this matter, I propose that the Council extend
an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, Mr. Papa Louis Fall, to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 23 September 2002 from the
Chairman of the African Group to the United Nations,
which reads as follows:
“In my capacity as Chairman of the African
Group for the month of September, I have the
honour to request authorization for Ambassador
Amadou Kébé, Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations, to intervene
in the debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, at the Security
Council.”
That letter will be published as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2002/1059.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
Mr. Amadou Kébé.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Kébé to take the seat reserved for him
at the side of the Council Chamber.
3
S/PV.4614 (Resumption 1)
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Bahrain. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): We
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. We are
convinced that you will conduct the business of the
Council in a wise manner. We also thank you for
having convened this urgent meeting at the request of
the Arab Group in order to discuss the deteriorating
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories.
We have learned from the news that, as a result of
the siege declared against certain Palestinian villages
and towns and because of the curfew that has been
imposed, Palestinian students are using underground
corridors and storehouses for classrooms. Imagine what
kind of lessons they receive under these conditions. We
know that a healthy teaching environment means that
there will be properly ventilated classrooms, with good
natural or artificial light and proper teaching material.
This means that even if the lessons are excellent, and
however devoted the teacher is, the benefits derived
from the lesson will be deficient if the setting is
inappropriate.
If this siege goes on, Palestinian youth will
develop hatred towards the perpetrators of a siege that
they have known since their birth. This hatred could
turn into violence, or could be the cause of violence.
Furthermore, the Palestinians are witnessing something
worse than the first situation. This is the treatment of
their President, the symbol of their resistance to the
Israeli occupation, around whom the noose is
tightening every day, while his offices, where he
resides, are being razed by bulldozers. One wing after
another is being attacked, as water, electricity and all
means of communication are cut off one by one.
Thus, these are two negative aspects of the
problem, one pertaining to teaching, the other to
politics and security. The two seriously threaten the
collapse of the Palestinian Authority’s control over its
territories in the West Bank and Gaza. Given this
situation, talks for a peaceful settlement become an
absolute necessity, even if this settlement proves
difficult at first. However, we need first to lift the state
of siege, to be followed by the withdrawal of the Israeli
security forces so that real peace negotiations get under
way.
It seems that the current Israeli Government
wants no peace. One thing proves this lack of
motivation. The Israeli army was supposed to withdraw
from Gaza at first, as was announced. However, the
plan was not applied, despite the fact that violence had
stopped for six weeks.
Numerous experiments have proved that peace
comes only through negotiations. It cannot be imposed
by force; otherwise it would be an unjust peace.
Unfortunately, peace will be possible only if preceded
by necessary preliminary steps, such as lifting the
siege, withdrawing of the Israeli forces and ending the
Israeli occupation. All of this seems out of our grasp
right now because of Israeli intransigence.
Israel did not implement any of the resolutions
adopted by the United Nations. This in defiance of the
will of the international community, whose inability to
act has led to Israeli imperialism over the Palestinian
people. Israel believes that the use of its military force
is part of a war against what is called terrorism, thus
exploiting the world’s struggle against this
phenomenon since the events of 11 September 2001.
However, there is a difference between resisting
occupation and resisting terrorism.
The Arab countries together want to bring about a
just and comprehensive peace in the region, based on
international law. This is a strategic option. This policy
was made clear in the Arab peace initiative adopted in
the Beirut Summit in March of this year. The initiative
received broad-based international support. It consists
of having Israel withdraw from the occupied Arab
territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem,
and giving the Palestinian refugees the right to return
to their homeland in return for the recognition by the
Arab countries of the State of Israel living in peace,
side by side with an independent Palestinian State,
within internationally recognized borders. However,
thus far this initiative has not met a favourable
response from Israel. Indeed, the events that the
Palestinians are witnessing on the ground do not show
any desire for peace on the part of Israel.
In conclusion, once again, we appeal to the
Security Council, the guarantor of peace and security,
to carry out the tasks entrusted to it, in order to ensure
the implementation of its resolutions, at the forefront of
which we find 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397
(2002). Furthermore, we urge the Council members to
4
S/PV.4614 (Resumption 1)
vote in favour of the Arab draft resolution which is
now before them.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Bahrain for his kind words addressed
to me.
I now give the floor to Yahya Mahmassani, the
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States to
the United Nations.
Mr. Mahmassani (spoke in Arabic): I should like
at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your assuming
the presidency of the Council for this month. I am
confident that you will conduct its proceedings with
efficiency and wisdom. I take this opportunity to
congratulate Ambassador John Negroponte for ably
steering the deliberations of the Council last month.
The Council meets today to deliberate on the
development of the situation in Ramallah, in the
aftermath of the Israeli aggression against President
Yasser Arafat at his presidential compound, following a
suicide operation inside Israel. The Israeli Government
announces daily, whether through its Prime Minister or
its public officials, that President Arafat is irrelevant
and that the Palestinian Authority is without authority.
If that is the case for Israel, why are the Israeli
forces laying siege to Arafat and punishing him by
demolishing his presidential compound? The fact of the
matter is that the policy of the Israeli Prime Minister
has become irrelevant, and that its logic of force and
violence over the logic of negotiations has failed. This
policy brings killing and destruction to the Palestinian
people without realizing peace and security for the
Israeli people. The Israeli opinion polls prove this fact.
General Amram Mitzna, the mayor of Haifa, expressed
this in a statement he made a couple of days ago:
(spoke in English)
“Mr. Sharon is leading Israel to disaster with a
policy of force, more force and yet more force”.
(spoke in Arabic)
After 50 years of war and violence, when will the
Government of Israel be convinced that the policy of
force and war will not settle the Middle East crisis and
that negotiations and the implementation of the
resolutions of international legitimacy are the only way
for Israel, the State of Palestine and all the other
countries of the region to live in peace, security and
stability? Israel’s violations of international
humanitarian law and the Geneva Conventions have
become commonplace, with the killing of women and
children, the demolition of homes, expulsions and
collective punishment continuing unabatedly as if they
were of no concern to anyone. It may be necessary to
cite some facts and figures to clarify the dimensions of
the heinous Israeli occupation. The following figures
might be relevant.
The number of Palestinian martyrs killed by
occupation-force bullets between 28 September 2000
and 23 July 2002 was 1,705, in addition to the tens of
thousands of people who have been wounded and
disabled. The number of detainees held during the
same period was 6,000, 1,700 of whom are under
administrative detention, meaning that they have not
been indicted. And the number of detained children,
according to the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) is about 600. Scores of houses have been
demolished. The total area bulldozed by the occupation
authority in Gaza is equivalent to 10 per cent of all
agricultural land.
Many new settlements have been established,
including 40 since Sharon came to power. Council
members recently heard a briefing by Mr. Terje Roed-
Larsen, United Nations Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, about the humiliating
situation in the occupied Arab territories.
The crux of the Arab-Israeli conflict is Israel’s
occupation of Arab territories and its refusal to
withdraw to the 4 June 1967 line in accordance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
242 (1967) and 338 (1973), and the terms of reference
of the Madrid Conference. As long as the occupation
continues, strife will continue, and so will resistance to
occupation.
Here, we should be committed to preserving
United Nations resolutions and the rules of
international law, which make clear the legitimacy of
resisting occupation within national borders. The Arab
States have opted for peace as a strategic choice, and
thus presented the Arab peace initiative at the Beirut
Summit. Security Council members and all other States
welcomed the Arab initiative, while Israel rejected it
and chose the strategy of war.
We have questions for the Security Council. Why
are there double standards? Why is Israel allowed to
remain above international law and above the United
Nations Charter? Why are Security Council resolutions
5
S/PV.4614 (Resumption 1)
on Israel not enforced as they are for other countries?
Israel has violated 28 of the Council’s resolutions. Why
does the Council not shoulder its responsibilities? And
why does it not put an end to Israel’s violations and its
defiance of international law? Those questions beg for
answers.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States for
the kind words he addressed to the presidency.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): I am
pleased, Sir, to see you presiding over the Council this
month and would like to thank you for having
convened this public meeting on the grave situation in
the Palestinian territories.
While the broad repression of the Palestinians in
the occupied territories has continued unabated, the
recent onslaught by the Israelis against President
Arafat’s compound in Ramallah is deliberately
designed to further deteriorate the situation. Flattening
all the buildings in the compound with the sole
exception of a wing of an office building, digging a
deep trench, running coils of barbed wire and placing
explosives, tanks and bulldozers around the main
building attest to the expansionist designs of the
Israelis.
The shooting and killing of several Palestinian
demonstrators, the closure of the East Jerusalem offices
of the president of Al-Quds University by the Israeli
police, the tightening of curfews on several Palestinian
towns and the raids carried out in Tulkarem and in
several parts of the Gaza Strip are among other recent
repressive measures that followed the raid on the
compound.
By launching a new round of violence and by
making an issue of the Palestinians in the compound,
Mr. Sharon seeks to sabotage any effort to develop a
road map for establishing a Palestinian State. In the
past several weeks of relative calm in the occupied
territories, the Israelis never stopped their campaign.
They kept up their attacks, including the bombing of a
Palestinian school. Tight closures and curfew
regulations continued unabated. Settlement building
activities went on ceaselessly. In other words, the
Israelis were deliberately seeking to provoke a
response, thereby to find yet another excuse to derail
any effort that might one day lead to the restoration of
Palestinian national rights.
Throughout the ongoing conflict, Mr. Sharon has
demonstrated that he continues to have his
longstanding agenda; he spares no effort and misses no
opportunity to push ahead with it. That agenda seeks to
squash the Palestinians and to conquer them
completely. The basic strategy upon which the agenda
is predicated is to make the Palestinians capitulate fully
and to have them renounce their basic legitimate
national rights. The ongoing siege of President Arafat’s
compound and what preceded it in the past several
weeks confirm once again the view that he does not
believe in a negotiated settlement. Nor did his
predecessors really believe in the peace process, for
they ceaselessly expanded settlement activity on the
very lands from which they ostensibly negotiated the
withdrawal.
In the midst of tragic events taking place in the
course of this ongoing conflict, the international
community must contemplate the reasons that prompt
Palestinian teenagers and youngsters, who normally
should see a bright future ahead, to sacrifice their lives.
It should be borne in mind that the exceptional nature
of the response demonstrates the exceptionally ruthless
nature of the crimes committed against the Palestinian
people over a very long period of time — crimes that
by any measure are unprecedented even in comparison
with similar instances in the colonial era.
Israel continues to flout all provisions of
international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention, particularly those banning indiscriminate
and disproportionate use of force and the humiliating
treatment of civilian populations. It is also adamant in
showing contempt for the recent resolutions of the
Council, which stipulate its withdrawal from the re-
occupied lands. We believe that the Security Council
should not stand idly by and let its authority erode.
It is time for the Council to act more resolutely
and demand full compliance with its resolutions. It is
very unfortunate that those who sometimes stretch
Council resolutions to advance their interests have no
qualms about seeing the flouting of the letter and the
spirit of clear-cut resolutions on the Palestinian
question.
6
S/PV.4614 (Resumption 1)
There is no doubt that selective enforcement of
Security Council resolutions has an adverse impact on
the authority of the Council and thereby undermines
the overall international security system. It is also time
for the Council to seriously consider the establishment
of an international force to provide basic protection for
defenceless Palestinian civilians.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran for the
kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Cuba. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): We are gratified, Sir, to see you presiding
over the Security Council, and we wish you the
greatest success.
For the third time in less than six months Israeli
tanks and bulldozers have once again broken into the
facilities of the Palestinian National Authority in
Ramallah. This time, they have virtually destroyed
everything, toppling buildings, cutting off water and
electricity and keeping President Arafat and a group of
his men under siege and in danger of losing their lives.
It is no secret to anyone that the Government of
Israel’s open defiance of Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions the rules of international law is
in good measure the result of the Security Council’s
passivity and failure to act. It is the result of the
arbitrary use of the powers and prerogatives of a
permanent member which, with its vetoes and threats
of a veto has prevented the Security Council from
fulfilling its mandate.
The world super-Power is determined to unleash
a war against Iraq, whether by imposing it on the
Security Council or acting unilaterally, as was
reiterated by President Bush in Trenton, New Jersey, a
few hours ago; it is preparing a dossier of that
country’s violations of Security Council resolutions,
with which it seeks to attempt to justify its plans for
military action.
Why does the United States not prepare a dossier
of Israel’s many flagrant violations of Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions? Why does it act so
different in one case than in the other? It would seem
essential for the Security Council, in the days to come,
to convene a debate like this one on the question of
Iraq and to cease its usual secret gatherings on a topic
that is on the front pages of every newspaper.
If the United States is truly worried about the
supposed presence of weapons of mass destruction in
the Middle East, why does it not demand of Israel that
it immediately destroy those it possesses? Now they
are attempting to explain that the credibility of the
United Nations is at stake if the Organization does not
support the new doctrine of preventive war. But by
what moral right does a country speak of credibility
when that country, using the anachronistic,
undemocratic privilege of the veto has, for many
years — 25 times — prevented this body from
fulfilling its mandate on the question of Palestine?
When they do not veto, they only permit the adoption
of timid resolutions that say little and are implemented
even less.
In Conference Room 4 of this building, the
International Conference of Civil Society in Support of
the Palestinian People is taking place, bringing
together 159 non-governmental organizations and 26
experts from all the world, including Israel. They have
not shown special interest in what is happening here.
They know that nothing will be done and that the
Security Council will not listen to them. There, the
Security Council simply lacks credibility.
In the meantime, the Palestinian people continue
to be completely unprotected. This organ has not even
been able to seriously consider the Secretary-General’s
proposal to establish a multinational force in the
occupied territories. We reiterate that the United States
must immediately suspend its financial support for
military purposes and its military supplies for Israel,
including tanks, helicopters, missiles and aircraft that
are being used against civilians.
State terrorism unleashed by Israel must come to
an end. The flagrant, systematic and massive violation
of the human rights, including the right to life, of the
Palestinian people, must be halted. The repression,
torture and demolition of homes must come to and end.
The illegal occupation of Palestinian territory must
end.
Innocent Israeli civilians are also unfortunate
victims of the spiral of violence and terror unleashed
by the policies of their Government. We demand that
the Government of Israel withdraw its troops
immediately from the facilities of the Palestinian
Authority in Ramallah and that it immediately cease
7
S/PV.4614 (Resumption 1)
the encirclement of President Arafat and his men. We
demand also a halt to the repression of the Palestinian
population, which has come out in the streets in several
cities to protest these new actions of the Israeli
Government.
Cuba will not waiver in denouncing the crimes
committed against the Arab peoples, in particular the
Palestinian people.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Cuba for the kind words he addressed
to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Malaysia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): Allow me, Sir, to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month and to commend your
predecessor, Ambassador Negroponte of the United
States, for his stewardship of the Council last month.
My delegation wishes to thank you and Council
members for convening this urgent meeting of the
Council to consider the grave situation in Palestine. We
thank Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen, United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process for his
extremely useful briefing on the situation, given in this
Chamber last Friday.
We are equally grateful to the Secretary-General
for his important statement to the Council this
morning. We hope that his thoughtful words will not
have fallen on deaf ears.
We are dismayed that after some six weeks of
relative calm, violence has erupted again, resulting in
the taking of innocent lives. Malaysia condemns these
acts of violence and deeply regrets the loss of innocent
lives on both sides of the conflict. Such actions serve
no purpose other than inflaming an already volatile
situation. In the current situation in Palestine and the
precarious and potentially explosive situation in the
Middle East, amidst the rumbling of a possible war in
the region, every effort should be made by all the
parties concerned towards de-escalating tension and
restarting dialogue and negotiation.
My delegation strongly condemns the brutal
military assault and siege on the headquarters of
President Yasser Arafat in Ramallah. Those actions are
completely uncalled for. They have placed President
Arafat in serious danger and have further undermined
his reform efforts. It is disingenuous on the part of
Israel to blame President Arafat for the suicide
bombings and activities of Palestinian militancy when
for many months now the Israel Defence Forces have
held sway in the occupied territories, with President
Arafat a virtual prisoner and with his every act and
movement closely monitored. It is also unfair to make
Mr. Arafat accountable for every suicide bombing that
occurs, as if he controlled the bombers’ every action
and intention.
While it is convenient for those who dislike Mr.
Arafat to blame him, it is obvious that he cannot be an
effective leader when his ability to exercise power and
authority is being systematically undermined, eroded
and shackled by Israeli operations and restrictions.
President Arafat himself has repeatedly condemned
attacks against Israeli civilians and has declared such
attacks as harmful to the Palestinian cause. Clearly,
those actions against President Arafat are intended to
harass and intimidate him into submission and to
destroy the symbol and hope of the Palestinian people
that he represents to his people and the entire
international community. Israel cannot hope to break
the indomitable spirit of the Palestinian people and
their leadership, as represented by President Arafat,
their democratically elected leader. If Israel sincerely
seeks peace with the Palestinians, it must abandon
those tactics of terror in favour of constructive
dialogue and engagement with them. Israel’s tactics
make a mockery of Mr. Sharon’s claim to be a “man of
peace”.
Violence does not happen in a vacuum. It must be
seen and understood in its proper context. In the
context of Palestine, it is the continued occupation of
Palestinian land by the Israeli occupying forces, the
demolition of Palestinians’ homes, the devastation of
their towns and cities, the destruction of their
livelihood and institutions, the frequent and prolonged
curfews and, worst of all, the loss of thousands of
civilian lives through the ruthless and indiscriminate
use of force by the Israeli Defence Forces (IDF). The
continued terrorizing of the Palestinian people by the
IDF — such as firing into a crowd of school children in
the Amari refugee camp last week, which resulted in
the killing of a nine-year-old boy — will only provoke
violence rather than quell it. Clearly, terror begets
terror and the spiral of violence will continue unabated
8
S/PV.4614 (Resumption 1)
unless serious efforts are made to stop this deadly
pattern of tit-for-tat retaliation.
The recent spate of violence is a wake-up call to
the international community, particularly those
entrusted with special responsibility to restart the peace
process. Events of recent days remind us that,
notwithstanding our preoccupation with other equally
important concerns elsewhere, the long-standing and
unresolved issue of Palestine demands our immediate
and undivided attention.
My delegation believes that as long as this issue
is unresolved it will remain the root cause of much of
the violence in the Middle East. The international
community and the United Nations cannot afford to
allow this issue to remain unresolved indefinitely. As
the Secretary-General himself has pointed out, the
increase in tension in the Middle East, due to the issue
of Iraq, increases the need for and the importance of
rapid positive movement on the Israeli-Palestinian
track.
As was pointed out by Mr. Roed-Larsen in his
briefing last Friday, the six weeks prior to the most
recent suicide bombings had been notably quiet on the
Palestinian side, despite many actions taken against the
Palestinians. IDF operations continued, however,
including widespread arrests and assassinations, as
well as a tightened closure regime and curfews. Those
deliberate and provocative acts by Israel at a time of
internal debate among the Palestinians on the utility of
violence in their struggle and amid serious efforts to
implement a security agreement, reflect Israel’s
complete lack of interest in and disdain for resolving
the conflict through dialogue and negotiations. It is
most regrettable that the serious efforts of the
Palestinians to restore calm and security have not
received a positive response from the Israeli side;
instead, they are being rebuffed and undermined at
every turn.
We must not to allow the issue of Iraq, which is
currently high on the Council’s agenda, to be used as a
pretext or excuse by Israel to intensify its practice of
State terrorism against the Palestinian people. The
renewed violence convinces us more than ever before
that only an interposing international protection
mechanism can monitor the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, as well as
provide much-needed protection to the Palestinian
people. We fully support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation for the deployment of an international
protection force, which Malaysia itself had advocated
during its membership of the Council two years ago.
Only forcible separation of the two peoples by a strong
United Nations force could provide the necessary peace
and security that would allow both parties to resume
negotiations. We remain convinced that if this had been
done, much of the current violence could have been
avoided.
We remain concerned over the dire and
deteriorating humanitarian situation on the ground. We
have been forewarned that the crisis might spiral out of
control within months, with 50 per cent of the
population dependant on food handouts and with
malnutrition and water-borne diseases spreading. The
economic situation has also worsened. Ironically,
despite its outward expression of concern at the
Palestinian plight, which is its own doing, Israel has
not seriously undertaken any effort to improve or assist
in alleviating the humanitarian crisis. My delegation
condemns the restrictive measures by Israel that have
aggravated the situation of the already overwrought
population living in the occupied Palestinian territories.
We welcome the efforts of the Quartet and other
countries, as well as international agencies, in
addressing the humanitarian situation.
We believe an independent Palestinian State is
inevitable, and we look forward to its realization within
the targeted three-year period, at the very latest. In that
regard, we welcome the Quartet’s three-phase plan of
action, or road map, for achieving a two-State solution.
We also welcome its plan to establish a third-party
mechanism to monitor and assess progress on forward
movement in the implementation of the road map. We
hope that the assessment will be fair and impartial. The
onus of achieving the targets of the road map must also
be equal on both sides.
Malaysia’s position on the question of Palestine
has often been repeated in the Council. We believe the
solution lies in the realization of the vision contained
in Security Council resolution 1397 (2002), in which
two States, Israel and Palestine, live side by side within
secure and recognized borders. Malaysia reiterates its
support for the Arab peace initiative and the important
efforts of the Quartet as well as other interested parties
and looks forward to the implementation of initiatives
to resume the peace process.
9
S/PV.4614 (Resumption 1)
My delegation would once again urge the Council
to take a more active role in efforts to find a permanent
settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, based on
the relevant resolutions of the Council, in the interest
of peace and stability in the region and of enhancing its
own credibility. Much is said these days about the need
for the United Nations, in particular the Council, to
enhance its credibility by following up on its
resolutions. We fully agree with that. The onus is on
each and every member of the Council. However, in
implementing its resolutions, the Council must ensure
consistency and even-handedness in respect of all its
resolutions, including those pertaining to the question
of Palestine, which have been ignored by Israel with
impunity. A selective approach by the Council will
only undermine its credibility.
My delegation looks forward to the Council
enhancing its credibility, beginning by meeting its
responsibility with regard to the Palestinian issue. A
real beginning in that direction would be for the
Council to support the draft resolution before it. Failure
to do so would ensure not enhanced credibility, which
we all seek, but the Council’s continued ineffectiveness
on this issue.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Malaysia for the kind words
addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Denmark. I invite her to take a seat at
the Council table and to make her statement.
Ms. Løj (Denmark): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union — Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia — and the associated countries
Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well as the European
Free Trade Association (EFTA) countries of the
European Economic Area Iceland and Liechtenstein
align themselves with this statement.
Until a few days ago, six weeks had gone by
without Israeli civilian casualties inside Green Line
Israel. This period of calm was shattered by renewed
acts of terror. The European Union condemns
unreservedly the suicide bombing attacks in Umm el-
Fahm and Tel Aviv, in which six Israelis were killed
and many more injured.
Likewise, our hearts go out to the Palestinian
children — and to their parents — who suffered a
bomb attack in the schoolyard of Zeif Yatta elementary
school in Hebron. Deliberately targeting children in
their schools is a particularly odious act.
The European Union deplores the fact that
civilians on both sides continue to suffer from
violence: horror and terror for ordinary people in the
streets of Israel, and the brutality of occupation for the
ordinary people in the Palestinian territories.
The European Union is deeply concerned by the
deployment of Israeli tanks in Ramallah and in the
north of the Gaza Strip, and by the Israeli Defence
Forces (IDF) shelling and destruction of Chairman
Arafat’s headquarters. Restricting the freedom of
movement of the Palestinian leadership does not
contribute to fighting terror, to Israel’s legitimate
security concerns, or to the necessary process of
Palestinian reforms supported by the international
community, including, not least, the Quartet. Israel
must stop the occupation of Chairman Arafat’s
headquarters, and Chairman Arafat must do his utmost
to stop the terror.
These events take place at a time when there had
been some hope that resumed contacts between the
parties could restart the political process. The European
Union strongly calls on both sides to show their
commitment to peace by acting with maximum
restraint. Force cannot defeat force.
The European Union has therefore welcomed the
promise by Fatah that it will prevent any attacks
against Israeli civilians and the fact that it has called on
other Palestinian groups to do likewise. We strongly
reiterate that call. The terrorists must not be allowed to
derail the aspirations of the many who support peace in
the Middle East.
The European Union recalls the recent statement
by the Middle East Quartet, at its meeting on 17
September in New York, in which the violence and
terror in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict was deplored
and condemned, and in which the expectations of the
international community with respect to the return to
the path of peace in the conflict were laid out.
The European Union once again confirms its
strong will to stand by those who seek permanent peace
and security. We will continue to work relentlessly with
10
S/PV.4614 (Resumption 1)
the regional parties and within the Middle East Quartet
towards that goal.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Tunisia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): We are
profoundly disquieted and concerned to see Israel using
provocation and military escalation while many peace-
loving international parties are trying to rebuild
following the serious damage inflicted on many
Palestinian reoccupied towns by the Israeli military
action.
This is a clear attempt to demolish what remains
of the infrastructure of the Palestinian Authority and its
institutions and clear evidence of Israel’s insistence on
committing further crimes against the defenceless
Palestinian people. It is clear that Israel is stubbornly
and intransigently persisting in impeding peace efforts
intended to defuse tension and to create conditions
conducive to a resumption of the political dialogue and
to a return to negotiations.
Notwithstanding all of the efforts made by the
Palestinian side to show good faith and good intentions
and to reform its institutions in keeping with the vision
and the requirements of influential international
parties, and despite the calm we had seen in the past six
weeks, Israel has continued to perpetrate barbaric
military actions against innocent Palestinian civilians.
Israel has not stopped its harassment of the
legitimate President of Palestine, President Arafat. It
has imposed a humiliating state of siege on him and
has destroyed his headquarters. The Israeli Government
has turned its back on all peace initiatives, including
the Arab peace initiative that was adopted and
endorsed at the Beirut Summit, whereas the Palestinian
and all Arab countries remain committed to peace as a
strategic choice.
Tunisia condemns Israel’s persistence in
imposing a state of siege on the legitimate President of
Palestine, President Arafat. It condemns Israel’s
continued implementation of a calculated and
systematic policy against defenceless Palestinian
civilians in order to starve them and to oust them from
their lands, in flagrant violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention and of relevant international instruments,
mores and ethics.
We condemn this persistence and call on the
international community to urge Israel immediately to
comply in full and without conditions with Security
Council resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002);
immediately to withdraw from all reoccupied
Palestinian towns; to return to the status quo of before
20 September 2000; and to put an end to its futile
policy, which is fed by a short-term political vision that
merely broadens the scope of the violence and fuels
resentment and a thirst for vengeance.
Secretary-General Kofi Annan said that a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution will be
impossible as long as the security imperative continues
to be considered paramount. We need to work in
parallel in all other areas, including the political and
economic fields, so as to deal immediately with the
humanitarian situation, which continues to deteriorate
in the Palestinian towns and villages that have been
reoccupied, in order thus to give rise to some hope and
to avoid a deadlock.
The brutality and daily acts of aggression
suffered by Palestinian civilians at the hands of the
Israeli occupying forces impel us today to reaffirm the
proposal made at the Cairo Summit by President Ben
Ali of Tunisia to establish a mechanism to protect the
Palestinian people from Israeli practices and violations.
We are profoundly convinced that the delicate
international situation today requires the international
community to step up its efforts to facilitate a return by
both parties to the negotiating table in order to enshrine
the vision of two States, Palestine and Israel, living
side by side within secure and recognized borders. The
international community should also redouble its
efforts to make Israel withdraw from the occupied Arab
territories, to observe international law in accordance
with the relevant United Nations resolutions, including
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), and to base its actions on the Madrid terms of
reference and the principle of land for peace.
(spoke in French)
In calling for this meeting of the Security
Council, the Arab Group wanted the international
community to be seized of the inadmissible behaviour
of the State and the army of Israel. A legitimate
complaint by the Palestinian Authority has been placed
before the Council and it calls for the minimum
minimorum. That entails an immediate halt to the
punitive operations organized by a Member of the
11
S/PV.4614 (Resumption 1)
United Nations in disregard of the Charter itself;
respect for the symbol of the Palestinian national
struggle — President Arafat, whose life is being
threatened; withdrawal by the occupying forces to the
positions held prior to September 2000; and accelerated
peace efforts by all international actors. None of that is
cause for reservations. As we have in recent times
constantly referred to the need for unity in the Council,
let us demonstrate the solidarity of the international
community even if we know that, unfortunately, Israel
will ignore this admonition with total impunity.
What disgusts the Arab world, and indeed the
Muslim world, is the policy of double standards to
which it is subjected daily. All peoples of common
sense in the world have strongly condemned the crimes
of 11 September 2001. But when it comes to the ills
that beset our region, people are silent. This is what
Robert Fisk wrote in The Independent on 11 September
2002:
(spoke in English)
“Today, 11 September, our newspapers and our
television screens are filled with the baleful
images of those two towers and their biblical
descent. We will remember and honour the
thousands who died. But in just five days’ time,
Palestinians will remember their September
massacre of 1982. Will a single candle be lit for
them in the West? Will there be a single memorial
service? Will a single ... newspaper dare to recall
this atrocity? Will a single ... newspaper
commemorate the twentieth anniversary of these
mass killings of 1,700 innocents? Do I even need
to give the answer?”
(spoke in French)
Rest assured that we are realistic people and that
we know that it is pointless to seek condemnation of
Israel by the Security Council. The draft resolution
before the Council expresses the hope that the Council
will request Israel to behave like a civilized country. Its
people are intelligent enough to understand that their
soldiers and their Prime Minister have gone too far and
that that is not in the interests of a country that will one
day have to live in peace and harmony with its Arab
neighbours. The Arab Summit held in Beirut made
Israel a historic offer. Tel Aviv should seize that
opportunity, sooner rather than later, to finally resolve
the painful Israeli-Arab conflict.
As far as the members of the Security Council are
concerned, their adoption of this draft resolution today
would mean that they were helping both parties in a
decisive manner. Indeed, the necessary conditions must
be created for a resumption of peace talks. In that
context, the situation of President Arafat must be
resolved as a matter of urgency. His freedom of
movement and action must be restored to him.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker is the representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): As this is the first time this month that I take
the floor in the Security Council, allow me, Sir, to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council. I would also like to thank you for
convening this open meeting so that the Council may
discharge its responsibilities in full view of the
representatives of the international community, on
whose behalf it carries out its work.
With regard to the subject under consideration, I
shall be very brief in describing the situation so that we
can recall the true nature of the issue.
As members are well aware, Palestine was
occupied during the period of the British Mandate. The
year 1947 witnessed the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 181 (II), on the partition of Palestine. In
1948, the occupying Power established its State in
Palestine with invaders who came from all over the
world. They were people who were not born there and
who can never claim that the land was theirs at any
time in history.
Since then, the Zionist objective remained secure
and recognized borders. Since then, the declared Arab
objective has been the liberation of Palestine — until
the catastrophe of 1967. The Israeli objective never
changed, while the Arab objective receded shamefully.
The goal of the liberation of Palestine was replaced
with that of the elimination of the consequences of the
aggression of 1967. Then came the 1973 war, which
achieved some military victories, but which brought
political defeat to the Arabs. Unfortunately, the Arabs
accepted this.
Let us consider the Israeli objectives. What is the
Zionist concept of Israeli security? As the Council and
the whole world can see, it is not the kind of security
12
S/PV.4614 (Resumption 1)
that is achieved through documents, conventions,
agreements or demilitarized areas. Nor can it be
achieved by a multinational force to separate the two
warring parties. The Zionist concept of security
requires the complete alteration of the military,
economic, political, cultural and psychological
character of the whole Arab region, creating a situation
that would make it impossible for Arabs to assert their
historical rights to their land. That has actually been
achieved in the case of some Arabs.
What happened in return? The Arabs took further
steps towards what was called peace. They agreed to
join what was called the peace process. They attended
the regional and international conferences of that
process. Then they discovered that what was required
of them was capitulation — and the declaration of
capitulation — not the achievement of peace.
Our Palestinian brothers have suffered greatly.
They thought that they, too, could take that route in
order to recover a part of their land. What did they
obtain? They accepted Oslo, Madrid, Wye Plantation,
Camp David and Sharm el-Sheikh: they accepted
everything to which they were invited and which they
were asked to sign.
What happened, and why did it happen? Some
Arabs offered peace initiatives, from Fez to Beirut.
What did they receive in return? All the initiatives
proposed by the Arabs were rejected. They received
nothing in return for all their concessions. All the
concessions made by our brothers in Palestine received
a negative response. That proves a very important
point: the occupying authorities in Palestine do not
seek peace; nor do they desire it. They do not even
need peace. They seek only destruction and are
sabotaging any initiative that aims at making peace in
the region.
This is not a figment of my imagination. I am
citing Uri Avneri, who, by the way, is not Libyan. He
has said that the goal of the occupying authorities in
Palestine is simply the destruction of any peace
initiative. He said this in his recent article entitled,
“How to Torpedo the Saudis”. He was referring to the
initiative of Prince Abdullah, which was endorsed by
the Beirut Summit. We know very well what the
Zionist terrorist army did to the Palestinians
immediately following that initiative’s endorsement at
Beirut.
That puts a direct responsibility on the Council.
Most unfortunately and regrettably, it condemns the
Council. This Council is called the Security Council.
Council members have seen what has happened to
international peace and security in the region and
because of the region. The Council knows everything
that has happened, and it has been unable to adopt any
resolution. That means that the Council is not free and
is not the master of its own affairs. It is not even
international: it does not truly serve the cause of
international peace and security. That is a fact
recognized by all Council members even if they do not
admit it. Where is the democracy in the work of the
Council? Where is the transparency in the work of the
Council? This is the Council’s responsibility. If the
Council is unable to discharge its responsibility, every
people under occupation must have the right to self-
defence. That is a historical and God-given right. They
must be able to resist those who occupy their land,
detain their people, imprison them, send some to meet
their maker, send others into exile and destroy homes
with their residents inside.
How can we allow those who defend their lands
against occupiers to be branded as terrorists? This is
warped logic. The terrorist is the one who comes to
occupy, to kill, to exile, to imprison and to destroy.
That is the real terrorist. Those who have the right to
respond in defence of their honour, dignity and land are
the occupied, not the occupier.
Do Council members imagine that, in the face of
the arrogance of power, we have forgotten the meaning
of words and their true weight? Some Arabs are so
afraid of death that they have died of fear; they died of
their fear to say a single word in self-expression. Since
they are dead nevertheless, they might as well speak
out.
All of the countries of the world that have
suffered colonialism know the meaning of occupation
and the importance of martyrdom and self-defence,
dignity and freedom. The Palestinians are free to
defend themselves. They are not terrorists. The
terrorists are those who persist in occupying their
lands.
It is now the Council’s turn to act. If it is unable
to discharge its Charter duties and responsibilities, then
at least once it should boldly condemn the aggressor
and occupier. We know that the events in Palestine are
part and parcel of all the schemes and plans being
13
S/PV.4614 (Resumption 1)
prepared for the region as a whole. We are fully aware
that all Arabs will be standing in line to be punished
one after the other if they do not come to see, before it
is too late, that they are all targeted. We believe that
they have all now understood and recognized that they
are all targets.
I affirm here that it is not always the rulers who
make the decisions. There comes a time when the
decisions are made by the people. If the masses have
been seduced by the illusions of peace and the peace
process, we can thank the Zionists for having
interrupted that seduction with everything they have
done and continue to do. If that should occur, however,
the Security Council will have nothing to do.
An Arab poet once said that what is justly ruined
can be justly rebuilt. We are awaiting justice and it will
not be long in coming. It will not be the Palestinians
alone who choose to die — they are already dead
anyway. All the inhabitants of the region will become
bombs that cannot be stopped so long as their rulers are
not up to making the difficult decisions needed to deter
aggression, restore dignity and liberate their usurped
lands. That day is inexorably coming. I say this not in
the interest of endorsing a resolution, but in order to
record it for history.
Those who are rising in Palestine are Palestinians.
They were not imported. That is an irrefutable
sociological fact. The Council has been trivialized by
the Zionist authorities, just as they trivialized the entire
United Nations when they prevented a Council mission
from going to Jenin to discharge its responsibility.
What did the Security Council do then? Nothing! It had
no reaction. If such an action were taken by an Arab
country, the Council would have imposed sanctions
under Chapter VII of the Charter. The Zionist
authorities have continuously trivialized the Council by
failing to comply with any of its resolutions. What is
the Council going to do? Arafat and the Palestinians
are always the ones who are wronged.
The calculations of history always prevail over
those of power and might. Any study of history reveals
empires that have risen and subsequently collapsed and
disappeared. That is what will happen to those who
believe that they can impose their will and ideas on
entire peoples, who are created in God’s image. When
the Libyan people faced Italy, it was the very first
occasion on which the aeroplane, a great innovation at
that time, was used for military purposes. We resisted,
however; we resisted the latest technology of that time
with our bare hands and any tools that were available.
We lost precisely half the population of our country,
but we achieved our freedom, as many others have
done. This will happen in Palestine, too. I place these
words on record here in the Council so that any future
scholar, in considering the Council’s activities on this
humanitarian question, will find at least one voice that
spoke the truth without seeking to conceal it.
When the Council was requested to send
observers — mere observers — it failed to do so. It is
high time for this Council to recover its prestige and a
certain degree of credibility, if it cannot recover it all. I
insist on this because we respect this Council and the
United Nations. We want to respect international
legality, too, but what international legality is there
when the United Nations is weak? We want a strong
United Nations that stands firm, in accordance with its
Charter and the rules of international law — the power
of the law, not the law of power.
The Council should reach its decisions through
direct dialogue, just as I am speaking here. Decisions
should not come in envelopes from capitals under
economic and political pressure from the International
Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the other
international financial institutions, as well as military
pressure and threats.
Such resolutions cannot express the will of the
international community, on whose behalf we are
working. We are making these comments so as to
ensure that they will be on record for the benefit of all
those who take a keen interest in ensuring that the
United Nations and the Security Council are strong —
something that we should all support.
I pray to God that representatives will have the
courage to tell the truth to their capitals so that one day
we will be able to create a strong Security Council and
a strong United Nations that will be our refuge against
the arrogance of power.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya for his
kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Pakistan. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): I should like at the outset
to compliment you, Mr. President, on having convened
14
S/PV.4614 (Resumption 1)
this important meeting today. I am speaking on behalf
of my Permanent Representative who, unfortunately,
could not be here today.
September 2002 marks the second anniversary of
violence in Palestine — violence triggered by
enormous provocation at the Al Aqsa Mosque in 2000.
The past two years have witnessed the loss of innocent
lives and indiscriminate violation of the human rights
of the Palestinian people. The latest in a long series of
unabated provocations is the demolition of the
Ramallah compound that housed important symbols
and elements of the anticipated Palestinian State. It is
regrettable that that attack was carried out at a time
when the Middle East Quartet had just declared its
agreement on a three-phase plan of action for achieving
a two-State solution within three years. The Israeli
assault — the third since March 2002 — and the
decision to completely isolate President Arafat
constitute a blatant violation of all norms of
international law and further aggravates the tense
situation.
Attacks, occupation, re-occupation, humiliation,
human rights abuses and the consequent decline in
Palestinian living conditions have further darkened the
prospects for peace in the Holy Land. The genuine
endeavours of the Palestinian people to introduce
reforms and political stability in the occupied
territories have been met with unabated curfews and
closures, which have further exacerbated the
humanitarian crisis in the occupied territories. Ms.
Catherine Bertini, the Personal Humanitarian Envoy of
the Secretary-General, has reported that the crisis
might spiral out of control within months, as about 50
per cent of the Palestinian population is unemployed,
while malnutrition and disease are spreading.
Such a situation is likely to cast a dark shadow on
international efforts, including those of the Middle East
Quartet, to bring peace and security to the Middle East.
The occupation forces, it appears, want to submerge
even the traces of the derailed peace process in the dust
of demolished Palestinian settlements.
Peace is not just the absence of war at the
expense of the inalienable rights of the weak. Real and
durable peace flows from a state in which people see
preserved their fundamental rights, based on justice
and equity, and are assured a secure economic and
political future. Unfortunately, by failing adequately to
address the root cause of the Palestinian problem —
that is, the preservation and realization of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people — peace in
the Middle East has been held hostage to an uneasy
situation that even a mild trigger could cause to erupt.
The Security Council must be able to ensure an
immediate end to the siege of President Arafat’s
headquarters; the non-negotiability of the fundamental
rights of the occupied people, including their right to
self-determination; respect for and urgent
implementation of Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 1397 (2002); a permanent end to the
provocative construction of illegal settlements in the
Palestinian territories; and the establishment of a
mechanism to assign responsibility for the violation of
humanitarian law by the occupation forces.
In Palestine as elsewhere, the resolutions of the
Security Council must be implemented. Time has come
for this Council to reaffirm the Charter obligations of
all Member States and ensure the implementation of its
own resolutions with out further delay or
discrimination.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Pakistan for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Sudan. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. I
would also like to pay tribute to Mr. Negroponte, who
presided over the Council’s activities during the month
of August.
The Council is meeting once again to discuss
Israel’s contempt for international law. It is truly
regrettable that this may not be the last such meeting.
With complete impunity, Israel, the usurping occupying
force, has persisted in its criminal, brutal acts.
Defiance and contempt have become the official policy
of the Sharon Government. You, Sir, may recall that
this Council has met more than once in the past year as
a result of acts such as those that Israel is committing
today. The deplorable repetition of this pattern leads us
to question the real role of the Security Council, which
is supposed to seek to ensure international peace and
security.
15
S/PV.4614 (Resumption 1)
Does the Council not believe that the continued
acts against the Muqata’a in Ramallah threaten
international peace and security? Do Council members
not believe that something should be done to put an
end to continued Israeli aggression and arrogance?
Does not the Charter of the United Nations, in
particular its Articles 34 and 36, require the Council to
adopt adequate measures in such situations? What does
the Council expect, now that Israel has tightened its
grip on the official headquarters of the Palestinian
National Authority, cutting off water, electricity and
telephone service from the building? Does the Council
not believe that such Israeli actions are serious enough
to warrant taking action to put an end to them? And
how can we explain the dubious silence about what is
happening? Does it reflect a kind of complacency
towards the usurper and occupier, or is it an admission
of the Council’s inability to shoulder its responsibilities
under the Charter?
Israel is not only attacking the headquarters of the
Palestinian Authority; it is also deliberately and
systematically committing aggression against the
provisions of the Charter and violating Council
resolutions that it does not respect. Israel is confident
that the Council will not find ways to enforce those
resolutions. The occupying force’s belief that it is
above the law and the assurances it receives that it will
always get the protection it needs prompt Israel to fine-
tune its efforts to invent new kinds of violations daily.
Empty expressions of compassion will not go far
under such circumstances. The Security Council should
shoulder its responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. It should take measures to deter
Israel, the occupying force, from continuing on the
path of violence, injustice and terror, for which all that
State’s capacities are harnessed. Forcing Israel to
withdraw immediately and unconditionally from all
Palestinian cities is a step — albeit a first small step —
on the road that the Council should take with a view to
achieving a just and peaceful settlement of the Middle
East crisis. The Council should hasten to adopt the
resolution introduced by the Arab Group. That is the
least it can do to preserve its authority.
The President: I thank the representative of
Sudan for the kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of India. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Nambiar (India): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council during a month charged with a full
agenda, coinciding, as it does, with the General
Assembly and with the first anniversary of the 11
September attacks. We thank you for convening this
emergency open meeting of the Council on the serious
situation in the Middle East, which allows us to take
stock of the recent developments.
Although in the month leading up to 17
September, 56 Palestinians and five Israelis lost their
lives, the six weeks from 4 August to 18 September
were unique in that they represented the longest period
without a suicide bombing or major Israeli military
activity since September 2000. Six weeks of relative
quiet in the Middle East gave rise to hopes for the
possibility of progress in addressing the conflict raging
in the region. The decision of the Quartet, in its
meeting of 17 September, to come up with a three-
phase road map for achieving a two-State solution
within three years, as well as the Quartet’s meetings
with the Foreign Ministers of countries in the region,
were positive signs. Unfortunately, recent
developments, including the two suicide attacks inside
Israel, the bomb blast in a Palestinian school and
subsequent Israeli action in Ramallah, have worked to
negate all efforts towards reconciliation.
The reoccupation of the headquarters of the
President of the Palestinian Authority in Ramallah on
19 September and the wanton destruction of property
around the President’s headquarters by the Israeli
Defence Forces (IDF) serve no constructive purpose.
Israeli forces have also reacted strongly to spontaneous
Palestinian protests against Israeli actions in President
Arafat’s compound, leading to the deaths of more
Palestinians and injuries to several others. The
incursions of the IDF into Palestinian-controlled areas
of Gaza and the reimposition of curfews and closures
in all Palestinian cities, with the exception of
Bethlehem, have taken the region back to the situation
of six weeks ago and have set back the political
process.
My Government strongly deplores Israeli
retaliatory measures against President Arafat and
believes them to be counterproductive. We believe that,
far from contributing to Israel’s security, they can only
jeopardize efforts towards peace. President Arafat
remains the legitimate representative of the Palestinian
people, and any attack against him would seriously
16
S/PV.4614 (Resumption 1)
undermine ongoing efforts to find a solution to the
conflict. We call upon the Israeli Government to
completely withdraw its forces from President Arafat’s
compound forthwith and to work with the Palestinian
Authority in de-escalating the situation.
The extent of the continuing humanitarian crisis
in the West Bank and Gaza Strip has been highlighted
by the Secretary-General’s Personal Humanitarian
Envoy, Catherine Bertini, who visited the region last
August and, more recently, by the release of the report
of the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator
(UNSCO) for the Middle East peace process on the
impact of closure and other mobility restrictions on
Palestinian productive activities. The UNSCO report
shows that the Palestinian economy is in a severe
depression, with only international aid stemming a
possible total breakdown. According to the report,
unemployment in the occupied territories is around 50
per cent and poverty levels have reached 70 per cent in
Gaza and 55 per cent in the West Bank, while income
losses are estimated at $7.6 million a day, with a total
loss of $3.3 billion since October 2000. The Secretary-
General has reported that, despite high-level Israeli
assurances of increased cooperation with the aid
agencies, there have been only marginal improvements
on the ground.
We urge the Government of Israel to do all that is
possible to alleviate the social and economic plight of
the Palestinian population by lifting closures and
blockades, by allowing unhindered access to
humanitarian supplies and by releasing the balance of
funds due to the Palestinian Authority.
The resurgence of violence threatens to derail
efforts towards peace, as do the military measures of
the IDF. The resumption of suicide bombings by
militant groups are an act of random violence designed
to torpedo the progress by the parties concerned
towards arriving at conciliatory measures. We condemn
the suicide bombings and the violence against innocent
civilians. It is our belief that no situation, however
difficult, can justify acts of violence against innocent
civilians, be they Israelis or Palestinians or any other
people of the Earth on which we cohabit.
Another crossroad has been reached, requiring
another debate in the Security Council on the
Bengalese issue. The answer lies in all concerned
persevering in their efforts towards a peaceful
settlement of the conflict, and in not allowing vested
interests to derail a process designed to bring peace,
security and economic well-being to an entire
generation of people in the region.
India joins the rest of the international
community in calling for continued forward movement
in realizing the vision of two States, living side by side
within secure and recognized boundaries, based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 1397 (2002).
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of India for the kind words he addressed
to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Saudi
Arabia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I should like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and to wish you every success.
My thanks go also to your predecessor, Ambassador
John Negroponte, for his work as President of the
Council last month.
I thank you, Sir, for convening this emergency
meeting to consider the latest developments in the
occupied Palestinian territories.
It is quite clear to the international community
that the dangerous escalation in the occupied
Palestinian territories has continued since the
provocative visit by the present Prime Minister of
Israel to the Al-Aqsa mosque, accompanied by a large
contingent of soldiers, in clear defiance of Arab and
Islamic feelings. That ominous visit was the spark that
ignited the Palestinian intifada, which is an expression
of the Palestinian people’s rejection of having its holy
sites desecrated.
Since the present Israeli Government came to
power, it has accelerated its plan to sabotage any
attempt to resume the peace talks and to reach a
peaceful settlement that would restore peace and
security while providing a just and permanent solution
to the problem. It has imposed a suffocating economic
siege; restricted the movement of the Palestinians;
destroyed houses and institutions; demolished the
Palestinian economic infrastructure; destroyed farms;
bulldozed fields; uprooted trees; killed children, elderly
people, the disabled and women; continued to liquidate
political activists and Palestinian leaders; closed
17
S/PV.4614 (Resumption 1)
crossing points and international borders; and
continued to expand Israeli settlements, while violating
the human rights of the Palestinian people and
breaching international humanitarian law. As a result,
violence has escalated. And each violent act led to
another. Much bloodshed and killing ensued.
The Israeli Government has insisted on using
excessive force with its entire military arsenal, as a
means of killing and destruction. It has adopted this as
a method of governing that falls within a systematic
policy of targeting the Palestinian people and their
leadership. The most recent instance of this is the siege
of the headquarters of the Palestinian president, and the
threat to bomb the headquarters with all those who are
in it to force them to submit to Israeli demands and
surrender.
The Israeli security forces continue to interfere in
the affairs of the Palestinian Authority, while the Israeli
army continues to kill or displace civilians and
demolish their houses. Intelligence units have
continued their arrests and assassinations pursuant to
what the Israeli Chief of Staff has said: that its country
aims to abolish what he called the Palestinian cancer
and bring about the moral and military defeat of the
Palestinians, in order to abolish their rights. All of this
has occurred before the eyes of the international
community, which has seen all forms of Palestinian
struggle as a form of terrorism while seeing Israeli
terrorism as legitimate self-defence, contrary to all
human ethical values.
The Security Council has a responsibility to face
injustice, denial of rights and threats to international
peace and security stemming from Israeli practices,
which provoke Palestinians and continue to suppress
and terrorize them, putting an end to their aspirations.
They find nothing before them in terms of dignity,
justice and the restoration of their usurped rights,
except to use violent acts, which leads in turn to Israeli
terrorism.
The international community cannot stand by in
the face of the deteriorating situation without doing
anything. We should force Israel to stop its practices
and its attacks, to submit to the requirements of
international humanitarian law, to provide the
necessary protection for innocent civilians, and to
implement the Fourth Geneva Convention, of 1949.
The siege of President Arafat’s headquarters
should end, and Israeli forces should withdraw from
Palestinian cities to their positions before September
2000. The intervention of the Security Council is no
longer for protection, but to put an end to the killing of
a whole people and to save it from being expelled from
its homeland, along with restoring its usurped rights
and putting an end to its humiliation. There is a dire
need for intervention by the international community to
help both parties to control the worsening situation and
to put an end to this spiral of violence and destruction.
The continuing spiral of violence in the occupied
Palestinian territories will not be halted unless the
Palestinian people regain their legitimate rights, which
are endorsed by the entire international community and
ratified by international law, and which have become a
legal matter pursuant to the agreements made by
various Israeli Governments with the Palestinian party.
Concentrating on the security side only has
become an obstruction, and not a bridge, to the
resumption of political negotiations. It has shown the
impotence and futility of Israeli policy, while the
Israeli Government’s attempt to dictate its conditions
and impose its will has led to more bloodshed and more
innocent victims.
The fact that the Israeli political discourse is not
serious or logical is reflected in its focus on blaming
only the Palestinian Authority on security matters. This
is at a time when the Israeli occupation forces have
undermined the Authority and deprived it of the means
to act. Blaming only the Palestinians for security, and
making it responsible for the violence and insecurity, is
not realistic and does not help to solve the problem.
Security must be garnered through mutual
commitments and responsibilities.
Security is a comprehensive and integral concept.
Being committed to it is the responsibility of all
parties. However, that commitment loses its credibility
when some are exempt from fulfilling it.
Therefore, we cannot accept the fact that Israel
has an exceptional status in the international
community, protecting itself under the pretext of
security, thus allowing it to transcend international
legitimacy and use the policy of force and that of faits
accomplis.
Breaking out of the spiral of violence in the
region has become an international responsibility, one
requiring finding a political settlement based on
international legitimacy and leading to Israel’s
18
S/PV.4614 (Resumption 1)
withdrawal from all Arab territories occupied since
1967 and to the establishment of a Palestinian State
with Eastern Jerusalem as its capital, side by side with
the State of Israel and bringing about peace, security
and stability for all the peoples of the region. This is
what the Arab initiative provides and what the Quartet
is trying to achieve.
This urgent demand is not just a Palestinian or an
Arab demand. It has increasingly become the demand
of the moderate forces of peace in the world, since the
current policy of the present Israel Government has
shown that security and peace cannot be generated by
repression, aggression and coercion and cannot be
brought about in the light of injustice and the absence
of justice.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Saudi Arabia for the kind words
addressed to me.
There are a number of speakers remaining on my
list who have not yet taken the floor. With the
Council’s agreement, I propose now to suspend the
meeting. I would like to invite Council members to
meet with me in the consultation room in 10 minutes.
The meeting was suspended at 6.35 p.m. and
resumed at 8.40 p.m.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Algeria. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table.
Mr. Abdallah Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I would, from the outset, like to tell you
how gratified I am to see a diplomat with your
experience and talent leading the work of the Council
during this month of September of living dangerously. I
therefore wish you every success in carrying out the
task before you. I would also like to say how grateful
my delegation is to Ambassador Negroponte for having
presided over the Council in a very effective and a
distinguished manner.
Just when the United Nations, during the General
Debate held at the beginning of every session of the
General Assembly, brings together Member States,
large and small, to strongly reassert their attachment to
the principles and objectives of the United Nations
Charter, their commitment to the rules and standards of
international law, and their determination to respect
and ensure respect for all resolutions of the Security
Council at all times and in all places, Israel has once
again, with its habitual arrogance fed by the strange
complacency demonstrated by our Organization with
regard to its activities, chosen this moment to attack
what little was left standing after its destructive rage of
a few months ago. Israel has now annihilated the last
buildings where the Palestinian Authority was doing its
best to maintain some sort of appearance of life, while
striving to reform the Palestinian institutions, as had
been demanded of it.
This obsessive frenzy of Israel and its recourse to
disproportionate military means against helpless
civilian targets, revealed the nature of the Zionist
regime, intoxicated with its military power, and drunk
day after day with its inglorious military feats, sure of
its impunity.
This shows the stubborn resolve of the Israeli
leadership to annihilate every hope of ever re-
launching the peace process that Mr. Sharon himself
has said has breathed its last. Indeed, there is no doubt
this systematic policy of destruction of the buildings
and infrastructure of the Palestinian Authority, and the
policy of isolating President Arafat is part of a
deliberate strategy to completely destroy the
momentum of the peace process begun at Madrid.
There also is no doubt that the purpose is to
undermine the credibility of the Palestinian Authority,
to crush its motivating forces and make it impossible
for it to carry out its own commitment to law and order.
Then it is blamed for not containing the legitimate
resistance of a people that is subjugated, repressed and
humiliated on a daily basis by an occupying Power that
uses the most sophisticated and devastating weapons
against young people who have no shield but their
bodies, such as the thirteen-year-old child who was
deliberately shot in Nablus, in front of a British
volunteer, by an Israeli soldier who had not even been
provoked.
In other words, this clearly deliberate Israeli
policy attempts to discredit and disqualify the very
concept of a viable and responsible Palestinian State, a
concept that has been accepted and is demanded today
by the international community as a whole, and has
also been unanimously endorsed by the Security
Council.
What we see today in occupied Palestine is truly
a situation of war, rife with danger for the Palestinian
people, but also for all other people of the area, where
19
S/PV.4614 (Resumption 1)
a war machine endowed with fearful means assails a
victimized people and its symbols with unheard of
ferocity.
It is incumbent upon the Security Council to put
an end to this immediately. Just when the Council is
very concerned with having its resolutions respected
when they apply to other conflicts, it must act with the
same resolve and rigour against a State which is
illegally occupying the territory of other States, a
country that resorts without restraint to force and
threatens its neighbours every day, which shamelessly
ignores resolutions of the Security Council, flouts
every standard of international law and tramples
underfoot the rules of international humanitarian law.
Any reluctance or hesitation on the part of the
Council would be a serious failure in terms of its
responsibilities and would certainly seriously damage
the credibility of the Council, which we want today,
more than ever, to see recognized by all and to have its
role as guarantor of international peace and security
recognized by all.
If we look at the responsibilities incumbent upon
the Council in terms of maintaining international peace
and security, and the part it must play as the pillar of
our collective security, we feel with increasing urgency
that the Council must act directly and energetically by
immediately condemning these outrageous policies of
the Israeli Government, by calling for an immediate
stop to the terror campaign and destruction it is
carrying out, to require that it withdraw from the
Palestinian towns and locations it has been occupying
since September 2000, by demanding it respect the
provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, and
by making sure, by whatever means are adequate,
perhaps by sending international observers, that it see
to the protection of the Palestinian population and
launch the peace process once again.
Algeria holds this point of view and firmly
believes, more than ever, that peace is a strategic
choice and there is no alternative to negotiation.
Algeria is firmly attached to a peaceful, fair,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the Middle East
conflict as proposed by the Arab Summit in Beirut
based on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) and resolution 338 (1978), and
on the principle of land for peace.
Such a settlement should obviously enable Israel
to withdraw from all of the occupied Arab territories,
thus opening the way to the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State with Al-Quds as its
capital.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Algeria for his statement and the kind
words he kindly addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Qatar. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Thank
you for giving me the opportunity to address the
Council at this extremely important meeting. This
meeting is being held under grave circumstances that
have deteriorated more than ever before. They call for
an immediate intervention by this Council in order to
put an end to the Israeli acts of aggression and for the
Council to discharge its responsibilities.
We meet today a few days after the beginning of
the violent attack carried out by the occupation forces
in Ramallah, in particular against the compound of
President Arafat, and the remaining buildings of the
Palestinian Authority. You are well aware of the events
and well aware of the losses to life and property.
The aim is to undermine the Palestinian Authority
and Palestine’s national security. This is happening at a
time when Israel is calling on the Palestinian Authority
to deter and stop the suicide bombings and violence.
What kind of logic is that? How can the Authority play
its role in maintaining security and deterring suicide
attacks when Israel is destroying the infrastructure of
the Palestinian security forces, apprehending and
killing its members?
Israel’s justifications for its acts of aggression
against Ramallah and the Palestinian Authority
compound, using the pretext of the Palestinian
Authority’s failure to stop the suicide bombings against
Israel, are totally unacceptable. First, the magnitude of
Israeli aggression — every time and particularly this
time — is totally disproportionate to the attacks carried
out by suicide bombers. Secondly, no proof has been
offered of any involvement by the Palestinian
Authority in instigating any suicide bombings, which
have been repeatedly condemned by the Authority.
We all reject terrorism and suicide bombings.
They take a toll in innocent lives. They are acts that are
totally proscribed by all religions and humanitarian
20
S/PV.4614 (Resumption 1)
values. But we must stop now and wonder about the
reasons and the motives that would lead some groups
and individuals to carry out such acts. The answer is
simply that occupation, repression, attacks, killings, the
demolition of homes, closures and blockades all lead to
desperation and thus to acts of suicide. Those who have
lost everything, including a dignified life, do not care
about sacrificing their own lives, which are unvalued
by others. Violence on the Palestinian side is therefore
simply a reaction against the arbitrary occupation by
the forces of occupation. The spiral of violence thus
continues, and it is the innocent on both sides who
alone pay the price.
By carrying out repeated massacres and
confiscating Palestinian land, Israel proves beyond a
shadow of a doubt that it does not wish to travel the
path of peace or to accept the Quartet initiative. We
view Israel’s action as an attempt to kill any serious
opportunity for movement towards a comprehensive
peace. We view it as an attempt to impede international
efforts to arrive at a peaceful settlement based on
relevant United Nations resolutions and the principle of
land for peace. Destroying the Palestinian Authority’s
infrastructure or harming its elected President, Yasser
Arafat, will not ensure Israel’s security. To the
contrary, those actions will complicate the situation.
It is frustrating and disappointing to us that for
almost two years terrible treatment has been meted out
to the Palestinian people by the Israeli occupation
forces, without the Security Council taking any
tangible steps to put an end to the repression by the
occupation forces or to compel Israel to comply with
resolutions of international legality.
In that light, and in order for the Security Council
to retain its credibility, we believe that the very least
the Council should do today is to adopt a resolution
binding upon Israel, ordering it to withdraw
immediately and unconditionally from Ramallah and to
lift its siege against President Arafat and members of
the Palestinian Authority.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Indonesia. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia): Allow me at the outset
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
are fully confident that, under your able leadership and
vast experience, the work of the Council will be led to
a successful conclusion. Allow me also to extend my
delegation’s appreciation to you for convening this
urgent meeting to consider the continuing grave
situation in Palestine.
Indonesia deeply regrets that the situation in the
occupied territories has continued to deteriorate
following repeated Israeli aggression, incursions and
the accompanying widespread arrests, assassinations
and destruction. We are particularly concerned at the
recent attack and reoccupation of the headquarters of
the President of the Palestinian Authority in the city of
Ramallah, which began on 19 September 2002. Indeed,
the policy of the use of military might not only
endangers the personal safety and security of President
Arafat; it could also ignite further violence and hence
threaten the very future of the peace process. We
therefore once again urge Israel to comply with the
relevant Security Council resolutions calling on it to
immediately withdraw from Palestinian towns and
cities and to stop its aggression. In that regard,
Indonesia strongly demands an immediate end to the
siege of Ramallah.
My delegation is also concerned that the
reoccupation of Palestinian cities and the continuing
policies of tightened closures, curfews and severe
restrictions on the freedom of movement of persons
and goods by Israel have further compounded the dire
humanitarian crisis, which, as noted in the report of the
Personal Humanitarian Envoy of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Catherine Bertini, might spiral out of
control within months. All those acts, which violate the
most basic provisions of international law and the
Fourth Geneva Convention, must be terminated. Unless
there is a reversal, the current situation will lead only
to further distrust, misery and, probably, even more
violence.
It is the responsibility of the international
community, and especially the Security Council, to
continue the search for the road to peace in the Middle
East. To that end, my Government reiterates that the
prospect of peace rests on full implementation of all
relevant United Nations resolutions, including Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), and
recognition of the principle of land for peace, which
would lead to the realization of two States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side within secure and
internationally recognized boundaries.
21
S/PV.4614 (Resumption 1)
Needless to say, the situation before the
Palestinian people and the Security Council is very
serious, and we call on the Council to take appropriate
and urgent action to avert further deterioration.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Indonesia for his kind words
addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Cyprus. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Christofides (Cyprus): I have the honour to
read out the statement of His Excellency Mr. Sotirios
Zackheos, Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Cyprus to the United Nations.
My delegation has aligned itself with the
statement of the European Union. I would like,
however, to make the following brief remarks.
The Government of Cyprus has expressed on
several occasions its principled position on the
Palestinian question.
In particular, we have condemned unequivocally
the terrorist acts and suicide bombings, which have
resulted in the deaths of Israeli civilians. At the same
time, we have pointed out that the continuing
occupation, the destruction of the Palestinian
infrastructure, the prolonging of the daily suffering of
the Palestinians as a result of the closures, curfews,
unemployment and the worsening economic situation
do not create the necessary climate for reconciliation
and regional stability.
We have all along called for restraint and
moderation from both sides and implored them to look
beyond confrontation and return to the negotiating
table, as well as take steps to break the cycle of
violence. We share the international community’s
belief that there can be no military solution or an
imposed settlement.
We watched, with great expectations, the
cessation of suicide killings for six weeks. We had
indeed hoped that this development, despite the
continuing Israeli actions that resulted in the loss of
lives in the West Bank and Gaza, would have led to
intensified moves towards a road map for achieving the
goal of the international community for the existence
of two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side
within secure and recognized borders, as envisaged by
resolution 1397 (2002). We therefore express our
dismay over the recent escalation, following the suicide
bombings in Israel and the terrorist attack on a
Palestinian school in Hebron.
The Government of the Republic of Cyprus
expresses its deep concern over the disproportionate
Israeli response and the actions of the Israeli army
aimed at the headquarters of President Arafat. We call
on Israel to lift its siege without further delay.
We must be frank. We cannot understand how the
siege of the Palestinian headquarters and the personal
hardship imposed on the elected leader of the
Palestinians can lead to an increase in Israeli security
or facilitate efforts towards Palestinian reforms which
are supported by the international community. We call
on Israel to consider the long-term consequences of
such actions.
In conclusion, we reiterate the need for the
implementation of the relevant United Nations
resolutions, as well as the provisions of the Geneva
Conventions. In particular, we express our concern
over the killing of children and of unarmed
demonstrators.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Nepal. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Sharma (Nepal): Let me congratulate you,
Sir, for the outstanding manner in which you have been
presiding over the Security Council in the month of
September. Your convening of this open debate on the
dangerous situation obtaining in the Middle East also
deserves our full appreciation.
The escalating cycle of violence in the Middle
East has reached new heights in the last few days. In
response to two suicide bombings by Palestinian
militants that killed six Israeli citizens, the Israeli
Defence Forces have mounted a massive retaliatory
action, using excessive and disproportionate force.
They have laid siege to Palestinian Authority
headquarters, razed its buildings to the ground and
partially torn down the living quarters of Palestinian
President Yasser Arafat. His life appears to have been
placed in imminent danger by default, if not by design.
The Middle East has been experiencing deep
turmoil and an endless spate of violence for quite some
time. In an effort to prevent attacks on Israel, the
22
S/PV.4614 (Resumption 1)
Israeli Defence Forces have reoccupied the West Bank
and destroyed most of the Palestinian security and
development infrastructure. Curfews and restrictions
have been imposed on Palestinian cities and towns.
Consequently, people are living in conditions of
profound hardship, without jobs and without incomes.
The overall situation in the West Bank and in the Gaza
Strip remains extremely precarious.
This must change. As the immediate first step, the
Israeli Government must withdraw from the occupied
territories, stop using excessive force against the
Palestinian people and lift the siege of Palestinian
towns and cities. It must not do anything that is likely
to harm President Arafat personally. Harming him
would be an affront to civility and to the human
conscience.
Nepal supports the legitimate aspiration of the
Palestinian people for a State, for freedom and for
progress. We also recognize Israel’s right to live in
security and to protect its citizens. However, neither
side will achieve what it wants by stepping up the
violence and further deepening hatred and animosity
between the two peoples.
Indeed, there is no military solution to the Middle
East problem. Only a fair and just proposal from Israel
will generate hope among the Palestinians and provide
them incentives to seek a peaceful, negotiated
settlement.
Meanwhile, the Palestinian Authority should
restore its security and development infrastructures, try
to prevent attacks against Israel and promote economic
development and social progress for its peoples. The
international community must help the Palestinian
Authority to rebuild its infrastructure and to get a fair
deal from Israel in the negotiations.
The Oslo Accords gave rise to that hope, only to
see it dashed in the current cycle of bloodshed. Now
the process will have to be built from the ground up
once again. Security Council resolution 1397 (2002)
and the Quartet agreement of July 2002 provide a way
forward for a comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
Nepal values all lives, irrespective of their
nationality, race or religion. Geography, as much as
history, has put the Israelis and Palestinians together.
They will have to learn to live with each other.
Violence will only breed violence and hatred.
The Security Council must therefore do
everything in its power immediately to stop the
ongoing bloodshed, to build bridges between the two
peoples and to launch a political process to find a
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Nepal for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is Mr. Papa Louis
Fall, Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Fall (Senegal), Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People (spoke in French): You are aware
how deeply gratified I am, Sir, to see you presiding
over the work of the Security Council.
Allow me at the outset to express to you our
sincere hopes for success in your term as President of
the Council in this particularly busy month of
September. To your predecessor, Ambassador John
Negroponte, Permanent Representative of the United
States, I should like to convey our deep and heartfelt
gratitude for the outstanding manner in which he
guided the work of the Council last month.
The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People is particularly
concerned by the rapid deterioration of the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territory. The responsibility
for this turn of events devolves first and foremost on
the Israeli Government, whose judgement is clouded by
the policy of security at all costs, which, as the facts
have shown with utter clarity, can only lead to
deadlock and to the slippery slope that we all are
witnessing today as powerless bystanders.
As the whole world knows, the President of the
Palestinian Authority is under siege, cornered in the
last ruined building of Ramallah and fully at the mercy
of Israeli fire and bulldozers, in living conditions that
are disgraceful, to say the least. Together with the
European Union and others who have expressed their
indignation, including Americans, the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People condemns the policy of the occupying Power,
just as it condemns the random and targeted attacks and
massacres of civilian populations.
23
S/PV.4614 (Resumption 1)
We make this energetic condemnation because the
subhuman plight imposed on the Palestinian leadership
is, paradoxically, a deliberate act by those who suffered
so greatly under Nazi barbarism and who still today
denounce the altogether intolerable remnants of anti-
Semitism. The survivors of the Holocaust must clearly
understand that the Israeli Government’s choice of
brutal force and boundless retaliation in unacceptable
conditions of terror, which some would associate with
a form of terrorism, cannot advance the cause of peace
in the subregion, and even less the security that is the
dream of both the Israeli and Palestinian peoples.
With the consent of the President, I would like to
endorse the recent exhortation by Monsignor Desmond
Tutu, hero of the anti-apartheid struggle and patron of
the Holocaust Centre of South Africa:
(spoke in English)
“Israel will never get true security and safety
through oppressing another people. True peace
can ultimately be built only on justice. Therefore,
Israel has three options: revert to the previous
stalemated situation, or exterminate all
Palestinians, or — I hope — strive for peace
based on justice, based on the withdrawal from
all the occupied territories and based on the
establishment of a viable State on those
territories, side by side with Israel, both with
secure borders.”
(spoke in French)
Just as no one can make the sun disappear,
Israel’s spokesmen and other representatives will never
be able to make us forget that the heart of the conflict
lies in Israel’s perpetuation of its illegal occupation of
Palestinian territories and the plethora of illegal acts
associated with it. While there is still time, Tel Aviv
must recognize that Israel will never live in peace and
security within internationally recognized borders as
long as Palestine is not free from occupation and
colonization. Nothing will succeed in bringing about
that peace and security: neither walls, which will fall
like the Berlin Wall, nor encirclement and closure, nor
wanton arrests of Palestinian activists, nor summary
and extrajudicial executions nor, even less, the mass
destruction of property, nor economic blockades nor
the systematic dismantling of the administration of the
Palestinian Authority. Such a policy has no future.
Rather, the future lies in a courageous and determined
resumption of the peace process on the basis of the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, in
particular resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397
(2002).
The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People once again launches an
urgent and heartfelt appeal to the Security Council, the
guarantor of peace and international security, to
shoulder its historic responsibilities. Posterity will not
forgive it for having left unresolved for over 50 years
the burning and grievous issue of Palestine. Tomorrow
may perhaps be too late to act, when the entire
flashpoint of the Middle East — cradle of the three
great revealed religions — will have been consigned to
the flames. It will be a thousand times more difficult
for the Council to act tomorrow than today.
The Committee urgently demands that the
occupying Power withdraw immediately and
unconditionally from Palestinian territory and that it
end its unacceptable siege of the offices of President
Arafat. In that regard, our Committee shares the
farsighted remarks made here this morning by the
Secretary-General, when he said that the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict cannot be resolved solely by the
use of force and that a policy exclusively based on the
use of force is doomed to failure. The Committee
therefore supports the Saudi initiative endorsed by the
Arab Summit held in Beirut, as well as the Quartet’s
peace plan, which must be implemented without delay.
Through me, the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People states
and restates its full support for sending an international
interposition force to halt the escalation of violence
and to protect the lives of Palestinian and Israeli
civilians.
According to the report of the Personal Envoy of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Catherine Bertini, 50 per
cent of the Palestinian population depend on
international assistance distributed by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and the World Food
Programme. In addition, over 70 per cent of the
population of Gaza, and 55 per cent of the population
of the West Bank, are living in poverty. In the light of
this, and given the rapid deterioration in the
humanitarian situation in the field, the Committee
urges international bodies to reinforce their assistance
to the Palestinian people. The Committee also urges
Israel to abide strictly by the relevant provisions of the
24
S/PV.4614 (Resumption 1)
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949.
Before concluding, I would like to reiterate with
force and conviction our unequivocal condemnation of
terrorism and terrorist acts against innocent civilians,
be they Israeli or Palestinian and regardless of
circumstances or motives. The suicide acts committed
by Palestinian extremists on Israeli territory, which
have been resolutely condemned by the Palestinian
Authority, can therefore not serve as a pretext or
excuse for stubbornly refusing to resume the peace
process.
It should therefore be understood that the
Committee holds out the sincere hope that the Council
will be able to properly assess the seriousness of the
situation in the Middle East and to honour the
international obligations incumbent upon it under the
Charter. Solutions to the crisis exist, and we are aware
of them. Let us therefore implement them in the
interest of the Israeli and Palestinian peoples, in the
interest of peace and security throughout the Middle
East and in the interest of cooperation and prosperity of
the peoples and nations of this sensitive region that
history, geography, culture and religion must serve to
unite.
I shall end my statement with the prescient
remark of Mr. Binyamin Bin Eliezer, the Israeli
Minister for Defence, cited in The New York Times of
21 September 2002:
(spoke in English)
“Today there are two schools of thought in the
Government ... One is to squash the Palestinians
and to conquer them completely, and the other
realizes that this is the time to hold out a hand
and to walk side by side.”
(spoke in French)
The Committee has no doubt whatever that the
allies and other friends of Tel Aviv will be able to
convince — I do not say coerce — the Israeli
Government to make the right choice, namely, to take
the side of those who favour peace.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People for his
kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Iraq. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Aldouri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin, Sir, by congratulating you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. I believe that your presidency will be
successful as the Council is facing extremely difficult
circumstances, particularly those under discussion
today.
Here we are once again, and I do not believe that
it will be the last time. We come to the Security
Council and call upon it to discharge its responsibilities
and commitments in accordance with its mandate to
maintain international peace and security by providing
protection for the Palestinian people, since it has not
yet done so.
On 19 September 2002, the Zionist occupying
forces reoccupied the headquarters and compound of
President Arafat. They have destroyed a number of
buildings in the compound and killed or injured a
number of civilians in a new defiance of international
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions. It is
not the first time that this has happened. The Council
has been called upon to protect President Arafat and
the Palestinian people several times before today. The
Palestinian people, the brethren of the Iraqi people, are
experiencing an unprecedented situation, comparable to
other situations that humanity has known in different
ages, such as the age of colonialism and the era of
fascism and nazism.
At a time when the international community is
incapable of taking the necessary measures to protect
the Palestinian people, the war crimes perpetrated by
the forces of the Zionist entity escalate. The
tremendous suffering of the Palestinian people
continues — for men, women and children, and in all
domains of life. We Iraqis know exactly what siege is,
as well as curfews, the bulldozing of land, killing, State
terrorism, the cutting off of power and water supplies,
and the cutting off of food and medicine. These are
weapons that have commonly been used against the
Palestinian people every hour and minute of the day, in
addition to traditional methods and weapons such as
bombings by Apache helicopters and United States
tanks and armoured vehicles. All the weapons that the
Israelis use are from the United States. In full view,
25
S/PV.4614 (Resumption 1)
those weapons are being used with unprecedented
brutality against an unarmed people.
Despite the fact that the Zionist entity continues
its criminal acts, which have been described by many
just and fair people as war crimes, crimes against
humanity and State terrorism, the international
community, including the Security Council, has not
been able to stop those crimes or to hold the Zionist
aggressor accountable. This is a case of double
standards. This new United States doctrine in the
United Nations will destroy what is left of the
credibility of the Security Council and the United
Nations — if they still possessed credibility in the eyes
of some.
At a time when we really know that the specific
position of one permanent member of the Security
Council is not to allow the Council to take a decision
on a resolution to halt the aggressor and to order the
dispatch of a protection force for the Palestinian
people, we are fully confident that the Council will not
stay silent. It should shoulder its responsibility in
accordance with the Charter.
The Palestinian people’s large and spontaneous
demonstrations in support of President Arafat in the
towns and camps of Palestine during the last two days
send a clear message to those who wish to change
Governments and Presidents according to their own
interests and their own likes and dislikes. Here we have
the Palestinian people upholding their President. All
the slogans being voiced reflect the strong faith of that
people, who clearly insist on President Arafat despite
the numerous American and Zionist attempts to apply
pressure to replace him. The siege on President Arafat
by the Zionist occupying forces is a huge challenge to
the resolutions of international law and a flagrant
breach of the norms of international humanitarian law
and the United Nations Charter.
My delegation believes that silence in the face of
such brutal crimes is silence in the face of truth.
Therefore, the Security Council has a duty to take the
necessary measures to protect this unarmed people and
its legitimate leadership from the Zionist machine of
war and destruction. This is a historic responsibility,
which the Council should undertake.
The draft resolution submitted to the Council by
the Arab Group is the bare minimum. It is even less
than that. Therefore, any opposition to the draft
resolution reflects the policy of might, to which the
Security Council should put an end in all
circumstances. Otherwise, the pressure will definitely
lead to an explosion. It will then be too late, and
everyone will be extremely regretful.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Iraq for his kind words addressed to
me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Morocco. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I wish you every success in your
endeavours.
Once again, the Council is meeting to consider
the situation in the occupied Palestinian territories. It
does so in the context of the ongoing Israeli escalation
and the persistence of the occupying Power in its
policy of demolition, murder and daily humiliation of
the Palestinian people and their legitimate leadership.
I should like to recall that, immediately after
these events, His Majesty King Mohammed VI, in his
capacity as Chairman of the Al-Quds Committee,
contacted President Yasser Arafat in order to ascertain
the details of the Palestinian situation, in particular in
the headquarters of the Palestinian President. During
that contact, the Morrocan monarch expressed the
complete solidarity of the Moroccan people with the
Palestinian people and their leadership in the new
tragedy imposed upon them by the Israeli occupation.
We have all seen with our own eyes how Israeli
bulldozers demolished the corridor separating President
Arafat’s bedroom from the conference wing of the
building. We have all seen how all the buildings
surrounding the presidential compound were destroyed.
Israel’s isolation of the Palestinian President and its
demand that he hand over a number of his close
associates can be seen only as a continuation of the
policy to humiliate the Palestinian leadership and to
destroy its legitimacy.
While the international community had thought
that such practices were a thing of the past, we find
ourselves once again facing the endless series of Israeli
provocations, which have naturally led the Palestinians
to demonstrate in the streets to express their support for
President Arafat. Once again, the response of the
26
S/PV.4614 (Resumption 1)
occupying forces was a violent one, leading to the
killing of innocent Palestinian civilians.
It is totally unacceptable that, whenever it finds
itself facing security problems on its territory, Israel
should proceed to attack the Palestinian leadership and
to destroy its infrastructure and the modest facilities
available to the Palestinian Authority. It is high time
that Israel understood that its security is inextricably
linked to more serious cooperation with the Palestinian
Authority and to its complete respect for the
Authority’s representatives. It is undeniable that the
Palestinian Authority has made genuine efforts in
recent weeks towards a far-reaching reform of its
structure and the rationalization of its work. A
scorched-earth policy has never led to the
establishment of lasting peace and security in any part
of the world.
The Kingdom of Morocco believes that it is
indeed high time for the Security Council to discharge
its responsibilities at this very delicate juncture in
international relations. It will thereby avert a further
deterioration of the situation in the Palestinian
territories and its repercussions in the rest of the
region. The Kingdom of Morocco takes this
opportunity to reaffirm its repudiation of all acts of
violence that target innocent civilians, by whomsoever
committed. It is our hope that the Security Council will
condemn such acts and adopt the necessary measures to
put an end to them.
The Council is called upon to adopt a resolution
to rectify the situation and breathe a breath of hope for
peace into the spirits of the peoples of the region,
foremost among which are the Palestinian people. We
sincerely hope that the Council will crown its
deliberations today with the adoption of a resolution
that will contribute positively to ending the violence in
the region and to the creation of conditions conducive
to addressing the deteriorating humanitarian situation
of the Palestinian people under the occupation. We
further hope that the resolution will restore the
negotiations to their proper path.
The Kingdom of Morocco will remain faithful to
its commitment to contribute to all serious initiatives
aimed at the establishment of a just, comprehensive
and lasting peace in the Middle East that will ensure
the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people,
including the right to the establishment of their
independent State, with its capital in Al-Quds Al-
Sharif, as well as Israel’s withdrawal from the other
Arab territories it has occupied since 1967. Such a
peace must ensure security for all States and peoples of
the region.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Morocco for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker on my list is Mr. Amadou Kébé,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Kébé (spoke in French): Allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month and to express
our high appreciation for the competent manner in
which you have guided the Council’s work. We also
thank you for having convened this meeting and for
having allowed the African Union to speak in this
debate.
My organization is here today to bear witness and
to add its voice to those of earlier speakers, who,
together are endeavouring to avert the dangers that
threaten Palestine, the Middle East and the entire
world.
My organization has on several occasions
addressed the Council in order to sound the alarm —
every time the spiralling violence and the political
stakes have exceeded what is tolerable and acceptable.
Again today the Council must urgently debate the
events in Palestine. Thanks to television, we can see, in
real time, how the headquarters of the Palestinian
Authority are being demolished. We know that that
action is not just an attempt to intimidate or a response
to suicide attacks, but a well-orchestrated plan, carried
out with great care, to try, in one way or another, to
eliminate President Yasser Arafat from the political
scene, as the Israeli authorities have repeated again and
again.
The current situation is extremely dangerous. If
nothing is done immediately to put an end to this spiral
of confrontation and to bring the two parties to the
negotiating table, the international community, through
its inaction, will have become complicit in one of the
greatest tragedies in history. We will therefore continue
to be a prophet of doom in an attempt to prevent a
repetition of history in Palestine — a repetition of the
tragedies that have occurred, century after century,
27
S/PV.4614 (Resumption 1)
because of the silence and cowardice of those who
could have taken decisive preventive action.
I should like to take this opportunity to recall the
principled position of my organization on the
Palestinian question. The African Union unreservedly
supports the just and legitimate struggle of the
Palestinian people, under the guidance of the Palestine
Liberation Organization, to exercise its inalienable
national rights, including the right to recover homes
and property, as well as the right to self-determination
and the right to an independent State on its national
land, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance
with international law and the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council.
My organization reaffirms its full solidarity and
unreserved support for the elected President of the
Palestinian Authority, Mr. Yasser Arafat, the leader
whom the Palestinian people freely chose in exercise of
their sovereign right.
The African Union also supports all the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, in particular
resolution 1397 (2002) of 12 March 2002, which, inter
alia, reaffirms the vision of a region in which two
States — Israel and Palestine — live side by side,
within secure and recognized borders.
Likewise, my organization supports all the
initiatives aimed at bringing about a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in the Middle East. Here I am
thinking of the Mitchell report and the Tenet plan on
security, which is designed to put an end to the cycle of
violence, as well as of the Arab peace plan published at
the Beirut Summit. Finally, and more specifically, I am
thinking of the initiatives of the Quartet, which call for
an immediate cessation of hostilities, a ceasefire and a
return to the negotiating table with a view to bringing
about a comprehensive settlement that covers political,
economic, humanitarian and institutional aspects of the
conflict.
Just as the African Union supports the settlement
plan of the Quartet, it also firmly supports the
Secretary-General’s proposal to set up a multinational
force, under Chapter VII of the Charter. The Union
believes that the presence of a robust and credible
United Nations force would make a positive
contribution to the implementation of the Quartet
initiatives.
But let us make no mistake: by destroying
infrastructures, disrupting structures and institutions
and arresting and assassinating Palestinian leaders,
Israel is aiming at nothing less than rendering any
peace plan inoperative. How can Palestinians possibly
fulfil their part of the bargain under the current
conditions of massive destruction?
The Palestinian and Israeli peoples have already
paid too high a price for a conflict that has lasted far
too long. The time has come for the various parties to
allow men of goodwill to try to give peace a chance. It
is not with tanks, political assassinations or suicide
attacks that solutions can be found. We believe that the
solution is waiting for us at the negotiating table.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Permanent Observer of the African Union for his kind
words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Mauritania. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Ould Deddach (Mauritania) (spoke in
Arabic): We are meeting here once again in very
difficult circumstances. I should like to take this
opportunity to thank you, Mr. President, for having
responded to the appeal of the Arab Group to hold this
open meeting of the Security Council to deal with the
serious and deteriorating situation in the occupied Arab
territories. This meeting is a further example of the
importance of implementing resolutions of
international legitimacy, including Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1402
(2002) and 1403 (2002).
It is regrettable that the Council should have to
hold successive meetings in order to reaffirm once
again the provisions of earlier resolutions or to adopt
additional resolutions that would be unnecessary if its
earlier resolutions had been implemented.
The current situation threatens to destroy all the
advances that have been made on the path of peace,
and it is therefore our duty to try to stop the backward
movement and continue the peace process. The Council
should therefore order an immediate end to the siege
imposed on President Arafat and a withdrawal from
Palestinian Authority lands, a halt to the destruction of
the institutions of the Palestinian Authority and an end
to putting the blame on President Arafat, a Nobel
Laureate who is deserving of that accolade.
28
S/PV.4614 (Resumption 1)
Security Council resolutions have not been
implemented and serious humanitarian developments
have resulted — since the Palestinian people face a
certain humanitarian tragedy unless there is urgent
intervention to provide protection for them. These are
elements that in fact test the Council’s credibility and
require it to shoulder its responsibilities, in accordance
with the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations. It is an utmost priority that the Council ensure
the implementation of the provisions of the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 in order to enable
humanitarian agencies and organizations to freely
provide assistance to the brotherly Palestinian people.
We in the Islamic Republic of Mauritania once
again reaffirm our full solidarity with the brotherly
Palestinian people and with its legitimate leader, Yasser
Arafat (Abu Amar). We call on the Security Council to
shoulder its responsibilities in the light of the gravity
of the situation, which does not allow any form of
procrastination, and to adopt the draft resolution
submitted to it for consideration.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Mauritania for his kind words
addressed to me.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. In conformity with the agreement reached in the
course of the Council’s prior consultations, I invite
members of the Council to return to the Consultation
Room to pursue consideration of the matter.
The meeting was suspended at 9.55 p.m.


United Nations S/PV.4614 (Resumption 2)
Security Council
Fifty-seventh year
4614th meeting
Tuesday, 24 September 2002, 2.20 a.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.
02-60164 (E)
*0260164*
President: Mr. Tafrov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bulgaria)
Members: Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Belinga-Eboutou
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wang Yingfan
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Valdivieso
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Levitte
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Traoré
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ryan
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Koonjul
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Aguilar Zinser
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Kolby
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mahbubani
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wehbe
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . Sir Jeremy Greenstock
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Cunningham
Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
Letter dated 20 September 2002 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2002/1055)
Note verbale dated 20 September 2002 from the Permanent Representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2002/1056)
2
S/PV.4614 (Resumption 2)
The meeting resumed at 2.20 a.m.
The President (spoke in French): As we agreed
in consultations, we shall vote on the draft resolution
on the basis of the English text, which is before us. The
draft resolution will be circulated in blue very shortly,
but I would like to know whether members are
prepared to vote on the basis of the document that is
now before them. I see this is the case.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2002/1063, which contains the text of a
draft resolution presented by Bulgaria, France, Ireland,
Norway and the United Kingdom. It is my
understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to
the vote on the draft resolution before it. If I hear no
objection, I shall now put the draft resolution to the
vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bulgaria, Cameroon, China, Colombia, France,
Guinea, Ireland, Mauritius, Mexico, Norway,
Russian Federation, Singapore, Syrian Arab
Republic, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland
Abstaining:
United States of America
The President (spoke in French): The result of
the voting is as follows: 14 votes in favour, none
against and 1 abstention. The draft resolution has been
adopted as resolution 1435 (2002).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.
Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
The resolution that we have adopted this evening was
flawed, in our view, in that it failed to explicitly
condemn the terrorist groups and those who provide
them with political cover, support and safe haven in the
perpetuation of conflict in the Middle East. Those
responsible for killing civilians obstruct the Quartet’s
efforts and the prospects for Palestinian reform. They
are known groups — Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad,
and the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade. The leaders and
spokesmen of these groups have openly claimed credit
for scores of terrorist bombings and for many deaths
and injuries. Their actions are aimed at the peace
process, at Israelis and at Palestinians.
This Council cannot claim to be seriously
considering efforts in the Middle East unless it is also
willing to recognize the tragic dynamic at play. Each
time a glimmer of hope, however dim, appears, a
terrorist act rises up to extinguish it. What we had
hoped for at this time was for the Council to assume its
responsibilities, take a clear stand against the actions of
these terrorist groups and call for action against them.
This resolution starts that process, but it does not
go far enough. Nor does it provide the clarity and
context we think is required, as set out in the draft text
we ourselves tabled on Monday. Our text was more
explicit on terrorism, those who perpetuate it, the need
to combat it, and on strong support for the Quartet, the
political process and continued effort on the ground in
the region. Because this resolution does not meet that
standard, and because we do not think it as well
conceived or worded as it should be, given the
importance of the issues it addresses, we have
abstained.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers on my list. The Security Council has
thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of
the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 2.30 a.m.

