United Nations S/PV.4808
Security Council
Fifty-eighth year
4808th meeting
Thursday, 14 August 2003, 1.40 p.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.
03-46748 (E)
*0346748*
President: Mr. Wehbe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Syrian Arab Republic)
Members: Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lucas
Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Raytchev
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Chungong Ayafor
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Maquieira
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wang Guangya
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Duclos
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Trautwein
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Sow
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Aguilar Zinser
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Akram
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Gatilov
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Arias
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . Sir Emyr Jones Parry
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Negroponte
Agenda
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 24 of Security Council
resolution 1483 (2003) (S/2003/715)
2
S/PV.4808
The meeting was called to order at 1.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 24 of Security Council resolution
1483 (2003) (S/2003/715)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I welcome the
presence of the Deputy Secretary-General at this
meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
24 of Security Council resolution 1483 (2003),
document S/2003/715.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2003/812, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Angola, Bulgaria,
Cameroon, Chile, Guinea, Spain, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Chile, China,
France, Germany, Guinea, Mexico, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America.
Against:
None.
Abstaining:
Syrian Arab Republic.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The result of
the voting is as follows: 14 in favour, none against and
one abstention. The draft resolution has been adopted
as resolution 1500 (2003).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.
Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to reaffirm our conviction that the success of the
political and economic reconstruction of Iraq and,
hence, its stability, require the United Nations to play a
dynamic role in the post-conflict management of the
country. The resolution that we have just adopted does
not, and is not intended to, correspond with that goal.
In particular, we would like a timetable to be
established with regard to the sequence of the political
transition — in keeping with one of the proposals of
the Secretary-General — which should facilitate the
stabilization of Iraq.
The resolution that has been adopted today does,
however, meet certain specific needs that the Council
has been identifying for some time — needs that were
formulated by the Secretary-General himself in his July
report. We note that in deciding to establish the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, the Security
Council is reinforcing United Nations activities in Iraq
and the work of the Special Representative by giving
them the necessary means to discharge their mandate.
That is why France voted in favour of the resolution.
Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): The
text that we have just adopted as Security Council
resolution 1500 (2003) deals with two specific issues:
the Governing Council of Iraq and the United Nations
Assistance Mission for that country. In its expression
of support for the Governing Council of Iraq, the
resolution hastens the day when the people of Iraq will
be in full command of their own affairs — a condition
that they have not known for some three decades.
When the Governing Council representatives
came to speak before the Security Council on 22 July,
they took an important step in the process of reaching
out to the international community to communicate
their dreams and aspirations for the Iraqi people and,
equally important, their plans to achieve those
aspirations. Through the resolution that we have just
adopted, the Security Council has made clear that we
heard the Governing Council’s message and that we
will work with it as a broadly representative partner —
3
S/PV.4808
a partner with which the United Nations and the
international community can engage so as to support it
in its endeavours to build a better Iraq.
The resolution helps pave the way towards the
peace, stability and democracy that the long-afflicted
Iraqi people so richly deserve. It also sends a clear
signal to those who oppose the political transformation
under way in Iraq that they are out of step with world
opinion. In this resolution we endorse again the vital
role that the United Nations is playing in Iraq. The
Secretary-General recommended the creation of a
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq to better
enable the United Nations to fulfil its responsibility
under resolution 1483 (2003); we fully support the
Secretary-General’s request.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): The
text just adopted as Security Council resolution 1500
(2003) reflects the vital role of the United Nations in
Iraq and creates the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI). It also rightfully welcomes the
establishment of the Governing Council of Iraq. We are
all agreed that the goal is to create, as soon as possible,
an internationally representative Government
exercising the sovereignty of Iraq. That must be
worked up with and by the Iraqi people. We want to
make progress rapidly, but of course it will take some
time to create the rights and opportunities which have
so long been denied to the Iraqi population.
The United Kingdom is working with the
coalition partners for an Iraq which can assume its
rightful place in the international community and
where the instruments of the international community
can operate normally. That will entail a growing role
for the United Nations and its agencies, and UNAMI
will be an important catalyst for this.
Lastly, the United Kingdom welcomes the support
given to this resolution, reflecting the Security Council
coming together and its members increasingly
converging to work for the shared objective of a stable,
united and free Iraq.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Pakistan voted in favour
of resolution 1500 (2003), on Iraq. It contains two
important elements: first, acknowledgement of the
Governing Council of Iraq and, secondly, the
establishment of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).
At every stage of the Council’s deliberations on
Iraq with regard to resolutions 1472 (2003), 1476
(2003) and especially 1483 (2003), Pakistan’s position
was guided by the interests of the Iraqi people. The
resolution just adopted upholds the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq. Pakistan, of course, would
also wish to see the reaffirmation of other principles,
such as: the right of the Iraqi people to choose their
own political destiny and form of government and to
exercise their right of self-determination; non-
intervention and non-interference in the internal affairs
of Iraq; permanent sovereignty and control over the
natural resources of Iraq; respect for the religious and
cultural traditions of the people of Iraq and for the
sanctity of holy places; and, finally, the right of the
Iraqi nation to economic and social reconstruction.
Those principles, indeed, are the framework within
which the Security Council must take all decisions and
actions relating to Iraq.
Pakistan has also advocated a central role for the
United Nations in the restoration of peace and security
in Iraq, the provision of humanitarian relief, Iraq’s
reconstruction and the restoration of its sovereignty
and independence. The resolution affirms the vital role
of the United Nations. Importantly, in paragraph 2, it
decides to establish UNAMI to help the Secretary-
General to fulfil his mandate, as set out in resolution
1483 (2003) and as envisaged in paragraph 98 of the
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
24 of resolution 1483 (2003) (S/2003/715).
We welcome the creation of UNAMI. Pakistan
has no doubt that the tasks facing UNAMI will be
challenging; it should receive the resources necessary
for the purpose. We also have no doubt that the role of
UNAMI will continue to grow and to become more
important as the Iraqi people move towards recovering
their full sovereignty and creating a fully representative
Government.
The Secretary-General, in his report pursuant to
paragraph 24 of resolution 1483 (2003), stated that the
Governing Council “will provide a broadly
representative Iraqi partner with whom the United
Nations and the international community at large can
engage” (S/2003/715, para. 107). The Government of
Pakistan has also termed the establishment of the
Governing Council as a welcome first step in the
direction of returning governance and restoring
sovereignty to the people of Iraq as soon as possible.
4
S/PV.4808
On 22 July, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, said
that the Governing Council was “broadly representative
of the various constituencies existing in Iraq”
(S/PV.4791, p. 8) and that it would need the full
support of the international community. He also
stressed the need to prepare a clear timetable for the
earliest possible restoration of Iraqi sovereignty. We
are glad that the views of my Government on the
Governing Council and the concept of an evolution
towards a fully representative Government, as reflected
in paragraph 1, have been approved.
At this stage, I should like to make one comment
of a general nature. Everyone recognizes the value of
consultations and consensus among the five permanent
members of the Security Council. However, we believe
that it is among the entire Council membership that the
Council’s decisions should be finally discussed and
approved. We hope that, in future, we — as a non-
permanent member — will have more time to consider
draft resolutions, especially on issues as important as
Iraq.
We believe that the people of Iraq face
monumental challenges in the economic, social and
political fields. We hope that the adoption of this
resolution will enable the international community to
accelerate Iraq’s progress towards full normalization of
conditions in the country. We look forward to the day
when that great nation — which shares strong bonds of
history, faith and culture with the people of Pakistan —
will recover its former glory in the international
community and emerge as a leading nation in the
Islamic world.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Spain
welcomes the adoption of this resolution, which we
joined in sponsoring. Its text reflects the spirit of the
Spanish draft presidential statement that my delegation
was eager to approve in the final days of our
presidency but that agenda-related reasons basically
prevented.
The resolution is necessary, realistic and relevant.
It secures the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq and reaffirms the Organization’s vital role in Iraq’s
reconstruction. Moreover, it hails the existence of the
Governing Council as a first step towards what we all
wish for: a sovereign, stable and democratic Iraq —
ultimately, an Iraq that controls its own future in peace
and prosperity.
Finally, I should like to indicate that I agree with
the comments made by the representative of Pakistan
concerning the desirability of extending Council
discussions to all members as a general rule.
Mr. Trautwein (Germany): Germany voted in
favour of resolution 1500 (2003). We believe that this
decision by the Council today marks an important step.
Germany has always advocated a vital role for the
United Nations in Iraq, and we welcomed the recent
suggestions of the Secretary-General in that regard as
being of the utmost importance for the necessary
implementation of resolution 1483 (2003).
The decision of the Council to establish the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI),
with the responsibilities set out in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2003/715), definitely reaffirms
that indispensable, vital role and is therefore a
significant step in the right direction. Moreover, that
decision creates a direct responsibility of UNAMI to
the Council and allows the Secretary-General to furnish
the United Nations efforts with the necessary financial
means.
We also agree with the Secretary-General that the
establishment of the Governing Council has to be
welcomed as an important first step in the development
towards an internationally recognized representative
government in order to create momentum in the
political process.
Resolution 1500 (2003) deserves merit for having
implemented those requests of the Secretary-General as
such without unnecessarily politicizing the matter. In
that respect, the adoption of this resolution will
contribute to finding a common way forward which
will lead to the full sovereignty of Iraq. Irrespective of
the fact that the resolution is certainly not the one
about which the media has speculated in the last few
days — a revision of resolution 1483 (2003) — it
marks, from our point of view, the beginning of a
process that should lead to a more even balance of
responsibilities among the United Nations, the
international community and the Coalition Provisional
Authority in the common effort to rebuild Iraq
economically and with respect for democratic values
and the rule of law.
Without in any way diminishing the substance of
this important resolution, I would like to conclude by
saying that we would have appreciated, if not expected,
a more transparent and comprehensive consultation
5
S/PV.4808
process among all members of the Council, with a
view, inter alia, to giving more members of the Council
an opportunity to consider sponsorship.
Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico voted in favour of resolution 1500 (2003),
convinced of the fundamental and decisive role that the
United Nations should play in the process of rebuilding
Iraq and in the efforts of Iraqis to recover full
sovereignty.
My country considers this resolution to be a
necessary technical step to enable the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative to carry out
fully the tasks entrusted to them by the Security
Council through the provisions of the relevant Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 1483 (2003), which
clearly states that it is the responsibility of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to coordinate
the post-conflict activities of the United Nations, to
coordinate among United Nations and international
agencies engaged in humanitarian assistance and
reconstruction activities and to assist the people of
Iraq. The resolution further stipulates that those
activities must be carried out in full and absolute
independence.
In that context, the Secretary-General, in the
report (S/2003/715) on the activities of his Special
Representative for Iraq, which he submitted in
fulfilment of his mandate, gave a detailed account of
the tasks that he considers the United Nations should
carry out in order to make a positive contribution to
Iraq’s recovery of its sovereignty and to the
reconstruction of the country, including the
establishment of a critical road map and concrete
timetable for establishing a fully representative
government that can exercise the sovereignty of the
Iraqi people.
In that context, the creation of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, which is provided for in
the resolution that the Council has just adopted, is a
vital step towards fulfilling those tasks. That Mission
enables the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative to have an effective presence in Iraq so
that their tasks can be carried out independently,
forcefully and capably.
We voted in favour of this resolution because it is
our concern that there should be a United Nations
presence in Iraq. It is our concern that the United
Nations should play a decisive role in that country’s
development. It is our concern that the United Nations
should support the Iraqi people by establishing an
independent and sovereign government. It is our
concern that the United Nations should fulfil its
humanitarian duties, employing its capacities in that
area. It is our concern that the United Nations should
have the institutional capacity to provide for, defend
and promote human rights and to create a space for the
participation of international humanitarian agencies in
carrying out those objectives. Finally, it is our concern
that, as indicated by the Secretary-General, the United
Nations should actively participate in Iraq’s full
recovery of its sovereignty, and in the termination of
the military occupation. In that context, we associate
ourselves with the Security Council consensus on
welcoming the establishment of the provisional
Governing Council as a first logical step towards
establishing a genuinely representative government that
exercises the sovereignty of the Iraqi people. That
welcome does not constitute legal recognition. Nor
should it be interpreted as endorsement. It is not,
because the Governing Council is still under the
authority of the occupying Powers.
Lastly, the independence of the United Nations in
Iraq means that the international community has
entrusted it with tasks that are distinct from the
obligations of the occupying Powers established as an
Authority. The Authority formed by the occupying
Powers bears the responsibility for ensuring the safety
and security of the population in the occupied territory.
That obligation stems from the Fourth Geneva
Convention and is in no way affected by the present
resolution.
Like other members of the Council, my country
has already conveyed to the sponsors of this resolution
our view that it should be through the search for
consensus among the 15 members, through the broad
discussion of all initiatives, that we can arrive at
broader and more consolidated agreement in the
decisions of the Security Council. That is why we hope
that procedures will be respected in future initiatives,
so that all members of the Council will participate in
all stages of discussion and adoption of a resolution.
Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation has consistently
advocated that the United Nations should play an
enhanced role in the political settlement of the situation
in Iraq. We are convinced that the resolution of the
complex problems facing that country can be achieved
6
S/PV.4808
only through the consistent efforts of the entire
international community, with the United Nations and
the Security Council playing a decisive role.
It is necessary to fully restore the sovereignty of
Iraq as soon as possible and give to the Iraqi people the
right to independently manage the resources of their
country. Conditions should be created to ensure that the
Iraqi people are able to choose a legitimate and
internationally recognized Government that can help
resolve the crisis in the country.
From the outset, Russia has supported a Council
decision on establishing the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq. The resolution adopted today, with
our active participation, fully reflects Russia’s position
supporting the Secretary-General’s recommendations to
deploy a full-fledged United Nations mission to play an
important role in resolving the crisis and rebuilding
Iraq. The resolution is in keeping with Russia’s
approach to the creation of the temporary Governing
Council in Iraq, which is an important first step
towards establishing an internationally recognized
Government and restoring State sovereignty.
We hope that this Council decision, in addition to
its resolution 1483 (2003), will give added impetus to
increasing the real participation of the United Nations
in the Iraqi post-war process, leading to the solid
settlement of the Iraqi problem in keeping with
international law.
Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the resolution on
Iraq just adopted by the Security Council. China has
always attached great importance to the post-war
reconstruction of Iraq. We have always maintained that
the United Nations should play an active and effective
role in the reconstruction process.
One month ago the Secretary-General
recommended the creation of a United Nations
assistance mission for Iraq. We believe that very
important recommendation will help strengthen the role
of the United Nations in Iraq’s reconstruction. China
supports the establishment of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq as soon as possible.
China welcomes the establishment of the
Governing Council of Iraq. We believe that it is an
important step towards Iraqi self-government. We also
look forward to the early and full restoration of Iraqi
sovereignty.
In the light of the above-mentioned
considerations, the Chinese delegation voted in favour
of the resolution.
The President (spoke in Arabic): As the
representative of China was the last speaker on the list,
I will make a statement in my capacity as
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, which is an
explanation of Syria’s position on resolution 1500
(2003).
The Syrian Arab Republic abstained in the vote
on the resolution just adopted by the Council. We did
so to reflect the Arab position endorsed by the Foreign
Ministers of Arab States members of the Arab follow-
up committee that met in Cairo on 5 August 2003 on
the question of fraternal Iraq, and in keeping with
Syria’s responsibility as the Arab representative on the
Security Council. Syria and all Arab States support the
need to end the occupation of Iraq and to form a
legitimate national Iraqi Government, as soon as
possible and within a clear and specific time frame,
based on equal rights and justice for all Iraqi citizens
and free of ethnic, gender or religious discrimination,
so that the world will be able to deal with a legitimate
Iraqi Government.
Today Syria reiterates to the Council its support
for the position adopted by the Foreign Ministers of
Arab States members of the follow-up committee, who
stressed that the formation of the interim Governing
Council of Iraq is a beginning that will gain credibility
from the fact that it is paving the way for the formation
of a national Government that represents the full
spectrum of Iraqi society and is capable of fulfilling the
aspirations of the Iraqi people. Hence, only the Iraqi
people can lend legitimacy to the Governing Council.
Syria reaffirms its commitment to support the
central role of the United Nations in Iraq, be it terms of
the political process or reconstruction. We also support
the efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative in Iraq.
We regret that the sponsors of the draft resolution
did not take into account a number of important
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
report in document S/2003/715, of 17 July 2003, which
were widely supported by members of the Council. We
deeply regret that the consultation exercise, which was
conducted outside of Security Council Chamber in a
format that lacked transparency, did not include the
input of rotating members of the Council, including
7
S/PV.4808
Syria, in the substantive part of the draft resolution.
That resulted in the sponsors maintaining the text and
not accepting proposals for logical amendments, which
narrowed the options available to us and made the text
available to us on a “take it or leave it basis”.
Syria hopes that in future discussions and
resolutions pertaining to Iraq, the Security Council will
comprehensively address all aspects constituting the
genuine concerns of the brotherly people of Iraq. We
also hope that the Council will work to bring about a
resolution of all such concerns in order to ensure the
end of occupation and to enable the people of Iraq to
restore national sovereignty over their territory and, as
soon as possible, to establish an elected national
Government that enjoys the support of the Iraqi people
and is recognized by the international community.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 2.20 p.m.
