United Nations S/PV.4803
Security Council
Fifty-eighth year
4803rdmeeting
Friday, 1 August 2003, 7.40 p. m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.
03-44942 (E)
*0344942*
President: Mr. Wehbe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Syrian Arab Republic)
Members: Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Gaspar Martins
Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Raytchev
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Chungong Ayafor
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Muñoz
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Zhang Yishan
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Duclos
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Pleuger
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Boubacar Diallo
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Aguilar Zinser
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Khalid
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Gatilov
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Arias
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . Sir Emyr Jones Parry
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Negroponte
Agenda
The situation in Liberia
Letter dated 29 July 2003 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2003/769)
2
S/PV.4803
The meeting was called to order at 7.40 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President (spoke in Arabic): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
August, I should like to take the opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr.
Inocencio Arias, Permanent Representative of Spain to
the United Nations, for his service as President of the
Security Council for the month of July 2003. I am sure
I speak for all members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Arias for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council’s
business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Liberia
Letter dated 29 July 2003 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2003/769)
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2003/769, which contains the text of a
letter dated 29 July 2003 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2003/784, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by the United States of
America.
I should like also to draw the attention of
members of the Council to documents S/2003/678,
S/2003/695 and S/2003/696.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, at this meeting; I
appreciate the keen interest that his presence reflects.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation takes this opportunity to congratulate
you, Sir, on your speedy and effective assumption of
the presidency for the month of August. Our thanks go
to Ambassador Arias of Spain and his delegation for
their effective work last month and for their good
temper and sense of humour throughout our difficult
work. We too welcome the presence of Secretary-
General Kofi Annan at this meeting.
The Government of Mexico has decided to
abstain in the vote on draft resolution S/2003/784. My
country would have preferred a paragraph-by-
paragraph vote, but the sponsor of the draft resolution
was opposed to that procedure, which is contemplated
in rule 32 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure. We requested a paragraph-by-paragraph
vote in order to make it clear that the one and only
reason for our abstention is our disagreement with the
content of paragraph 7 of the draft resolution and that,
like the other members of the Council, we fully support
all the other provisions of the text.
In the course of the negotiations, Mexico proposed
the omission of that paragraph, because it is essentially
irrelevant to the objective of restoring security and peace
in Liberia; it is unnecessary for the purposes of this draft
resolution. Like other delegations, Mexico submitted
various other formulations in a quest for consensus.
Unfortunately, consensus was not achieved. Paragraph 7,
to which Mexico has an objection, would set a serious
precedent by doing away with the prerogatives of States
whose legislation provides for the exercise of criminal
jurisdiction in cases where crimes are committed against
their nationals abroad. Mexico cannot support that; it is
in specific contravention of our laws: article 4 of
Mexico’s penal code clearly establishes that crimes
committed abroad by a foreigner against a Mexican shall
be prosecuted in Mexico, provided that the accused has
not been the accused of a definitive trial in the country
in which the crime occurred.
Likewise, we express our concern at the fact that
paragraph 7 fails to provide guarantees for the
attainment of one of the international community’s most
dearly held objectives — the elimination of impunity —
since it does not establish an obligation for troop-
contributing countries to try officials or personnel who
have committed crimes or other offences.
3
S/PV.4803
It was for all those reasons and in order to uphold
the laws of Mexico and the principles of international
law that Mexico decided to abstain in the vote. The
Mexican Constitution imposes an absolute obligation
upon the head of the Executive branch — whom I
represent — to respect and ensure respect for the laws
emanating from the Constitution.
We regret that we must abstain, because ever
since it joined the Security Council Mexico has been
particularly attentive to the issue of peace in Liberia
and to the humanitarian situation there. Our
chairmanship of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1132 (1997)
concerning Sierra Leone has given us an opportunity to
look closely at the critical situation of Liberia in recent
years and to gain an understanding of the responsibility
of the international community and of the Security
Council to address the situation in that country.
Mexico never agreed with the strategy of passive
containment that was for so long adopted towards
Liberia; its only outcome was the deterioration of the
humanitarian and human rights situation for the
majority of Liberians. Further, Mexico has worked to
ensure that the Security Council devotes particular
attention to the problems of West Africa, employing a
comprehensive regional approach. Here, peace in
Liberia is a key component of peace and security
throughout the region.
In the course of the July 2002 visit by our
delegation to assess compliance with the Sierra Leone
sanctions imposed by the Security Council, we met
with Liberian authorities, civil society and with United
Nations officials and staff. As a result of those
meetings we advised the Security Council to abandon
passivity and adopt an approach of constructive
engagement so that, through the active participation of
the United Nations and with the leadership of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) we would be able to achieve political
agreements between the Government of Charles Taylor
and the armed rebels, leading to a ceasefire and, thus,
to an end to the violence whose innocent victims are
women and children. In that spirit, over the course of
several months, the delegation of Mexico advocated a
presidential statement, which was ultimately issued on
13 December 2002 (S/PRST/2002/36). In that
statement the Security Council expressed its grave
concern about the humanitarian situation and stated the
urgent need to adopt a strategy of constructive
engagement. Unfortunately, the ensuing efforts were
inadequate for want of political will.
Despite repeated appeals by Mexico and other
countries, the violence continued, instigated from
within Liberia and from outside it, and the
humanitarian situation became critical. Following the
Accra agreement of 17 June 2003 establishing a
ceasefire in Liberia and securing Taylor’s commitment
to leave power, Mexico supported the proposal to
dispatch a multinational stabilization force to Liberia
and the subsequent deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation, which would guarantee a
transitional political process culminating in free and
fair elections.
The need for such a multilateral peacekeeping
force was dramatically emphasized by ECOWAS and
eloquently expressed by the Secretary-General himself.
On 18 July 2003, Mr. Kofi Annan made an urgent
appeal to the Security Council, particularly to some of
its permanent members, to adopt, in accordance with
the Charter, the measures necessary to put an end to
violence and to ensure the supply of basic humanitarian
assistance to the civilian population of Liberia,
concentrated mainly in Monrovia because of the war.
During the Security Council mission to West
Africa, which took place from 26 June to 5 July 2003,
the Mexican delegation reiterated once again its belief
that it was necessary and urgent that the Council and
the international community lend their full support to
ECOWAS so that the proposed multinational force
could be deployed to Liberia in order to make the
parties comply with the ceasefire to which they had
committed themselves.
Finally, in recent weeks Mexico continued to
insist that the Security Council act, given the repeated
acts of violence and criminal attacks against the
civilian population carried out mainly by the rebel
groups. My delegation is convinced that, if we had
acted in time, many lives would have been saved and
the great suffering of the Liberian people would have
been lessened.
While this draft resolution comes a bit late, the
action it proposes must serve as a point of departure to
begin a transitional political process to restore peace to
Liberia. The draft resolution states, and my delegation
agrees, that it is imperative that there be respect for the
ceasefire, on the basis of which all parties involved,
including the political parties, civil society and all
4
S/PV.4803
those who have been forced into exile, can agree on
measures that will lead to the election of a Government
that represents all Liberians.
We also agree that President Charles Taylor must
honour his commitment to abandon power in order to
allow this process to move forward, and we fully
support the position of the African Union and
ECOWAS that no force that aspires to gain power
through armed force can achieve such power
legitimately. We hope that in the coming days the
Liberians will finally regain hope.
Mr. Pleuger (Germany): First of all, I welcome
the presence of the Secretary-General at this very
important meeting. As this is the first time that I
address you, Sir, in your new capacity as President of
the Council, I would like to congratulate you and
assure you that we will support your presidency as far
as we can. I would also like to thank Ambassador Arias
for the very able way in which he conducted the
business of the Council during the previous month.
Last but not least, I would like to thank Ambassador
Negroponte for having presented us with the draft
resolution on which we are going to vote today.
We deeply deplore the dramatic events that are
taking place in Liberia. The reports that are coming out
of that country are deeply disturbing. The constant
killing of civilians, children and women in particular is
to be deplored. As was stated by Ambassador Aguilar
Zinser, the Council must react quickly and swiftly. It is
already quite late to do so. Therefore, Germany
supports the rapid deployment of a multinational force
and subsequently of a United Nations force. We
therefore urged, together with others, the presidency to
convene this meeting. We also urged that the 24-hour
rule be waived so that we could come to a decision at
an early stage. We thus are in favour of all parts of the
draft resolution that pertain to the mission in Liberia.
However, we must also admit that we would have
liked to see one more paragraph in the draft resolution
pertaining to children and their well-being. We would
have liked to have not only the very welcome second
preambular paragraph, which pertains to the well-being
and rehabilitation of children, but also a stronger
operative paragraph calling on all Liberian parties to
ensure the protection, well-being and rehabilitation of
children in accordance with international obligations
and the provisions of Security Council resolutions 1261
(1999), 1314 (2000), 1379 (2001) and 1460 (2003).
Having said that, I have to state that my
delegation cannot agree with paragraph 7 of the draft
resolution. Paragraph 7 goes far beyond what the
Council decided just a few weeks ago in resolution
1487 (2003), on which we abstained. Paragraph 7 not
only limits the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), it goes beyond that. It limits
national jurisdiction of third countries with respect to
crimes committed by members of the multinational
force or a United Nations stabilization force if that
member is the national of a State not party to the Rome
Statute of the ICC.
Therefore, it is our view that the proposed
paragraph would prevent prosecutors in States that may
have to exercise jurisdiction over crimes committed
against their nationals abroad from investigating and
prosecuting those crimes. In practical terms, for our
legal system that would mean that if a German were
killed in Liberia, no German court could prosecute the
perpetrator.
The second point is that prosecuting what we
consider to be international crimes, such as trafficking
in human beings — trafficking in women — piracy or
other international crimes, under Germany law by any
German court, regardless of where the crimes are
committed and by whom, would not be possible. We
feel that the purpose of that paragraph could have been
met by concluding a bilateral status of forces
agreement, as has been done in previous instances and
in other peacekeeping operations.
There is no precedent for that. There is no reason
to limit the national jurisdiction of third countries.
There is no justification for discriminating against
peacekeepers from countries that are members of the
Rome Statute of the ICC. Therefore, we feel that that
paragraph is not in accordance with international and
German law, and we regret not being able to accept it.
Therefore, Germany has no choice but to abstain in the
vote. Although — and I would like to stress this — we
support wholeheartedly the rest of the draft resolution,
we would have preferred to have voted on the draft
resolution paragraph by paragraph to make clear that
the Security Council has consensus on all parts of the
draft resolution except paragraph 7.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now put to the
vote the draft resolution contained in document
S/2003/784.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
5
S/PV.4803
In favour:
Angola, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Chile, China,
Guinea, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Spain,
Syrian Arab Republic, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
Against:
None
Abstaining:
France, Germany, Mexico
The President (spoke in Arabic): The result of
the voting is as follows: 12 votes in favour, none
against and 3 abstentions. The draft resolution has been
adopted as resolution 1497 (2003).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.
Mr. Negroponte (United States of America):
Mr. President, I join you and others in welcoming the
Secretary-General in our midst. I thank him for his
presence on this occasion.
The United States is gratified by the swift action
taken by the Security Council in adopting this
important resolution on Liberia, introduced by my
delegation. Our sponsorship of this resolution reflects
the importance that the United States places on finding
the right and effective means to bring peace to Liberia.
It is our conclusion that an effective response demands
intensive involvement by the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and the rest of the
international community, anchored by the United
Nations. The United States will do its part to support
this endeavour. We ask all Member States to show their
support through contributions to the staffing, funding
and sustenance of the Multinational Force and the
United Nations peacekeeping mission to follow.
This resolution will permit the Multinational
Force to deploy in Liberia under the authority of
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter. It also sets
in motion the establishment of a United Nations
peacekeeping mission. The resolution authorizes the
peacekeeping forces in Sierra Leone to provide support
to the initial phase of ECOWAS deployment without
jeopardizing the continuing mission of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), and it
authorizes the Secretary-General to take immediate
steps to begin to prepare for deployment of a follow-on
United Nations peacekeeping mission.
We are confident that the committed efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Jacques Klein, backed fully by the will of the Council
and the resources of the Secretariat, will significantly
advance this critical deployment. The Multinational
Force and a follow-on United Nations peacekeeping
operation go hand in hand. The Multinational Force is
a crucial short-term bridge to our goal of placing
United Nations peacekeepers on the ground in Liberia
as soon as possible.
We appreciate the willingness of many of the
West African States to assist in the vital task of
restoring peace to Liberia. I would like to take special
note of Nigeria’s commitment of two battalions for
immediate deployment. The United States is pleased to
provide support for those deploying units. President
Bush has directed the Secretary of Defense to position
appropriate military capabilities to support the
deployment of an ECOWAS force. A United States
Marines force will shortly reach the coast off Liberia.
A first ECOWAS reconnaissance team has arrived in
Monrovia. As part of the ECOWAS vanguard for the
Multinational Force, a first Nigerian battalion is set to
move into Liberia as soon as Monday.
Clearly, there was a manifest need for the Council
to adopt this resolution quickly. As the security situation
deteriorates, humanitarian conditions — already
appalling — continue to worsen at a devastating pace.
Peacekeepers on the ground will secure the environment
for the delivery of humanitarian assistance. Their
presence will support the implementation of the 17 June
ceasefire agreement, including establishing conditions
for initial stages of disarmament and demobilization
activities. Very importantly, peacekeepers will safeguard
security in the wake of Charles Taylor’s departure from
the Liberian presidency. I cannot emphasize enough how
crucial it is for Taylor to leave now.
Furthermore, it is imperative that all Liberian
parties who are signatories to the 17 June ceasefire
agreement — in particular the leadership of the
Liberians United for Reconciliation and Democracy
(LURD) and of the Movement of Democracy in Liberia
(MODEL) — immediately and scrupulously uphold the
17 June ceasefire agreement. In that regard, all
Liberian parties must cooperate fully with the
6
S/PV.4803
Multinational Force and ensure the Force’s safety and
security in Liberia.
The Multinational Force, starting with the
Nigerian battalion that is leaving UNAMSIL, can now
deploy confident of the support of the Council and in
the knowledge that planning for a follow-on United
Nations peacekeeping force is under way.
Finally, I would simply note that, in order to deal
with the demands of this urgent situation, we ask the
Secretary-General to direct his Special Representative
for Liberia to establish a presence in Liberia as soon as
possible.
Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I should like to welcome the presence of
the Secretary-General at our meeting today. I should
also like to warmly congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of August. I am confident that, under
your leadership, the Council will be able to accomplish
its task successfully. I would like to assure you of our
full support in your work. In addition, I should like to
take this opportunity to thank the representative of
Spain for his outstanding performance as President last
month.
The Chinese delegation is deeply concerned at the
situation in Liberia. We call upon all Liberian factions
to abide by their commitments. We hope that, in the
people’s interests, they will intensify their constructive
negotiations in order to reach a consensus on
arrangements for a transitional Government as soon as
possible.
We welcome the resolution just adopted by the
Security Council, which authorizes the deployment of a
Multinational Force to Liberia. The resolution has
demonstrated the determination of the United Nations
in seeking a political solution to the Liberian question.
We have taken note of the concerns of a number
of members with regard to paragraph 7 of the
resolution, and we regret that a compromise solution
could not be found on that point by the parties
concerned. We hope that the resolution can contribute
to stabilizing the Liberian situation, to alleviating the
humanitarian crisis in its capital and to promoting a
peaceful solution to the Liberian question.
China appreciates the tireless efforts of the
Secretary-General and of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) in promoting the peace
process. We highly value the decisions reached at the
recent ECOWAS summit, and we call upon the
international community to provide assistance to the
ECOWAS peacekeeping force. We hope that
cooperation between the United Nations and ECOWAS
can be further strengthened so that, together, they can
help the parties in Liberia to end their conflict and to
achieve stability and peace in the country soon. We
look forward to the report of the Secretary-General on
the timely deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping mission.
Mr. Muñoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like to offer my delegation’s congratulations to you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency, which, as is
already evident, augurs well for the work of the
Council this month. We would also like to express our
appreciation for the work done by Ambassador Arias as
President last month. We are very pleased to see the
Secretary-General at this meeting. His presence
certainly reflects the urgency of the issue and the
importance of the resolution that we have just adopted.
The international community and public opinion
demanded swift action from our Organization, and
particularly from the Security Council. We could not
have continued to wait for the Council to take a
decision while civilians, including women and
children, were dying in Liberia. That is the primary
reason why we voted in favour of the resolution.
There were other considerations, such as the fact
that, given the absence of local jurisdiction as a result
of the catastrophic domestic situation in Liberia, there
should be a competent criminal jurisdiction there. We
must ensure legal security, and it should be recalled
that personnel of the United Nations and of the
specialized agencies are granted certain privileges and
immunities, including immunity from criminal
prosecution. The same is true of bilateral agreements
on the status of forces vis-à-vis the host country. We
are concerned about the fact that, by making
exceptions, we might impede the harmonious
development of international law.
To sum up, Chile supported the resolution with
enthusiasm, since saving lives is the most urgent
priority. We must respond appropriately to a
humanitarian crisis that brooks no further delay.
Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me to congratulate you, Sir, and to express our best
wishes to you on your assumption of the presidency of
7
S/PV.4803
the Council. I should also like to thank the Spanish
delegation for its endeavours during its presidency last
month. I would like to welcome the presence this
evening of the Secretary-General, which attests once
again to his commitment to peace and stability in West
Africa. I would like to take this opportunity to say how
much we appreciate the very important personal role
that he has played in recent days and weeks in the
service of the people of Liberia.
We are all familiar with the tragic situation that
has been continuing in Liberia for many months.
France fully supports the thrust of the resolution that
has just be adopted. The Security Council has thereby
authorized the speedy deployment in Liberia of a
Multinational Force and, subsequently, of a United
Nations force. We welcome the fact that the resolution
was adopted so rapidly. We are grateful to the
delegation of the United States for having taken the
initiative on this matter.
As we all know, the contribution of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) has
been and remains decisive for creating the opening for
a resolution of the crisis in Liberia. In this regard we
welcome the role played by the leaders of ECOWAS, in
particular President Kufuor and President Obasanjo. It
is crucial that ECOWAS receive all necessary support
from the international community. Today’s resolution
represents an important stage in that respect.
France, unfortunately, was not able to join in
voting in favour of the resolution because of one of its
provisions, which is unrelated to the situation in
Liberia. I am referring to the establishment of
exclusive jurisdiction by the national criminal courts of
States participating in this operation for the prosecution
of their nationals.
We do not believe that the scope of the
jurisdictional immunity thus created is compatible with
the provisions of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, the norms of French law or the
principles of international law. Furthermore, it causes a
problem of consistency at a time when the Security
Council has the intention of spearheading the
movement to reject impunity in all its forms.
My delegation put forward several suggestions
regarding this provision that we believed would allow us
to get around the problem. With respect to the vote
itself, we, like others, made some procedural
suggestions that would have made it possible for the
Security Council to affirm its unity regarding the
objective of the resolution while enabling those States
having a problem with the question of penal immunity to
dissociate themselves from the text on that specific
point. We regret that those initiatives were not agreed to.
But the point we wish to make this evening is that
new hope is being born for Liberia and its people.
Despite the disagreement on a major issue of
international law to which I referred, we would like to
welcome the commitment of the United States of
America to Liberia within the United Nations
framework. That commitment will considerably change
the situation regarding the tragedy of Liberia. Nor can
we forget that that tragedy affects security in the entire
subregion.
The commitment of the United States will
therefore also have a positive impact on regional
stability. France, like the United Kingdom, is
committed, under the auspices of the United Nations,
to countries neighbouring Liberia, and we welcome the
commitment of the United Nations. We are determined
to work closely with all those who contribute to the
security of the region, side by side with ECOWAS and
the United Nations, so that West Africa can embark
once again on the path to peace, stability and
development.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.
The meeting rose at 8.20 p.m.
