United Nations S/PV.5117
Security Council
Sixtieth year
5117thmeeting
Friday, 28 January 2005, 4.10 p.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.
05-22263 (E)
*0522263*
President: Mr. Mayoral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Argentina)
Members: Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Baali
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Adechi
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Sardenberg
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Zhang Yishan
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Faaborg-Andersen
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Duclos
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Vassilakis
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Kitaoka
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mercado
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dumitru
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Konuzin
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . Mr. Johnston
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Manongi
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Patterson
Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (S/2005/36)
2
S/PV.5117
The meeting was called to order at 4.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(S/2005/36)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Lebanon, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Assaf
(Lebanon), took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/36, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon. Members also have before them document
S/2005/53, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Denmark, France, Greece, Romania, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America.
I should also like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to documents S/2005/13,
S/2005/23, S/2005/24, S/2005/25, S/2005/26, which
contain letters from the Permanent Representative of
Lebanon, and documents S/2005/14 and S/2005/40,
containing letters from the Permanent Representative
of Israel.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
If I hear no objection, I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.
There being no vote, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Algeria, Argentina, Benin, Brazil, China,
Denmark, France, Greece, Japan, Philippines,
Romania, Russian Federation, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America
The President (spoke in Spanish): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1583 (2005).
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council that wish to take the floor after the vote.
Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of the resolution.
The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) makes an indispensable contribution to
stability and security in the region. The persistence of
violent incidents and violations along the length of the
Blue Line underlines the importance of UNIFIL’s
presence on the ground.
That resurgence of violence has grave
consequences, including, recently, the death of a
French officer serving the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization.
We condemn the use of violence. We call on the
parties to exercise the utmost restraint. We also
condemn all violations of the Blue Line, whether by
land or by air. It is the responsibility of the parties to
take the necessary measures to ensure respect for the
Blue Line in its entirety and to prevent all violations.
The Blue Line remains the agreed reference for the
international community.
To that end, and in conformity with the constant
demands of the Security Council, Lebanon must
re-establish its authority in the south, in particular by
deploying its armed forces and disarming the militias.
At a time when there are encouraging prospects with
regard to resuming the peace process in the Middle
East, everything must be done to move towards
stability in the region.
Mrs. Patterson (United States of America): The
United States voted in favour of the resolution
supporting the extension of the present mandate of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
through the end of July 2005. We agree with the
3
S/PV.5117
Security Council that UNIFIL continues to play a
critical role in attempting to maintain stability in
southern Lebanon, and we feel that this resolution
reflects the continued concern of the international
community about the persistent sources of instability in
the area. We reiterate that the interests of both sides are
served by peace and security along the Blue Line, and
we urge again that calm and restraint prevail in the
area.
The Secretary-General has affirmed that UNIFIL
has essentially completed two of its three mandates,
with the one remaining mandate being the restoration
of international peace and security. We remain
concerned by what the Secretary-General termed the
disturbing activities of Hizbullah in the area. As we
saw with the incidents of 9 and 17 January, which
resulted in the unfortunate loss of life on both sides of
the Blue Line — including one United Nations military
observer, a French national — Hizbullah remains a
persistent source of violence and an obstacle to the
fulfilment of that final mandate.
Yet the Lebanese Government continues to
condone Hizbullah operations launched from its
territory, even those that show a complete disregard for
the Blue Line. As the Secretary-General’s recent report
on UNIFIL operations reaffirms, the continually
asserted position of the Government of Lebanon —
that the Blue Line is not valid in the Shab’a farms
area — is not compatible with Security Council
resolutions and, in any case, is no excuse for allowing
Hizbullah to engage in violence along and across the
Blue Line.
Furthermore, it is incumbent upon the
Government of Lebanon to fully extend and exercise
its sole and effective authority over all its territory up
to the Blue Line, consistent with numerous Security
Council resolutions. As was evidenced by the rocket
attacks launched from Lebanese territory by rogue
elements last October and November, the failure of the
Lebanese Government to deploy its armed forces in
sufficient numbers to ensure a calm environment
throughout the area poses a grave threat to peace and
security there.
Again, we believe that UNIFIL continues to serve
an important purpose, yet we feel that the continued
spectre of armed militias in southern Lebanon, coupled
with the Lebanese Government’s unwillingness to
assert its sole and effective control over all its territory,
are the greatest impediments to UNIFIL’s expeditiously
fulfilling its final mandate of restoring peace and
security along the Blue Line.
It is the policy of the United States Government
to ensure that United States persons participating in
United Nations peace operations, including members of
the armed services of the United States of America, are
protected from criminal prosecution or other assertion
of jurisdiction by the International Criminal Court. If
United States persons were involved, the United States
would seek express provisions providing protection for
United States persons from countries hosting any
mission established or authorized by the Security
Council.
The United States does not have any persons
serving in UNIFIL, however, and has agreed not to
seek such express provisions in this case.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Algeria
joined other members of the Security Council in voting
in favour of the draft resolution on renewing the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL). It did so once the concerns it had
expressed had largely been taken into account by the
country that prepared the original text, and I should
like to thank that delegation for the flexibility it
demonstrated.
Negotiations turned out to be rather difficult
because of efforts to introduce political elements
which, we feel, were not appropriate in a text of this
nature.
Algeria, which attaches the greatest importance to
UNIFIL’s continued mission in Lebanon and to the
integrity of its mandate, would like to recall that only
Israel’s full withdrawal from all Arab territories
occupied by force — namely Palestinian territory,
including Al-Quds Al-Sharif; the Syrian Golan; and
Shaba’a Farms — can lead to a just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement of the Israeli-Arab conflict.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): Together with other
delegations, we voted in favour of the draft resolution
just adopted. Brazil fully supports the important role
being played by UNIFIL in southern Lebanon, in
conformity with its mandate, as established by
resolution 425 (1978), of confirming the withdrawal of
Israeli forces, assisting the Government of Lebanon in
ensuring the return of its effective authority in the area,
and restoring international peace and security.
4
S/PV.5117
We encourage the Secretary-General, in preparing
his recommendations with regard to reviewing the
mandate and structures of UNIFIL, as envisaged in
operative paragraph 11, appropriately to take into
consideration, inter alia, the opinions and views of the
Lebanese Government in this matter.
My delegation is gravely concerned at the
persistence of tensions, hostile rhetoric and
skirmishes — some with deadly consequences —
which characterize the situation along the Blue Line.
We regret the fact that such events are continuing to
take place notwithstanding the repeated appeals made
by the Council and by the Secretary-General and his
representatives in that regard.
We call on both parties fully to comply with the
provisions contained in resolution 425 (1978) and
subsequent Council resolutions. We expect Israel fully
to respect the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Lebanon by ceasing its recurrent incursions into
Lebanese airspace, which have proved to entail clear
destabilizing and provocative effects.
For its part, the Government in Beirut must do
more to exert effective authority and control over the
southern part of its territory as well as to reassess its
positions regarding the deployment of its forces along
the line of withdrawal. We also call on both parties to
comply with their obligations in ensuring the safety
and security of United Nations personnel. They must
do their utmost to prevent the recurrence of incidents
such as that of 9 January last.
We take this opportunity to convey once again
our solidarity to France and Sweden and to the
concerned families for the death and injury caused to
two of their nationals. As the Secretary-General
remarks in his latest report, Israel and Lebanon have
been stressing their desire to avoid confrontation. We
urge both of them to live up to those aspirations.
Brazil is genuinely committed to the promotion
of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East. We expect the parties, with the support of
the international community, to take advantage of the
present opportunities and to sustain this favourable
momentum.
Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): Japan attaches great
importance to the role of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and welcomes the
adoption of the resolution to renew its mandate for
another six months.
The Japanese delegation has paid particular
attention to two points, namely, the ninth preambular
paragraph and operative paragraph 7. With regard to
the ninth preambular paragraph, Japan believe that,
thanks to extensive discussions and valuable
contributions by the members of the Council, we were
able to agree on well-balanced language that reflects
decisions taken by the Security Council in the past.
With regard to operative paragraph 11, Japan, as
one of the largest financial contributors to
peacekeeping operation activities, upholds the basic
position that all peacekeeping missions should be
under constant review with regard to their mandates
and structures, particularly in the light of the rising
demand for, and the changing character of,
peacekeeping operations in the world. The need for
review applies to UNIFIL as well. In the light of
UNIFIL’s importance, we consider this paragraph to be
appropriate in order to enhance its effectiveness and
efficiency.
Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Since its inception, the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) has played an important role in
maintaining stability in the region. We appreciate the
efforts it has undertaken.
In keeping with the Secretary-General’s
recommendation, and at the request of the Lebanese
Government, we support the adoption by the Security
Council of a technical resolution to extend UNIFIL’s
mandate for a further six months. We are grateful to all
sides for the constructive spirit manifested during the
consultations on the draft resolution.
Even though the text is still not entirely
satisfactory, the Chinese delegation, bearing in mind
the overall situation, voted in favour of the draft
resolution.
We would like to avail ourselves of this
opportunity to appeal once again to the parties
concerned effectively to implement their commitments,
fully respect the Blue Line, exercise the utmost
restraint, and jointly maintain peace and stability along
the borders.
The relationship between Israel and Palestine has
witnessed some improvement. The peace process in the
Middle East is moving in a positive direction. As the
5
S/PV.5117
question of Lebanon and Israel is an important part in
the peace process in the Middle East, we hope that both
parties will seize the opportunity to expeditiously
resume their talks on the basis of the relevant Security
Council resolutions and the principle of land for peace,
strive to reach consensus and achieve a comprehensive,
just and durable peace in the Middle East at an early
date.
Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
French): Russia voted in favour of the draft resolution
on extending the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL).
Throughout the history of these forces, mandates
have always been voted on unanimously, and we did
not wish to break with that tradition or to create a
precedent of deviating from the principle of
unanimously voting on mandates for United Nations
missions.
We would like to note, however, that the decision
taken by the Security Council is not fully satisfactory
to us. We believe that the resolution is too politicized
and that it is geared not so much to enhancing the
nature of the United Nations operation in southern
Lebanon, but rather to bringing pressure to bear on
Beirut and obliging it to endeavour to resolve questions
that — because of objective reasons and because of the
overall situation in the Middle East — it simply cannot
resolve.
In an attempt to make the resolution less
politicized, we introduced a number of amendments to
try to make it more balanced when it was under
consideration at the expert level. During the recent
consultations on the draft resolution, we made a further
effort to try to introduce a small change that we felt
would have made it more balanced. Unfortunately, our
suggestions were not accepted.
The current mandate of UNIFIL is fully
acceptable to Russia. We see no reason to change it.
But when we discuss reviewing the mandate and
structure of UNIFIL, we believe that we should rely on
the experience of the Secretary-General and on his
understanding and reading of the situation in the
region. Of course, we would expect him to take
account of the views and opinions of the Lebanese
Government.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our view
that solving the problems in southern Lebanon will be
impossible unless there is a comprehensive Middle
East settlement covering all tracks. Without Syria and
Lebanon, it will not be possible to achieve a solid
peace in the region, based on the well-known Security
Council resolutions — 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and
1515 (2003) — the Madrid principles, the land-for-
peace formula and the Arab peace initiative approved
in 2002 at the Beirut Summit of the League of Arab
States.
Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): The Security Council
has just adopted resolution 1583 (2005), extending the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon for another six months. I would like to
emphasize the cooperative spirit that prevailed during
its preparation. The unanimous adoption proves the
Council’s feeling that the situation that continues to
prevail on the ground is still threatening peace and
security in the area.
There is one element the resolution about which
we would like to express some thoughts. It is well
understood that the increased number of peacekeeping
operations worldwide, with an ever-expanding range of
activities to be carried out, has created an urgent need
to review the structures of current peacekeeping
operations so as to achieve greater operational
efficiency through the utilization of limited resources.
The review of peacekeeping operations should
nevertheless be carried out in accordance with
objective criteria and the existing conditions on the
ground and should be defined by factors of substance
after assessment of the risks involved in each specific
situation. Needless to say, the opinion and views of the
host country play an important role and should be
taken into consideration appropriately.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Argentina.
Argentina voted in favour of the resolution. We
believe the fact that it was adopted unanimously is very
significant, as that represents important support for
continuity in the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL). That Force must continue to
contribute to restoring peace and security in the region.
My country attaches great importance to the
efforts being made by UNIFIL to preserve the ceasefire
along the Blue Line, resolve incidents and prevent acts
of violence. Given the importance attached to this
matter, we are gratified that on this occasion the
6
S/PV.5117
Council adopted the resolution unanimously. We
believe that text was developed in a favourable manner
during negotiations over the past few days.
I would like to recall that just a few weeks ago
the Security Council expressed its concern about the
violence that had developed along the Blue Line, in
particular as a result of the incidents on 9 January.
Those incidents clearly demonstrate that there is a real
risk of escalating violence and reprisals that could have
destabilizing repercussions throughout the region.
My country is particularly concerned that, despite
a period of relative calm along the Blue Line, tension
between the parties remains very high. Argentina
reiterates its appeal to the parties to act with the utmost
prudence and self-restraint and to put an end to
violations of the Blue Line, while complying fully with
their obligations under resolution 425 (1978) and other
pronouncements by the Security Council.
Despite the positive influence of UNIFIL’s
presence on the ground, we must not forget that, as
stated in operative paragraph 8 of the resolution, Israel
and Lebanon bear the primary responsibility for
maintaining the ceasefire and respecting the
withdrawal line. Argentina supports the Lebanese
Government’s efforts, and we will continue to provide
support for any measures to promote security in this
area.
Finally, I would like to reiterate that the situation
in southern Lebanon must be examined within a
broader, regional context. There can be no doubt that
what is happening there has an impact throughout
UNIFIL’s area of operation. Argentina would therefore
like to recall once again the importance of achieving a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, in keeping with resolutions to 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 1515 (2003).
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Assaf (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Lebanon
very much appreciates the efforts and the sacrifices
that have been made by the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) to secure peace and
security in the region. The Lebanese Government
would like to underscore the importance that it attaches
to UNIFIL and to the fact that UNIFIL must remain in
place, carrying out its tasks in keeping with resolution
425 (1978), without any review or change whatsoever.
The Government of Lebanon believes that it
would have been desirable to draft a technical
resolution to extend UNIFIL’s mandate without
selectively highlighting passages from the Secretary-
General’s report and without introducing any political
elements into the resolution. Those elements could
have a detrimental effect on peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.
