United Nations S/PV.5246
Security Council
Sixtieth year
5246thmeeting
Thursday, 4 August 2005, 11.05 a.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.
05-45189 (E)
*0545189*
President: Mr. Oshima . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Japan)
Members: Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Baali
Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mayoral
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Zinsou
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Sardenberg
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Cheng Jingye
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Faaborg-Andersen
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Duclos
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Papadopoulou
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Baja
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dumitru
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Konuzin
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . Sir Emyr Jones Parry
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Taj
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Bolton
Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
2
S/PV.5246
The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Expression of welcome to Mr. John Bolton,
Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations
The President: I should like, at the outset of the
meeting, to extend, on behalf of the members of the
Council, a most sincere and warm welcome to
Ambassador John Bolton, the new Permanent
Representative of the United States, as he begins his
work at the United Nations and in the Security
Council. We all look forward to working closely with
Ambassador Bolton in the months ahead, and we also
look forward to benefiting from his contributions to the
work of the Council, based on his long and rich
experience and his distinguished diplomatic career.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Iraq in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sumaida’ie
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/494, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Romania, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and
the United States of America.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution. Unless I
hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Algeria, Argentina, Benin, Brazil, China,
Denmark, France, Greece, Japan, Philippines,
Romania, Russian Federation, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1618 (2005).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.
Mr. Bolton (United States of America): I am very
pleased that my first participation in the Security
Council comes on the day on which the Council has
unanimously adopted this resolution condemning
terrorism in Iraq, vividly demonstrating broad
international support for the Iraqi Government. That
support is extremely important as Iraq continues
forward with its political, security and economic
transition.
Today it is, notably, only days after the 15-year
anniversary of Saddam Hussein’s unprovoked
aggression against Kuwait and the adoption of
resolutions 660 (1990) and 661 (1990). Over that 15-
year period, the Council has been seized with the
question of Iraq. For most of that time, the effort was
to compel positive behaviour from the Government of
Iraq. Today, however, the Council is in partnership
with the new, democratically elected Government of
that country.
On a personal note, I was the Assistant Secretary
of State for International Organizations in August
1990. I have long been invested with ensuring the
development of a peaceful, democratic Iraq. We are
nearing the resolution of that process, and the next
months will be critical.
Iraq is quickly approaching another major
milestone in its transition, that of having a draft
constitution in place by 15 August. In anticipation of
doing so, the Iraqi Government has expressed its
commitment to meeting the 15 October referendum and
3
S/PV.5246
the 15 December election timelines as outlined in the
Transitional Administrative Law and endorsed by
Security Council resolution 1546 (2004). It is
important that that be a transparent, participatory and
inclusive process.
The Iraqi people continue to demonstrate the
courage that we have seen throughout the transition
process, most notably on 30 January, when millions of
Iraqis participated in Iraq’s first democratic national
election. Undeterred by Saddam Hussein’s legacy of
many years of oppression and war, the Iraqi people are
determined to create a new reality. Iraqis continue to
work towards a new constitution and new elections
despite ongoing terrorist attacks and threats of attacks.
This resolution is also important because it
illustrates that Iraq faces the same transnational
terrorist threat that has struck many other parts of the
world. This resolution highlights the critical
importance of cooperation among all Member States to
halt the flow of terrorists, weapons and terrorist
financing to Iraq.
We call upon the Governments of Syria and Iran
to honour their commitments to assist Iraq under this
resolution and other relevant resolutions, including
resolution 1546 (2004), and to implement the pledges
they have made to support stability in Iraq at the
conference of Iraq’s neighbours.
We call upon all Iraqis to reject violence and to
support a transparent, participatory and inclusive
transition process.
The constructive dialogue through which this text
was developed demonstrates further the strengthened
resolve of the United Nations to work together for a
democratic, secure and prosperous Iraq and for the
lasting and permanent benefit and safety of its people.
Finally, we urge all Member States of the United
Nations, especially in the Arab world, to come forward
and support the Iraqi people at this critical point in
their development of constitutional structures of
representative government.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by expressing my pleasure in very warmly
welcoming Ambassador John Bolton, the new
Permanent Representative of the United States to the
United Nations. I would like to assure him of our full
readiness to work with him as closely as possible and
in an open and constructive spirit.
Algeria voted in favour of the resolution on Iraq
because it represents a very timely response to the
worrying resurgence of terrorist violence in Iraq and
around the world. Given that the resolution addresses
Iraq in particular, my country, like other members of
the Council, cannot but condemn in the strongest terms
the appalling attacks being committed there daily,
which are causing the deaths of hundreds of innocent
people, including children, diplomats and even
journalists.
In accordance with the Charter, the Security
Council’s mandate is to combat terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations with the greatest
determination until it is finally eradicated, including by
addressing its underlying causes. All Member States
have an obligation to cooperate actively and effectively
in efforts aimed at combating terrorism.
In Iraq, combating terrorism must go hand-in-
hand with heightened efforts to bring the political
process to conclusion and to ensure a transition that
will enable that fraternal country to regain its full
sovereignty and to preserve its unity and territorial
integrity. In that regard, it is essential that the draft
constitution be finalized in an inclusive manner and
within the time frame that has been set, and submitted
to the Transitional National Assembly and
subsequently to the Iraqi people for approval.
Algeria, which has just lost two of its courageous
sons in the service of peace in Iraq, will continue to
stand alongside the Iraqi people during the difficult
phase they are undergoing, as well as to lend its
support to the political process that will enable them to
regain the peace, stability and progress they so ardently
aspires to and to seize their destiny with independence
and dignity.
Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me also to welcome Ambassador Bolton, the new
Permanent Representative of the United States of
America. I assure him of my delegation’s readiness to
cooperate closely with him, as it is our custom to do
with the United States Mission.
France has fully supported the resolution just
adopted. We resolutely condemn the terrorist attacks
being committed in Iraq on an almost daily basis. The
Security Council is playing its role by reacting to those
unjustifiable acts that threaten peace and security. In
Iraq as well as elsewhere, the fight against terrorism
4
S/PV.5246
must be carried out relentlessly and with the most
absolute determination.
France would also like to reiterate its belief that
only a political solution pursuant to resolution 1546
(2004) is likely to provide Iraq with prospects for
peace and stability. That political solution must be
based on national reconciliation, the rejection of all
forms of exclusion and discrimination and the
involvement of all Iraqis in the transition.
In that regard, it is essential that the draft
constitution to be submitted to a vote in the
Transitional National Assembly and subsequently to
popular referendum first be the subject of consensus
among all segments of the Iraqi population within the
Constitutional Drafting Commission.
France reaffirms its full support for the political
process in Iraq, as well as its determination to help the
Iraqi people during this difficult period of transition.
Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, allow me to welcome Ambassador John
Bolton. I assure him of my and my delegation’s
determination to work with him and his Mission, as we
have done since we became members of the Security
Council.
My delegation voted in favour of the resolution
submitted by the United Kingdom and the United
States because Argentina most vigorously and
unequivocally condemns and has condemned all acts of
terrorist violence in Iraq, which have killed many
innocent civilians, including children. In that regard, I
wish once again to extend the condolences of the
people and Government of Argentina to all the family
members of the victims of those brutal attacks.
We also reaffirm our condemnation of the attacks
on the diplomatic community accredited in Iraq and
again convey our condolences to the Governments of
Algeria and Egypt, which recently suffered the
assassinations of their diplomats in Baghdad.
We also reiterate that there is absolutely no
justification for terrorist acts and that those who are
responsible for and perpetrate such acts should be
brought to justice. The international community is
duty-bound to cooperate with such efforts, pursuant to
the resolutions of the Security Council and other
relevant international obligations.
We also believe it essential that the Iraqi political
process, if it is to be successful, be as inclusive as
possible and that all Iraqi sectors involved — political,
ethnic and religious — join in a genuine dialogue that
would help to achieve national reconciliation in that
country.
Lastly, we wish further to note that, as we
struggle against terrorism, we cannot lose sight of the
need to respect civilians. In that regard, my country
appeals to all the forces acting to maintain security in
Iraq to take all the necessary precautions to protect the
civilian population at all times in the context of respect
for human rights and international humanitarian law.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I, too,
would like to join colleagues in welcoming Mr. Bolton.
The United Kingdom looks forward to working very
closely with him.
The United Kingdom welcomes today’s
resolution. It is right that the Council should condemn
without reservation and in the strongest terms the
recent terrorist attacks that have taken place in Iraq.
Those attacks and attacks before them, targeting and
killing hundreds, truly have been shameless and
horrific.
The resolution we have adopted again urges every
United Nations Member State to prevent the transit,
arming, support and financing of terrorists, and it again
notes the importance of the role of countries in the
region — and in particular Iraq’s neighbours — in that
respect. Syria and Iran, in particular, can and should do
more. Nothing can justify any country’s turning and
blind eye to those acts of mass murder. Nothing can
justify supporting those callous terrorists.
Despite those attacks, many courageous Iraqis
continue to take forward the peaceful political process
and the drafting of a new constitution as they work
towards constitutionally mandated elections inclusive
of all. The international community should and, I
know, will stand by them in those efforts, encouraging
national dialogue, outreach and a political process in
which all Iraqis can participate peacefully. For our part,
we must do everything possible to support that process
and the recently confirmed timetable for that
constitutional development.
Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I welcome Ambassador Bolton as Permanent
Representative of the United States to the United
5
S/PV.5246
Nations. We are prepared to cooperate actively with
him in the Security Council and other bodies of the
Organization.
Russia voted in favour of resolution 1618 (2005)
on terrorist activities in Iraq. We proceed from the
premise that any violence against the civilian
population is a crime that can have no justification
whatsoever. We express our condolences once again to
the Iraqis who have lost their loved ones as a result of
terrorist attacks and to our Algerian and Egyptian
colleagues whose comrades fell victim to criminals
hiding behind religious and political slogans. We are
pleased that today’s resolution includes provisions
condemning the murder of diplomats and calling for
protection for all foreign civilian personnel. Those who
organize, sponsor and carry out such inhuman
misdeeds must be subject to the most severe
punishment.
In the circumstances of a brutal war against
terrorists, we note in particular the inadmissibility of
giving them a podium in the mass media for the spread
of their views. We may refer abstractly about freedom
of speech and the right to disseminate information, but
that right is not without its limits. In most countries
throughout the world, it is prohibited to propagandize
war, inequality among people and various forms of
discrimination. There are other limitations as well. We
must be equally responsible in approaching the
possibility of propagandizing ideologies and terrorist
practices, which are no less dangerous phenomena. It is
indeed ignoble to yield to the commercial temptation to
popularize sanguinary bandits who defile the memory
of the dead and inflict additional pain and suffering on
their loved ones.
The situation in Iraq cannot be boiled down
simply to the need to fight international terrorism.
Uncompromising opposition to terrorism, regardless of
its origins, is one of the priority responsibilities of the
Security Council. We can resolve the issue of Iraq only
if we undertake comprehensive efforts in the overall
Iraqi context. The crimes committed today by terrorists
are only part of the problem to be overcome by the
Iraqi people on their path towards a political
settlement. The achievement of national reconciliation
is the most important key to the elimination of the
terrorist threats facing that State. It is vitally necessary
to find a just political solution for adequate
participation in the management of State affairs by all
political forces in the country and all ethnic and
religious groups living on its territory.
We should agree on the basic principles to
underlie the future constitution and the country’s
governmental structures. In that connection, a new
basic law must be acceptable to all Iraqis and exclude
all forms of discrimination. We must reach an
understanding on the timeframe and conditions for the
withdrawal of all foreign forces from Iraqi territory. In
that connection, we must revive the country’s
functioning national security structures. If we fail to
resolve those issues, the causes of the ongoing terrorist
activity in Iraq will not be allayed. Russia has
repeatedly undertaken initiatives to assist in the Iraqi
political settlement, and those initiatives remain active.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): At the outset, I wish to
join other delegations in extending our welcome to
Ambassador John Bolton.
The Brazilian delegation condemns, in the
strongest terms, the terrorist acts taking place
throughout Iraq. No motivation can justify the deadly
toll of civilians on a daily basis. We express our deep
condolences to the families of the victims and to the
people and the Government of Iraq. Brazil shares their
pain, as we lost Sergio Vieira de Mello in a brutal
attack against the United Nations headquarters in
Baghdad almost two years ago. Presently, the Brazilian
Government is making additional efforts to search for
the engineer João José Vasconcellos, Jr., who was
kidnapped last January. The resolution just adopted
reflects our concern for the security of foreign
diplomats, United Nations staff and foreign civilian
personnel in Iraq.
The successful conclusion of the transitional
period with the referendum on a permanent
constitution and the election of a new Government can
provide the conditions that will enable Iraqis to
definitely break with the past and build a new future.
Energies should be focused so as to enable that vital
political process to prosper. All parties in Iraq have a
responsibility to prevent a stalemate at this stage,
which would mean only the perpetuation of instability,
carnage and suffering.
That responsibility relies on ensuring that the
political process is inclusive and transparent. It is a
task for both those who are taking part in the process,
who must be responsive to the broader interests of
society and must provide for participation in decision-
6
S/PV.5246
making, and those who have decided not to engage,
who are asked to lay down their arms or to overcome
their indifference and step in.
The Brazilian Government stresses the right of
the Iraqi people to determine their own political future.
An independent, sovereign and democratic Iraq is to be
built through reconciliation and unity. That is the only
possible way to ensure that their keenest national
interests will prevail and that Iraq will be able to walk
on its own feet once again.
Mr. Cheng Jingye (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, the Chinese delegation would like to
welcome Ambassador Bolton among us. We look
forward to continuing our cooperation with the United
States delegation.
The Chinese delegation strongly condemns the
series of terrorist attacks that has taken place recently
in Iraq. We would like to express our deepest sympathy
and condolences to the victims of those attacks, to their
families and to the Government and the people of Iraq.
The maintenance of security and stability in Iraq
is a very important guarantee for the smooth
development of the current political process in Iraq.
We hope that the parties concerned can redouble their
efforts to take all possible measures to improve the
present security situation on the ground.
We have also followed with great attention and
concern the political process in Iraq. We believe that
the parties in the country will be able to act in the long-
term interests of the Iraqi people, strengthen their unity
and overcome their differences so that the constitution
can be finalized according to schedule.
Mr. Dumitru (Romania): On behalf of the
Romanian delegation to the Security Council, I am
particularly honoured to warmly welcome the new
Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Ambassador John
Bolton. It is our determination to continue our close
cooperation with the United States delegation during
the next five months, the last leg of Romania’s
membership in this body.
We have recently witnessed a worrisome and
troubling accumulation of terrorist acts in Iraq. One
can definitely speak of a critical mass of such
horrendous attacks that makes Council action
imperative. It is important that the Council send a
strong message of condemnation of such acts as well as
a message of solidarity with the people of Iraq in the
face of this threat.
It is for that reason that Romania, a country that
is itself actively participating in the effort to stabilize
Iraq and to ensure a successful political transition in
this sorely tried country, decided to co-sponsor this
resolution. In our view, the resolution is a timely
upgrade of Security Council action with regard to a
major item on its agenda. It is also the appropriate
answer to a formal request made by the legitimate
Government of Iraq itself. As Romania will continue to
participate in the international community’s efforts to
help Iraq, we look forward to the full implementation
of the resolution.
The President: I should now like to make a
statement in my capacity as representative of Japan.
Japan welcomes the adoption of resolution 1618
(2005) with unanimous support. That demonstrates the
Council’s strong determination to condemn terrorism
and to do its utmost to prevent further acts of terrorism
in Iraq as well as in other countries and places. In
particular, Japan hopes that despite the tragic deaths of
Mijbil Sheikh Issa and Thamen Hossein Obeidi, the
constitutional process in Iraq will continue to recover
its pace so that the political process, as outlined in
resolution 1546 (2004), can move forward in order to
achieve the goal of realizing a stable and peaceful Iraq
as early as possible.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Sumaida’ie (Iraq): I should like to take this
opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and to commend your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Greece, for his able
stewardship last month. I wish also to congratulate
Ambassador John Bolton on assuming his role at the
United Nations. I look forward to working closely
together with him.
I must thank the Security Council for giving me
the opportunity to speak before it again on this
occasion.
Today, the Security Council has spoken with one
voice on an issue that is at the very core of its
functions, powers and responsibility as specified in
7
S/PV.5246
Article 24 of the United Nations Charter, namely,
peace and security. In doing so, it is acting, as the
Article states, on behalf of all Member States — that
is, on behalf of the world.
Terrorism has emerged as one of the greatest
challenges to world peace and security. We have seen
that challenge mounted to deadly effect in Beirut, New
York, Washington, D.C., Nairobi, Beslan, Madrid, Bali,
Aden, Karachi, Riyadh, New Delhi, Casablanca,
Istanbul, London, Sharm el-Sheikh and other places.
But nowhere is it as virulent and persistent as it is in
Iraq today.
Iraq is paying in blood and treasure: the blood of
its innocent citizens and the wealth it badly needs for
reconstruction and healing in a fight against this
multiheaded modern-day monster that stalks the world
and that, after Afghanistan, has nested in its land. Iraq
is bearing the burden for the world, and now the world
must stand with it. I wish to thank the Security
Council, as the guardian of world peace and security,
for taking this honourable stand.
The Iraqi people, like the people of London but
with immeasurably greater risk and hardship, are
facing down the terrorists and going ahead, as they
must, with building their lives, their new democratic
institutions and their country. They can take comfort
today in the fact that that they are far from being alone.
There are those who say that terrorism has been
unleashed in Iraq because of the occupation of Iraq;
that it would have been better not to take military
action to remove Saddam Hussein and his regime,
odious though it was; that it would have been better to
let sleeping dogs lie. That is nonsense. That is the kind
of inverted logic that appeals to those who, for reasons
of their own, do not want to see. It is the logic which
blames the doctor for the disease and the victim for the
assault.
However, I do not want to dwell on the past or go
over the arguments and counter-arguments in favour of
or against military action in Iraq — although I am quite
willing, if anyone is ready to listen, to passionately
defend the action that delivered the Iraqi people from
bondage and allowed them for the first time to express
their free will and contemplate a future with the pride
and dignity that they deserve.
We are not talking here about ordinary dissent.
The new Iraq is wide open to all its citizens and their
opinions and attitudes. We hear them expressing such
opinions freely every day, as they did in their millions
on election day in January. Lively debates are taking
place as we speak about the constitution and the future
shape of the country. All viewpoints are actively
sought and encouraged, not just welcomed — even
from those who have strong misgivings about the
current political climate in Iraq. But that is not what
terrorism is about. It is about forcing and coercing
people. It is about limiting choices and trampling
underfoot human rights, dignity and all the values that
we hold dear.
The Secretary-General was quite right when he
said, in paragraph 87 of his report “In larger freedom”
(A/59/2005),
“Terrorism is a threat to all that the United
Nations stands for: respect for human rights, the
rule of law, the protection of civilians, tolerance
among peoples and nations, and the peaceful
resolution of conflict.”
Faced with such a threat, what must we do? The
operative word here is “do”. It is not enough to
condemn terrorism, although that is an essential first
step. We must go beyond that to understand its nature,
confront it at every level and defeat it. That is a task
that is easier said than done, we know, but it must be
done, because there is no acceptable alternative.
The relevant questions now are: what is
terrorism? What lies at the roots of terrorism? What do
terrorists want? Do they offer an alternative that can be
considered? And can anything be done — or undone —
to assuage their vindictiveness and violence?
I know that a comprehensive definition of
terrorism has eluded this Organization so far. Some
tend to confuse struggles for self-determination with
terrorism and to blur the borders between them. Yet we
know that no struggle for independence and self-
determination targets its own people, its own water and
electricity supply systems, its own hospitals, its oil
pipelines, the humanitarian aid workers who are
risking their lives to help their people, neutral United
Nations personnel, foreign diplomats, children, barbers
for shaving beards, women for not covering their
heads, contractors and engineers repairing schools and
bridges, and restaurant-goers for simply being out with
their families for a meal. It should not be so hard to
define terrorism, at least its core segment. A
8
S/PV.5246
determined effort to agree on such a definition should
be made.
At a fundamental level, terrorists are people who
want to change the world and believe that violence
against civilians — and sometimes against
themselves — is the most effective way to do so. We
must resolutely and collectively reject any notion that
legitimizes such violence, no matter in what direction
they seek to change the world. Because if we accept
any such notion, there can be no peace or security
anywhere.
In the case of Iraq, terrorists and their apologists
often declare that they are seeking to remove the
foreign forces from its territories. Yet everything they
do leads exactly in the opposite direction. They
continue, through their actions, to provide the main
justification for the prolonged presence of foreign
forces.
Terrorism has its own structures: a superficially
attractive ideology, financial support, recruits, lines of
communication, lines of supply, safe houses, means of
intimidation and coercion, disinformation, propaganda,
apologists and individual, institutional and State allies
who see themselves benefiting from their activities. It
tends to grow like bacteria in a suitable environment
and entails a combination of ignorance, a hopelessly
skewed world view, a sense of grievance and a culture
of violence, criminality and death.
More resources must be allocated for the study
and analysis of terrorism, and in particular the
phenomenon of suicide bombers. These are being
produced in unprecedented numbers. We must get at
the sources of their proliferation, the structure that
supports them, and dismantle it systematically. We
must also take practical steps to prevent any media
from promoting or glamorizing terrorists. This effort is
clearly bigger than any single country can undertake
and requires international cooperation; hence the
importance of this resolution.
Coming back to my country, there is hardly a
family in Baghdad which has not been affected directly
or indirectly by acts of terrorism. On a personal level, I
have lost several dear friends, including my colleagues,
members of the Governing Council, Aqila Al-Hashimi,
who participated in the work of the Security Council in
2003; Izzuddin Saleem, who was Chairman of the
Governing Council at the time; women’s rights activist
Amal Ma’malchi; and Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs Bassam Kubbah. Those and others — all fine
individuals — were patriots serving their people and
their country. In each case two thoughts passed through
my mind as I struggled with the agony of loss: there
but for the grace of God go I; and, no matter what, we
must not give in to the murderers. We must not
weaken.
We shall not weaken. With your collective help,
we shall beat these merchants of death and destruction
and build a country to be proud of.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.
