United Nations S/PV.5282
Security Council
Sixtieth year
5282ndmeeting
Monday, 17 October 2005, 10 a.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.
05-55536 (E)
*0555536*
President: Mr. Ungureanu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Romania)
Members: Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Baali
Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. García Moritán
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Djakpo
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Sardenberg
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wang Guangya
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Løj
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. De La Sablière
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Vassilakis
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Oshima
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Baja
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Denisov
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . Sir Emyr Jones Parry
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mahiga
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Brencick
Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security
Letter dated 10 October 2005 from the Permanent Representative of Romania
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2005/638)
2
S/PV.5282
The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations in maintaining international
peace and security
Letter dated 10 October 2005 from the
Permanent Representative of Romania to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General (S/2005/638)
The President: As agreed in prior consultations,
the Security Council is pleased to invite the following
representatives of regional organizations to participate
in this meeting in accordance with rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure: His
Excellency Professor Omotayo R. Olanyan, Acting
Executive Secretary and representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission; His
Excellency Mr. Hamidon Ali, Chairman of the New
York Committee of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations; His Excellency Mr. Valery Kyrychenko,
Deputy Chairman of the Executive Committee of the
Commonwealth of Independent States; His Excellency
Mr. Terry Davis, Secretary General of the Council of
Europe; His Excellency Mr. Yahia A. Mahmassani,
representative of the Secretary General of the League
of Arab States; His Excellency Mr. Martin Erdmann,
Assistant Secretary General for Political Affairs and
Security Policy Division of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization; His Excellency Mr. Albert Ramdin,
Assistant Secretary General of the Organization of
American States; and His Excellency Mr. Mark Perrin
de Brichambaut, Secretary General of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to all the aforementioned representatives to
this meeting. I also thank them for taking the time to be
with us today.
In view of the limited seating at the Council
table, the first five speakers of regional organizations
are seated at the table. Upon the conclusion of their
statements, the Secretariat will invite the remaining
representatives of regional organizations to be seated at
the table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I should like to draw attention to document
S/2005/638, which contains the text of a letter dated 10
October 2005 from the Permanent Representative of
Romania to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a background paper on
the item under consideration.
It is my particular pleasure to acknowledge the
presence of Secretary-General Kofi Annan, who, as we
all know, attaches great importance to the subject of
today’s debate.
Allow me to begin the debate by making a
statement in my national capacity.
I would like to state at the outset that, as an
acceding country, Romania aligns itself with the
statement to be made later by Ambassador Jones Parry
on behalf of the European Union (EU).
I recognize with appreciation the presence of the
Secretary-General, as well as his steadfast overall
interest in the issue that we are addressing today. I also
wish to express my particular gratitude to the leaders
and representatives of regional organizations who took
the time to come to New York to participate in our
proceedings. I am also very pleased to acknowledge
the presence in the public gallery of a group of students
from Columbia University, a fine team of both
Romanians and Americans.
There are 3 main reasons why Romania has taken
up the issue of cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations in maintaining international
peace and security as the flag theme of its current
tenure in the Security Council. The first has to do with
Romania’s own record of making the regional
dimension a hallmark of its long-standing foreign
policy and action, as well as with its experience in
contributing to conflict management in our region.
Working in partnership with the United Nations, the
European Union, NATO, the OSCE and the Council of
Europe have developed durable solutions to put an end
to conflict in the Balkans. That partnership allowed for
integrated solutions that addressed security issues
while supporting the building of democracy and
opening up the path to meaningful regional integration.
If such integrated conflict management were to be
3
S/PV.5282
practiced in other areas of our continent where disputes
and tensions continue to exist, Europe as a whole could
become free of conflict in a sustainable manner,
thereby finally ending insecurity and making it
impossible to relapse into violence.
Romania was a key player in such undertakings
as Chairman-in-Office of the OSCE, in 2001, and as
Chair of the South-East European Cooperation Process,
from 2004 to 2005. Next month, my country will once
again be at the forefront of regional efforts when we
assume the chairmanships of the Council of Europe’s
Committee of Ministers and of the Black Sea
Economic Cooperation Organization. In the meantime,
Romania has become a North Atlantic ally and
acceding country to the EU. Each of those
organizations is now also making contributions to
restoring or consolidating peace well beyond the
territorial realm of their respective memberships, be
that in Afghanistan or Iraq or in the Sudan and its
Darfur region.
In Romania’s own neighbourhood, cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
continues to be of the utmost importance to the process
regarding Kosovo. The same is true for the still
unresolved and protracted conflicts in the Black Sea
area. Among those, the issue of the Abkhaz region of
Georgia is on the agenda of the Security Council, and
will be taken up again towards the end of our
presidency.
In the same context, a recent example of joint
undertakings by regional organizations is the launch of
the EU mission for the monitoring of the border
between the Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova,
which we trust will have a positive impact on the
settling of the conflict in the Transdnister region of the
latter.
A second reason for our steady pursuit of the
regional theme relates to the important developments
that have taken place recently within the United
Nations in that regard. The Secretary-General himself
deserves praise and credit for having presided this year
over the sixth, and arguably the most successful thus
far, meeting with the heads of regional organizations
having a partnership with the world Organization. The
outcome of that meeting should lend itself to sustained
follow-up, especially since world leaders gathered in
New York last month resolved to expand consultation
and cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations through formalized agreements
between their respective secretariats and, as
appropriate, to involve regional organizations in the
work of the Security Council.
From a historical perspective, we have to
acknowledge the tremendous foresight and vision the
Charter’s authors had in laying down a sophisticated
Chapter VIII that stands the test of time despite the fact
that it was crafted at a time when regionalism was
anything but the driving force it certainly represents
today. However, something must have changed in that
regard in the six decades that have elapsed. We now
have to determine how to make the most of Chapter
VIII, and enhance global, regional and subregional
national synergies in the areas of conflict prevention
and management, as well as in upholding human rights,
democracy and development.
Our third reason has to do precisely with the
underlying conviction that creating the right
complementarity and subsidiarity between the United
Nations and regional action would significantly
consolidate both and generate a considerable pool of
resources assigned to peace that would ultimately lead
to the ability of the international community to
effectively and promptly address every tension, every
threat, every open conflict and every fragile situation
in the aftermath of conflict. We need to remain
flexible, open and creative when expanding on the
potential of global-regional cooperation.
Contributions that regional organizations can
bring span a wide range of options, as I am sure
today’s debate with our valued partners and guests will
reconfirm. Our work on cooperation with regional
organizations should therefore be aimed not at
identifying universal patterns, but rather at
ascertaining, at the end of the day, which regional
actors can be relied on in a given situation, what they
can be expected to bring to the table of conflict-
resolution, and how the United Nations and other
regional partners can help fill in the gaps.
That approach is precisely what is upholding the
draft resolution before the Council today. I would like
to take this opportunity to thank all delegations that
have contributed to making its contents as substantial
as they currently stand, and I wish to express
appreciation for the interest that regional organizations
represented today have taken in the whole process.
4
S/PV.5282
The draft resolution provides an initial
framework to make the expanded regional involvement
envisaged in the outcome document work. It aims at
regular meetings with heads of regional and
subregional organizations and better communication
with those partners. It calls upon all States to
contribute to strengthening the capacities of regional
and subregional organizations. It invites the Secretary-
General to report on the dynamics, challenges and
opportunities of a more meaningful interplay between
global and regional actions in the area of peace and
security.
I am persuaded that the two regional debates
Romania has convened during its current term in the
Council and the adoption of the draft resolution will
only open up the way for the process to be carried on.
Already, other elected members have manifested their
readiness in that direction. At some point in time, a
wider group of friends of the Council’s cooperation
with regional organizations could be set up. Romania
would certainly look forward to participating in such
an undertaking.
In fact, with practically every meeting it holds,
the Security Council invariably comes across regional
implications of conflicts. United Nations action is also
buttressed by regional contributions in the new areas of
global anti-terrorism and the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.
I trust that the advances in the regional outreach
of the Security Council will in turn lead the way to a
global United Nations-regional organizations
partnership that will be broader in scope than what is
currently possible under Chapter VIII. I trust that we
will eventually have the sort of Charter that will be
devoted only to the relationship between the United
Nations and regional organizations, for that is what
will make our Organization not only live on, but
deliver better on the high expectations placed on it.
And that will be the lasting contribution my country,
Romania, will have been able to make as a responsible
elected member of the Security Council in the years
2004 and 2005.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
Once again, I welcome the presence of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and invite him to
take the floor.
The Secretary-General: At last month’s summit,
world leaders supported a stronger relationship
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
as envisaged in Chapter VIII of the Charter. We need
only look at the reality of contemporary peace
operations to see why.
Over the last decade, there has been a dramatic
growth in the range of partnerships between regional
organizations and the United Nations in support of
countries emerging from conflict. In peacekeeping,
those partnerships have taken many different forms.
There have been transitions from regional
operations to United Nations operations — as we saw
in Liberia with the Economic Community of West
African States — and from United Nations operations
to regional ones, as we saw in Bosnia and Herzegovina
with the European Union (EU).
The United Nations and regional partners have
coordinated separate missions side by side, as with the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization in Afghanistan and
Kosovo. In Kosovo, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the EU were also included
as part of the structures of the United Nations Mission
in Kosovo.
Regional organizations have provided support
within the context of a United Nations-led mission, as
with the Organization of American States engagement
in Haiti.
Regional operations have provided bridging
support until United Nations peacekeepers received
reinforcement, as we saw with the EU operation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in 2003.
And finally, as in Darfur recently, the United
Nations has provided support to a regional operation,
in that case deployed by the African Union (AU).
The same trends are evident in our peacemaking
operations and efforts. On important occasions, the
United Nations has provided critical support to
regional processes, as in Sudan, where the United
Nations assisted the effort, led by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, that
secured the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, and is
now supporting the AU-led efforts on Darfur. On other
occasions, regional organizations have provided vital
political and technical support to United Nations
efforts, as we saw with the wide-ranging EU support
5
S/PV.5282
for the recent United Nations peacemaking effort in
Cyprus.
In short, we are increasingly drawing on the
resources and legitimacy of a network of multilateral
mechanisms — regional and global — to provide
collective responses to the peace and security
challenges of today.
That is why the Security Council has stressed the
need to increase collaboration between the United
Nations and regional organizations and has established
the practice of meeting with them annually. To support
those efforts, the high-level meetings between the
United Nations Secretariat and regional organizations
have now also been made an annual event, and a
Standing Committee has been set up to maintain
strategic direction and offer broad guidance on action
at the working level. The world summit gave new
backing to those efforts.
The task now and the task ahead of us is to make
sure that our cooperation mechanisms work as well as
possible. They must be effective, efficient and
mutually reinforcing. They must be flexible and
responsive to our rapidly changing and integrating
world, and they must be consistent with the Charter
and advance its principles and purposes. I hope we can
make progress in four broad areas.
The first is the need to strengthen capacity. The
demands for peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding are high and seem likely to remain so for
the foreseeable future. Increased regional activity,
within the framework of the Security Council’s
primary responsibility for international peace and
security, will be an important component of improved
international responses to conflict.
This is particularly true in Africa. We in the
Secretariat see our partnership with the African Union
in peacekeeping as a strategic priority, and I welcome
the commitment made at the world summit to support a
10-year programme to strengthen the capacity of the
African Union. We now look forward to an open and
productive dialogue with the African Union and other
regional partners on how to implement this
programme.
Second, we should exploit our comparative
strengths. Each of us may have particular capacities in
responding swiftly or robustly, or in undertaking
activities that are resource intensive or require long-
term engagement. Let us make sure that we
complement each other, rather than compete with each
other. I hope that, through regular dialogue on our
specialized competencies, we will gain a clear picture
of who can bring what to the table. We should reflect
our understandings in formalized agreements, as
envisaged in the summit outcome document. Some of
these could be signed even at the operational level of
our respective organizations in order to move forward
pragmatically and maximize results.
Third, we should deal with conflict in a holistic
manner. We must focus not just on peacekeeping and
peacebuilding but also on conflict prevention and
resolution. The United Nations is looking to strengthen
its mediation capacities as envisaged in the summit
outcome document. And the stronger our capacity is,
the more we can assist non-United Nations mediators,
particularly partners in regional organizations. We
must also focus on the broader social and economic
components of peace, using the new Peacebuilding
Commission to draw together the contributions of
many actors, including regional organizations, in
support of common peacebuilding strategies.
Fourth, and most important, we should reinforce
a collective approach to security. The United Nations
partnerships with regional organizations must provide
the means to meet, rather than to avoid, our
responsibilities under the Charter to provide an
effective international response to violent conflict
wherever it occurs.
At times, a regional response may be the best way
to end conflict or build peace. But on other occasions,
the direct involvement of the United Nations, either
alone or with regional partners, may be vital. When it
is, the Organization must be willing and able to act. In
that spirit, I warmly welcome the world summit’s
recommendation that regional organizations consider
placing their conflict prevention and peacekeeping
capacities within the framework of the United Nations
Standby Arrangements System.
Likewise, the best-equipped troop contributors
should remain ready to deploy where needed around
the world, either through, or in support of, regional
organizations or directly through United Nations
peacekeeping. That would be a tangible demonstration
of our collective commitment to partnership.
May I conclude by thanking the Government of
Romania for the strong interest it has shown on this
6
S/PV.5282
issue during its tenure on the Council. I hope that the
torch of leadership will pass to another Council
member, so that we build on the momentum that has
been generated in promoting cooperation with regional
organizations in service of the peoples of the United
Nations.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his kind words.
I now invite the Secretary General of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to
take the floor, Mr. Marc Perrin de Brichambaut.
Mr. de Brichambaut (spoke in French): This
summer, the United Nations celebrated its sixtieth
anniversary and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) celebrated the thirtieth
anniversary of the Helsinki Act 1975. The world
summit and the resulting outcome document have
indicated the road to follow for the future with regard
to relations between the United Nations and regional
organizations.
With 55 participating States spread over three
continents, the OSCE is prepared to contribute actively
to this work on the basis of the important achievements
we have made with regard to norms and commitments
shared by all of the participating States.
Jointly with the current presidency of OSCE —
held by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Slovenia,
Mr. Dimitrij Rupel — I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this very timely meeting. I shall try
to answer three questions that you have raised.
Along with the other regional organizations, the
OSCE is in a position to provide strong assistance to
the Security Council in its central role in preserving
international peace and security. The OSCE has the
Forum for Security Cooperation, which is the keeper of
disarmament treaties and confidence-building
measures. It has the Conflict Prevention Centre and has
deployed 18 missions in the field, which in agreement
with the host countries are trying to create long-term
stability. In this connection, it carries out broad
security responsibilities in its sphere of responsibility,
which could be considered to be subsidiary to those of
the Security Council. Sometimes OSCE activities are
directly set out in the Council’s resolutions; this is the
case in Kosovo and Georgia. Its actions are carried out
essentially after a crisis in the work of consolidation
and stabilization, but they also follow closely so-called
frozen conflicts, and the texts governing them do not
exclude OSCE participation in peacekeeping
operations.
This practice and the instruments entrusted to the
Permanent Council under the responsibility of the
current presidency are available to the Security
Council, if the latter wishes to make use of them.
Through the transmission of data, evaluations and
analyses and by meeting requests, the OSCE and its
members can provide information to the Security
Council in the spirit of Article 52 of the Charter.
Guidance from the Council will be very much
appreciated. It can, of course, apply to one or another
of the crisis cycle phases in which the OECD is able to
intervene.
Similarly, the OSCE has the goal of assisting in
the implementation of Security Council resolutions, for
example in the area of terrorism and weapons of mass
destruction. Contacts with the Secretariat would be
facilitated if we had a framework agreement between
the United Nations and the OSCE, as just mentioned by
the Secretary-General. We would be prepared to have a
permanent liaison office in New York. Work is
constantly carried out by the State holding the OSCE
presidency.
Among the regional organizations, there is a
network of exchanges. It will be strengthened, and I
think it is relevant for the work of this Council. Within
each region, there is mutual and methodological
reinforcing among regional organizations. This is the
case in Europe, where exchanges between the OSCE,
the Council of Europe, the European Union, NATO,
and the Community of Independent States are close
and have led to active complementarity and joint
projects. The specialities of each of those organizations
and their varied composition allows us to deal better
with crises and to work towards the future. That is the
case in the Balkans and in the Caucasus.
Among regional organizations from different
continents, we can do even more. The Organization of
American States (OAS) has enabled the OSCE to take
its first steps in organizing the fight against terrorism.
With the League of Arab States, the OSCE is working
on the issue of small arms and light weapons and
election monitoring. The African Union is closely
following the development of institutions and policies
within the OSCE that are available to it. The 18 OSCE
missions are trying to strengthen civil society, a
7
S/PV.5282
requirement for stability and long-term development,
as we have just been reminded. It unites activities in
various areas to implement the commitments
undertaken by all member States. The missions also
provide an opportunity to gain experience that we can
share with other regional organizations. In the areas of
election monitoring, institution-building and support
for minorities, the experience of the OSCE has
something that everyone can benefit from.
Thirdly, the OSCE is based on the affirmation of
shared values. It is oriented towards the discussion of
ideas. It can make its contribution to the collective
effort of all international organizations following the
United Nations summit. The OSCE was one of the first
organizations to affirm that the security of States and
individuals depended on a holistic approach, with
activities that covered several dimensions — first and
foremost, the human dimension — and that those
activities should be conducted with a long-term
perspective in view. Today respect for the individual
and the search for good democratic governance are
values that are broadly shared by all international
organizations as concepts linked to human security.
The OSCE continues to forge ahead and to be a
conceptual laboratory for all its members. It is making
progress in areas such as tolerance, the fight against
human trafficking, freedom in the media, and
environmental security and safety. Those activities are,
obviously, open to other organizations. I believe it
would be particularly useful for the OSCE to take part
in two projects that concern all international
organizations: first, the preparations for the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission, which
provides a new and original platform for regional
organizations; and, secondly, the dialogue among
civilizations, called for by the Secretary-General.
At the high-level meeting of the heads of regional
organizations, presided over by the Secretary-General
in July, we devised a collective framework to allow us
to pool our thinking and coordinate our efforts in this
area supported by everyone’s goodwill. The framework
should enable us to make substantive contributions as a
follow-up to the 2005 world summit and, at the same
time, work out some details within its outlines. The
draft resolution before the Council is a new departure.
It will serve as a framework so that in the future
mutually beneficial exchanges will both be a
permanent working method and provide mutual
support. The decisive impetus will have come from
Council members, and we are grateful for that.
The President: I now call on the Assistant
Secretary-General of the Organization of American
States, His Excellency Albert Ramdin.
Mr. Ramdin: On behalf of the Organization of
American States (OAS), I would like to join previous
speakers in expressing our pleasure to be addressing
the Security Council today. We thank the Council for
inviting us to do so. We also congratulate you,
Mr. President, for taking the initiative to organize this
meeting. We believe that it is timely and appropriate,
given the high level of interest and discussion that have
taken place on this topic within the General Assembly,
the world summit, and other forums within the
international community during the past year. We
would also like to express our appreciation for the
leadership, the interest and the commitment of
Secretary-General Annan in this effort.
As both the OAS Secretary General, José Miguel
Insulza, and I stated at the sixth high-level meeting
between United Nations and regional organizations,
held last July in New York, the OAS welcomes a much
more structured approach to strengthening
collaboration between United Nations and regional
organizations in the areas of democracy, development
and security, including conflict prevention and
peacebuilding. We are pleased and ready to contribute
in a substantial manner to the recently established
Standing Committee. We believe that a first critical
step in establishing a division of labour — defining the
roles and responsibilities of the regional organizations,
the United Nations and other key actors in the
region — is to adopt a shared agenda within the
framework of the United Nations on issues of early
conflict prevention, security and development.
The OAS views closer cooperation with other
multilateral organizations as a critical component of its
new action plan for strengthening regional and
democratic governability in the Americas. As is well
known, the OAS has been actively engaged in several
conflict prevention, facilitation, and mediation efforts
over the past years. Currently, the OAS is actively
involved in facilitating a political settlement of crises
in Haiti, Nicaragua, Ecuador, Bolivia and Colombia,
through several mechanisms. OAS engagement is not
limited to immediate resolution of conflicts, but also
provides technical assistance and capacity-building for
8
S/PV.5282
the longer term. The OAS uses several options for
engagement: missions of the Secretary General,
delegations of the Permanent Council in Washington,
D.C., special envoys, long-term missions — such as
those we have in Haiti and in Colombia — and
technical support, as mentioned earlier.
Aside from what the OAS can offer in the way of
political mediation, shuttle diplomacy and technical
cooperation, the OAS has the advantage of both being
able to convene member States to address issues and
the ability to work with all levels of Government in
forging consensus on important policies, both
nationally and subregionally. That capacity for
dialogue and decision-making by consensus is the
preventive capacity the OAS brings to United Nations
regional cooperation.
We recognized the valuable work of the Security
Council and acknowledge the important leadership role
of the United Nations in the maintenance of peace and
security. However, there is much more that can be done
to strengthen our respective institutions through closer
collaboration, joint analyses, joint implementation of
technical cooperation, focused attention on structural
prevention and improved, streamlined funding for
preventive multilateral actions. Specifically in response
to a few of the questions outlined in the concept paper
circulated by the President of the Security Council, I
would like to highlight a few views that we share and
consider important.
First and foremost, I think it is important to
understand that the OAS strives to work subregionally,
within the Americas, wherever possible. In that
respect, we must acknowledge and work with the
subregional organizations, such as the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM), the South American
Common Market (MERCOSUR), the Central American
Integration System and others, which play a critical
role in the development of regional stability. Those
subregional organizations should strive to work in
tandem with the lead multilateral institutions,
searching for ways to complement the work of the
OAS and the United Nations. As the Secretary-General
mentioned, Haiti is a good example both of effective
OAS-United Nations cooperation and collaboration and
of collaboration among subregional organizations —
such as the Association of Caribbean States and
CARICOM — in support of Haiti.
We must take into account the many political and
institutional lessons learned in our respective areas of
expertise and share them with other interested actors.
Perhaps the Security Council would consider inviting
regional organizations on an annual basis to present
key findings from their respective peacebuilding and
post-conflict missions. The Standing Committee, now
that it has been established, could play a leading role in
organizing that type of presentation. The Peacebuilding
Commission could allow for representation from every
region through participation of a high-level official
from regional or subregional organizations. We believe
that regional organizations could contribute to the
Peacebuilding Commission by assisting in the
definition of political objectives and priority areas of
peacebuilding in a given country.
We recognize that in particular instances a
regional organization may be better suited to take a
lead in pre-conflict or post-conflict situations. Political
clout, experience in a country and established trust
with political actors may allow a regional organization
to facilitate a better solution. In the cases of Bolivia
and Ecuador in the Western Hemisphere, our role as
the Organization of American States has been critical
in that regard.
Both the United Nations and regional
organizations should, when relevant, place priority on
capacity-building after peacekeeping, peacebuilding or
crisis support operations. Regional organizations and
agencies that continue democratic consolidation efforts
through peacebuilding activities should be identified
early and supported by the United Nations through
mobilized funding and cooperation. In the case of
Haiti, that has worked very well between the United
Nations and the Organization of American States.
The challenge for the new OAS leadership —
both Secretary General Insulza and I were elected just
a couple of months ago — is to transform the
Organization of American States institutionally and
organizationally in such a way that it can deal much
more effectively with the new intra-State challenges in
the Western Hemisphere. The OAS is working to
address those challenges as I speak, striving to develop
a far more proactive role in conflict prevention through
quiet diplomacy, greater cooperation with other
subregional organizations — some of which I
mentioned earlier — the sharing of information and
experiences, improved analysis and review of
normative and legal frameworks. All of those
9
S/PV.5282
strategies, in our view, will enhance the capacity and
capability of the OAS in early conflict prevention and
will help to strengthen the multilateral efforts of
regional organizations in the Americas.
Finally, we look forward to working with the
United Nations and with other regional organizations
to strengthen our capacity to effectively address the
many conflicts throughout the world and, in our case,
specifically in the Americas.
The President: I now invite the Acting Executive
Secretary representing the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, His Excellency Professor
Omotayo R. Olanyan, to take the floor.
Mr. Olanyan: I should like to begin by
conveying to you, Mr. Foreign Minister, the warm
greetings of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, His Excellency Mr. Alpha Oumar
Konaré, and by thanking you for organizing this
important debate, which is vital to our organization and
to development in Africa. His inability to be here today
is due not to lack of interest, but rather to critical
official engagements on the continent.
The debate in which we are participating today
offers a useful opportunity to examine past experiences
of cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations. It will enable us to highlight
those things that we have done well and those that we
have not. The lessons of successes and failures will
provide useful guidance for the consolidation of future
cooperation.
It is well known that the objectives of regional
organizations can differ in political, military, strategic
and economic ways. For us in Africa, our regional
organization is essentially for development. But our
experience has shown that development can occur only
in a peaceful atmosphere. For that reason, we have
developed an effective mechanism to address conflict
issues on the continent.
Our experience in cooperation has been very
useful. Cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union (AU) is provided for in Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations and in the
Constitutive Act of the African Union. On that basis,
we have put in place a significant number of
cooperative agreements and adopted several
resolutions. Our cooperation is both political and
economic. In that regard, the Department of Political
Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations of the United Nations have collaborated
with the AU and subregional organizations such as the
Economic Community of West African States, in
addressing conflict prevention, management and
resolution and peacekeeping operations on the
continent. At the moment, the United Nations is
working closely with the African Union and
subregional organizations on the ongoing crises in Côte
d’Ivoire, the Sudan and Somalia.
Here, I should like to refer to the sixth high-level
meeting between the United Nations and regional and
other intergovernmental organizations, convened at
United Nations Headquarters on 25 and 26 July 2005.
Among the conclusions reached at the meeting was that
the issues of abject poverty, the depletion of natural
resources, environmental degradation, pandemics and
the social ills of crime and corruption should be
resolved in order to ensure international peace and
security. More important, the meeting supported the
proposed 10-year capacity-building plan for the
African Union, which is a laudable action that could
effectively promote global peace and stability.
What are the basic elements of cooperation for
stabilization? It is necessary to state that the
stabilization process entails, among other things,
harmony and change within and among the components
of the regional system and involves regional systemic
factors. Harmony within and among those components
depends on factors inside and outside the system.
Moreover, the inbuilt capacity to absorb and convert
extraregional systemic factors can determine the
strength of regional stabilization.
It therefore follows that cooperation for
stabilization should target major weaknesses in the
institutions and operations of regional organizations
and the development problems of their member States.
Regional stabilization should be about
cooperation aimed at increased and sufficient support
for the consolidation of the African Union
Commission. The United Nations, as noted earlier, has
already been supporting the Commission’s efforts in
that regard. However, it is clear that much needs to be
done to build up the institution in order to enhance its
operationalization. There are deficiencies in the area of
human resource capacity-building. That is evident in
various departments of the organization, including the
Political Department and the Peace and Security
10
S/PV.5282
Council. Support for long-term consultants and training
programmes is necessary to correct those deficiencies
and to enable the Commission to fully carry out its
administrative responsibilities. The organs of the AU,
including the Peace and Security Council and the Pan-
African Parliament, should be strengthened, and
specialized committees, the Court of Justice and
financial institutions should be established to enable
the AU to perform effectively in the area of regional
stabilization.
Regional stabilization in Africa is about conflict
prevention. The United Nations has a track record of
cooperation with the AU in that respect. As it is,
however, the AU is far from having a full complement
of mechanisms in place to address this complex issue,
which has several dimensions. The AU is resolved to,
among other things, establish an early warning system
to provide information about the development of
political and economic crises in African countries.
Analytical information from such an early warning
system is vital so that the AU can, in collaboration
with the United Nations and with relevant subregional
organizations, take necessary preventive actions that
will not allow crises to degenerate into conflicts or
wars. Further cooperation with the United Nations is
desirable for the full establishment of an effective early
warning system, which would constitute a major
stabilizing factor in regional processes.
Regional stabilization is about effective conflict
management and resolution. Again, these are areas
where the United Nations has cooperated with the AU
and where a number of successes have been achieved.
Nevertheless, there is still room for further
improvement in that respect. There is a need for the
development of a mechanism for the rapid termination
of hostilities, the implementation of peace agreements
and the transition to democratic governance in
countries in crisis. The more effective those
mechanisms are, the better the chances of regional
stabilization.
Regional stabilization is about peacebuilding. In
that area, the support of the United Nations is very
important for countries emerging from conflict, but the
United Nations and the African Union do not have such
a mechanism at the moment.
The African Union welcomes the decision by
heads of State and Government at the 2005 summit in
New York to establish the Peacebuilding Commission.
Peacebuilding entails redressing political, legal,
economic, social and infrastructural problems at the
end of a war. We welcome the efforts of the President
of the General Assembly to immediately put in place a
mechanism for establishing the Peacebuilding
Commission, and we urge that an appropriate role be
assigned to regional organizations, which are
indispensable partners in the peacebuilding process.
Sound post-conflict peacebuilding is a requirement for
the prevention of the reactivation of conflict and for
laying the foundation for economic growth,
development and, therefore, stability.
Regional stabilization implies support for the AU
in its efforts to consolidate democracy and good
governance. At its summits, the AU has adopted
several decisions in those areas. Democracy and good
governance should be strengthened in countries that
have not experienced crises. The political, legal and
economic and social framework for democracy and
good governance should be developed to ensure a
peaceful political transition. The United Nations is
already cooperating in those areas, in particular
through the Economic Commission for Africa and the
United Nations Development Programme. We
encourage increased cooperation with the African
Union and African countries in order to ensure national
and regional stability.
Regional stabilization is about sustainable
economic growth and development. We have in place
several programmes, including the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development (NEPAD) and the AU Strategic
Plan. Currently, Africa is lagging behind in the
attainment of the Millennium Development Goals.
Thus, Africa welcomes the proposals on development
and the recognition of the special needs of Africa
contained in the 2005 High-level Plenary Meeting
outcome document (General Assembly resolution
60/1). The stabilization of the continent requires the
swift implementation of those recommendations, in
particular those relating to an increase in official
development assistance and foreign direct investment,
the expansion of foreign trade, the cancellation of
external debt and the halting and the reversal of the
spread of pandemic HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis
and other infectious diseases.
Stunted development is one of the root causes of
crises and wars in Africa. Cooperation on
implementation should ensure coherence and
harmonization. Cooperation should be sustainable and
11
S/PV.5282
lead to equitable economic growth in countries. In the
absence of sustainable and equitable economic growth
and development, economically weak countries in the
continent will be more susceptible to crises and
internal conflict.
Furthermore, regional stabilization implies
regular consultation by the United Nations with the
leadership of regional organizations. The dynamic
nature of issues in the various regions suggests that
there should be regular meetings to discuss issues and
reorder priorities in order to effectively resolve them.
The United Nations, as already noted, has further
developed that arrangement. Its decision at the sixth
high-level meeting between the United Nations and
regional organizations, held in July 2005, on a
mechanism for coordination and implementation
should be speedily implemented to facilitate regional
stabilization.
Finally, the regional stabilization process is about
sound political support for the leadership of regional
organizations. In the day-to-day activities of regional
organizations, the leadership provides direction and
responses to issues as they arise in the region. Those
actions are generally carried out in consultation with
the United Nations and other stakeholders. Cooperation
for stabilization should focus on that important area.
The cooperation of the United Nations gives regional
leaders significant legitimacy. The more cooperation
there is with the leadership of regional organizations,
the better will be their ability to provide solutions vis-
à-vis the forces of destabilization in the region.
In conclusion, I reaffirm that global stability
derives from regional stability. It is also an irrefutable
fact that regional organizations have the capacity to
meaningfully address regional issues if they are
adequately empowered through sufficient cooperation
with the United Nations. The African Union has the
leadership role in the continent’s stabilization process
for peace, security and sustainable economic growth
and development. Now is the time for the United
Nations to build on its achievements in cooperation
with regional organizations.
Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the presence of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Romania as he presides
over today’s meeting.
We appreciate the statements of the Secretary-
General Kofi Annan and the representatives of regional
organizations.
Strengthening cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security is a major issue and a
challenging task. The world today faces many
interconnected threats, such as armed conflict, terrorist
attacks, arms proliferation, humanitarian crises, the
spread of disease and drug abuse. Those problems
share the common characteristic of being transnational
and transregional. To deal effectively with those
problems, the United Nations must assume its full role,
and cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations must be strengthened. In the
United Nations system, the Security Council has the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
In recent years, regional organizations have taken
on an increasingly important role in conflict resolution,
post-conflict reconstruction, counter-terrorism and the
response to humanitarian crises. Their work has
provided effective support and assistance to the work
of the Security Council. The High-level Plenary
Meeting outcome document (General Assembly
resolution 60/1) recognized that role.
In that context, I would like to make the
following three points. First, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter, all countries and
regions recognize the principle that the Security
Council is at the heart of the international machinery
for collective security. It is also universally recognized
that regional organizations play a positive role in
facilitating the resolution of regional issues.
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter
establishes the role of regional arrangements in the
settlement of disputes. It also provides guidance for the
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations. The summit outcome document states
clearly that a stronger relationship between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations is
required. That places a demand on our future work and
provides an important foundation for the conduct of
such cooperation.
Secondly, in the sphere of increasing coordination
on practical implementation, regional organizations
have unique advantages in dealing with problems in
their respective regions. When considering regional hot
12
S/PV.5282
spots, the Security Council should heed and respect the
views and the recommendations of regional
organizations. In the implementation process, the
Council should give due attention to the unique
advantages of regional organization. For their part, in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter, regional
organizations should take the initiative to keep the
Council informed on their actions in a timely manner
and keep channels of communication open. It should be
noted that regional situations vary greatly, as do
regional organizations. Communication and cooperation
between the two sides should be governed by the
principle of flexibility and should be results-oriented,
and efforts should be made to avoid a one-size-fits-all
approach.
Thirdly, we should strengthen mutual assistance
and give prominence to Africa. Many issues on the
Security Council’s agenda relate to Africa. China
greatly appreciates the positive efforts of the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States, the Inter-Governmental Authority on
Development, as well as of mediation and good offices
missions, in seeking solutions to African conflicts.
The necessary financial resources and logistical
and technical support must be provided with a view to
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and African regional and subregional organizations so
that the peacekeeping and peacebuilding capacities of
those organizations can be enhanced.
We welcome the decision in the Summit Outcome
document to develop and implement a 10-year plan for
capacity-building with the African Union. Such an
endeavour will enable the United Nations to better
cope with regional conflicts and post-conflict
reconstruction in Africa. It will also benefit the African
countries themselves.
There are many regional and subregional
mechanisms for dialogue and cooperation in the Asia-
Pacific region that are playing an important role. The
Shanghai Cooperation Organization is one such
mechanism. Since its establishment in 2001, the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization has gradually
developed into an effective mechanism for promoting
regional security, stability and development. Last year,
it was granted observer status in the General Assembly,
and this year it participated in the summit. The
Shanghai Cooperation Organization will continue to
work, in a spirit of mutual benefit and trust, to promote
equality, consultation and respect for cultural diversity
and shared development. It will pursue an external
policy of not allying with nor targeting other countries
and regions, as well as of abiding by the principle of
openness. It will cooperate closely with the United
Nations with a view to contributing to regional and
international peace and security.
Finally, China endorses the draft resolution
prepared by the delegation of Romania, which we
thank for its efforts.
The President: I thank the representative of
China for his kind words addressed to the presidency.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I would
like, first of all, to sincerely thank you, Mr. President,
for having organized this debate, which provides us
with this opportunity to exchange ideas with the
representatives of regional and subregional
organizations on the best way of boosting cooperation
with the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations has
increased, and the prospects that are now opening up
are more promising than ever. Much remains to be
done, however, if we are to better prepare those two
partners to face, together, existing and new threats to
global peace. The purpose of our meeting today is to
make an assessment of the state of such cooperation, to
identify its strengths and weaknesses, and to consider
what might be done in order to improve it. I would like
to comment on just three elements.
The first element relates to the need to rationalize
the framework for cooperation and to ensure that it
remains adaptable, since we are dealing with matters
that are continually evolving. A great deal of work has
been carried out in that area by the General Assembly
and the Security Council. In our view, this is not a
question of rewriting Chapter VIII of the Charter, but
of exploring, as much as possible, the resources at our
disposal and of basing ourselves on a liberal and
pragmatic reading of its provisions.
We must recognize, in this respect — and we
pointed this out during our discussions on the draft
resolution to be adopted at the end of the debate — that
there is a degree of resistance to going off the beaten
track. Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations is not optional but is an
imperative need imposed by new global realities.
Indeed, the new, complex challenges confronting our
13
S/PV.5282
system of collective security require us to strengthen
cooperation between all players — the United Nations,
regional organizations, Governments and civil society.
Furthermore, regional organizations are playing
an increasing role in the settlement of crises in their
respective geographic areas, and legitimately aspire to
take on increased responsibilities. The Security
Council is not being asked to delegate some of its
responsibilities to those regional organizations but,
rather, to make good use of the contributions of such
organizations through improved interaction, on the
basis of the principles of complementarity and
comparative advantage. The contribution of the
African Union (AU) and subregional organizations in
Africa in the area of political mediation and conflict
prevention, as well as, increasingly, conflict
management, thanks in particular to the very active
role played by the Peace and Security Council of the
AU, is key in this regard.
The second element relates to the mobilization of
resources to help regional organizations and to
strengthen their capacity for action. The United
Nations has acquired a body of experience in planning
and managing multifaceted and complex operations,
which it can and must share with regional
organizations. Although much progress has been made
in helping regional organizations, in particular in
Africa, to develop their capacity for intervention,
greater efforts are required. The Secretariat is prepared
to do more, but it is has to deal with insufficient
resources and, sometimes, lack of political will on the
part of Member States, which prevent it from seeking
innovative solutions. In this context, the Darfur crisis
provides a clear illustration of the gap that exists
between statements and declarations of good faith and
practice; it is a test case for cooperation with regional
organizations — the yardstick by which the
international community’s efforts, and its success and
failures, will be measured.
The third element relates to the stabilization and
peacebuilding phase, during which the United Nations
and regional organizations have a great deal to do
together. That phase, which is generally considered to
be crucial for the success of a peacebuilding process,
does not receive the attention that it deserves. We hope
that the establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission will help to bridge that gap.
Ms. Løj (Denmark): Denmark appreciates this
opportunity to discuss the issue of improved
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. We welcome the Romanian initiative to
hold this debate and the fact that the Foreign Minister
of Romania is presiding over our discussion.
We would like to associate ourselves with the
statement to be delivered later by the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom on behalf of the
European Union (EU).
We welcome the participation today of
representatives of a wide range of regional
organizations. Their contributions to enhancing
international peace and security are of the utmost
importance.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations should be
developed even further. We feel that two areas in
particular are in need of further and timely attention,
namely, the African dimension and counter-terrorism.
Those two issues are also reflected in the draft
resolution initiated by Romania — a draft resolution
that Denmark wholeheartedly supports.
In relation to the African dimension, progress has
been made. We welcome the continued efforts to
strengthen practical cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU), as demonstrated
most clearly in the case of the African Mission in
Sudan.
We would like to encourage enhanced African
ownership and participation in conflict management on
the continent. The Security Council should explore
how best to support ongoing efforts to develop the
African security architecture and work closely with the
African Union and regional organizations to advance
ways and means of cooperation.
Such a coherent approach stimulates operative
cooperation between the United Nations, the EU and
other international actors. The goal should be to
establish efficient partnerships and an equitable
division of labour among organizations involved in
conflict prevention and peacekeeping.
Let me note that Denmark contributes actively to
enhancing African regional and subregional
organizations’ conflict-prevention capacity, through the
European Union and through substantial bilateral
assistance. Thus, Denmark provides, on a bilateral
14
S/PV.5282
basis, through our Africa Programme for Peace, $40
million to capacity-building.
In relation to the fight against terrorism, Denmark
firmly believes that regional organizations can and
should play a particularly important role. In fact, we
will not succeed in this fight unless regional and
subregional organizations firmly commit themselves to
that challenge.
First, the more strongly regional organizations
vow to condemn terrorism in all its forms, the more
successful the international community will be in its
fight against that phenomenon. Such an unambiguous
message is essential to helping dispel any remaining
doubts that terrorism in some form could be
acceptable. It is not.
Secondly, as the Council has noted on several
occasions, many States are willing to do more in the
fight against terrorism but lack the capacity to do so. A
key role for regional organizations is to assist members
in implementing their international obligations in this
field, including by helping them to develop the
necessary capacity to fulfil those obligations.
That is a challenge of which the Security
Council’s Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) is fully
aware. As Chairman of that Committee, I urge the full
cooperation of all regional and subregional
organizations in our collective fight against terrorism.
In conclusion, we see improved cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
as a work in progress. Much has been achieved already,
notably on the ground, not least in the Sudan. With the
overall goal of enhancing international peace and
security, Denmark remains committed to supporting
concrete initiatives to further improve cooperation in
future. The establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission will be a very important step in that
regard.
The President: I invite Mr. Terry Davis,
Secretary-General of the Council of Europe, to take the
floor.
Mr. Davis: I join my colleagues in thanking the
presidency very much indeed for the invitation to
attend this meeting.
I should like to group my remarks under five
headings: first, the general relationship between the
United Nations and the Council of Europe; secondly,
the work of the Council of Europe on conflict
prevention; thirdly, the work of the Council of Europe
in post-conflict situations; fourthly, our work with the
United Nations; and, lastly, what the Council of Europe
can offer the United Nations in terms of future work
and in the context of the concept paper which was
issued a week ago.
Turning, therefore, to our general relationship
with the United Nations, we at the Council of Europe
believe that it is the responsibility of the United
Nations to maintain world peace, and we support it in
its work to that end. We believe that there is a link
between global security and regional security, and we
believe also that there is a link between security,
democracy, human rights and the rule of law. Of
course, democracy, human rights and the rule of law
are the core business of the Council of Europe. Those
are the reasons why we at the Council of Europe are
strong believers in multilateralism and in the world
summit pledge to support a stronger relationship
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
The Council of Europe has a wide range of
activities, but most of it could be covered by the
generic description of conflict prevention. One good
example would be our activities under the Framework
Convention for the Protection of National Minorities.
That is a legal instrument which was developed and
adopted by the Council of Europe after the changes in
Europe in the early 1990s.
Much is known about ethnic conflict and ethnic
cleansing in Europe during that period; much less is
known about potential ethnic conflict which did not
materialize. I choose an example from your own
country, Mr. President. In the early 1990s, there was
considerable tension on ethnic minority issues and
ethnic minority grounds between Romania and
Hungary. Contrary to the former Yugoslavia, Romania
and Hungary chose the Council of Europe way. Both
countries signed and ratified the Framework
Convention in 1995. The conflict remained potential,
not real, and therefore largely unknown.
That example illustrates a trend that I, as
Secretary-General of the organization, intend to
encourage, namely not only to maintain high standards
in human rights, democracy and the rule of law, but
also to give a direct and robust response to new and
specific challenges on our continent.
15
S/PV.5282
As everyone sitting on the Security Council
Counter-Terrorism Committee knows, the Council of
Europe has a threefold approach to fighting terrorism.
Better legal cooperation, exemplified by our
conventions on the suppression of terrorism,
cybercrime and money-laundering, respect for human
rights and the promotion of intercultural and inter-
religious dialogue are some of the ways to address the
root causes of terrorism.
We pay special attention to the balance between
vigorous measures to combat terrorism on the one hand
and strict protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms on the other. It is our firm view that the
absolute prohibition on torture, inhuman and degrading
treatment must be upheld. Today a State cannot be a
member of the Council of Europe without agreeing to
be monitored by a committee on the prevention of
torture.
As for intercultural dialogue, for some years we
have had dialogue with other continents through our
North-South Centre, based in Lisbon. This has
included Africa. In coming months and years, we
intend to increase and intensify that dialogue,
especially on the southern shores of the Mediterranean,
in the Middle East, and in Central Asian republics.
Turning now to our other experience of dealing
with post-conflict situations in Europe, we have been
much involved in multilateral action and individual
actions in the Balkans and the South Caucasus in
particular.
There are two misunderstandings about the work
of the Council of Europe. We give a very broad
interpretation of democracy, human rights and the rule
of law, and we regard our work as properly including
work on good governance, which includes local and
regional government, work on education, culture,
cultural heritage, youth and social cohesion issues.
The second misunderstanding is that we are a
Strasbourg organization. It is true that we are based in
Strasbourg, but we are not restricted to Strasbourg. In
recent years our activity has increased in our member
States, inside our member States, often in partnership
with other regional organizations such as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the European Union, and with the United
Nations — the Balkans being a case in point; there has
already been some reference to Kosovo.
Turning to our work with the United Nations, let
me say that it is not restricted to Kosovo. We have a lot
of cooperation already with some United Nations
agencies. I think that in some cases, it could be better.
That is why I would welcome the idea put forward by
my colleague from the OSCE of a framework
agreement with the United Nations. We would certainly
like to be part of that. I also look forward very much to
working with the Peacebuilding Commission in future.
We offer certain assets and resources to the
United Nations. We have not only our own expertise;
we also have intergovernmental experts: the experts
working for our member States - the 46 member
countries of the Council of Europe. We offer the
Parliamentary Assembly, which has representatives
from the parliaments of our 46 member countries. We
have a Congress of Local and Regional Authorities
which is very similar, with representatives of local
government. We have the European Commission
against Racism and Intolerance dealing with issues of
intolerance, racism, anti-Semitism and Islamophobia.
We have the Court for the protection of human rights,
which applies to all our member States and whose
rulings must be obeyed in our member States.
We have, of course, a very strong relationship —
indeed, a special statutory relationship — with non-
governmental organizations, which gives a grassroots
link to civil society in Europe. We also have the
networks created by expertise, training and other
assistance activities in our member States.
The United Nations Security Council has the
responsibility for the maintenance of peace and
security in all parts of the world, including Europe. My
invitation to you, Mr. President, is for the Security
Council to make best use of what the Council of
Europe has to offer.
I look forward to our cooperation during the
Romanian presidency of the Council of Europe, which
is going to start in November. The presidency of our
Committee of Ministers, a decision-making body, will
last from November until May of next year, and
Romania will be followed by the Russian Federation. I
am sure that they, too, will wish to encourage this
work, in alliance and cooperation with the United
Nations.
The President: I thank the Secretary General of
the Council of Europe for his kind words.
16
S/PV.5282
I now invite the Deputy Chairman of the
Executive Committee of the Commonwealth of
Independent States, His Excellency Mr. Valery
Kyrychenko, to take the floor.
Mr. Kyrychenko (spoke in Russian): We hope
that this meeting will enhance cooperation between the
United Nations and the regional organizations in such
areas as the maintenance of international peace and
security, especially in conflict prevention and
settlement, and in post-conflict peacebuilding.
As is known, the establishment of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) was a very
difficult matter. In essence, it was formed under the
pressure of the need for a firm response to the
appearance of a fundamentally new geopolitical
situation. This, in fact, was compounded by a problem
that arose because of a deep crisis in the economy and
other spheres of public life in the former Soviet areas.
By and large, however, the formation of the CIS
put an end to a chaotic process of break-up of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and to its
destructive impulse; this historical fact is recognized
by the entire international community. It is an
unmistakable achievement of the CIS that it formed
new structures for the establishment of fundamentally
new inter-State relations, allowed for a peaceful way
for political disengagement for the former Soviet
Republics and promoted the establishment of new
sovereign States.
Nonetheless, we were not able to avoid conflicts
and contradictions. Unfortunately, some of them spilled
over into open confrontation and conflict. The most
serious were in Tajikistan, Georgia, Moldova and the
situation in Nagorno-Karabakh. Major factors that
promoted the emergence of conflict situations in the
former Soviet areas are as follows. Socio-economic
problems worsened and social disparity and
polarization increased among the population. There
was a lack of clarity and mixed interests among the
major geo-political centres with regard to new
independent States with regard to spheres of influence.
Political forces struggled for power, and there was an
upturn for the armed forces. Problems in inter-ethnic
relations arose, and there was a mass exodus of
national minorities, especially Russian speakers. Clan
and other types of conflicts grew, and in regions of
Central Asia and the Caucasus the role and influence of
Islamic fundamentalism, and of international centres of
terrorism, the drug trade and other criminal
phenomena, increased.
For the stabilization process, it is very important
to define and analyse possible reasons for the
emergence of conflict in each specific situation, in
order to prevent and settle those conflicts, for
peacebuilding in the post-conflict area, and to ensure
the security and strengthening of trust and confidence.
In the CIS, the system to prevent and settle
conflicts, post-conflict peacebuilding and the
strengthening of the stabilization process are at a
formative stage. Nevertheless, through the efforts of
the CIS countries — first and foremost, of the Russian
Federation — and in close cooperation with, and with
the help of, United Nations structures and those of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), we have been able to achieve some results.
There have been a number of cases of States in
conflict where we have broken through the stage of
armed conflict and gone to political dialogue. We
searched for compromise and solutions; as a result of
the Russian Federation’s mediation in Nagorno-
Karabakh, on 12 May 1994 a ceasefire was established.
In Transdniester, a ceasefire has been in effect since
July 1994, on the basis of the agreements and
principles for a peaceful settlement of armed conflict.
In the conflict area in Abkhazia, Georgia, since 14 May
1994 we have had an agreement on a ceasefire and
disengagement of forces.
We must especially point out that in 2000 we
were able to settle the conflict in Tajikistan. A
settlement was signed on 27 June 1997 in Moscow
between the Tajik officials and the opposition, an
overall agreement on the establishment of peace and
national harmony. As a consequence, hostile activities
ended, and the collective CIS peace forces and the
United Nations observer missions were dissolved. That
played a significant role in the Tajik settlement.
Now the next stage — that is, post-conflict
peacebuilding — has occurred. In order to intensify
cooperation, the Executive Committee of the CIS has
established working relations with the United Nations
Tajikistan Office of Peacebuilding. In October of last
year, a Memorandum of Understanding and Partnership
was signed between our organizations for a post-
conflict recovery for the Republic of Tajikistan. The
end of the civil war in that country is a clear example
of how, through the joint efforts of the United Nations,
17
S/PV.5282
the OSCE and the CIS, an armed conflict in one of the
bloodiest conflict areas at the end of the twentieth
century can be practically settled.
We in the CIS understand that the lack of
settlement in the conflict in the territories of Georgia,
the Republic of Moldova and in and around Nagorno-
Karabakh essentially has an impact on the political,
social and economic conditions for development in
those States that have been drawn into conflict. Those
factors have made difficult the process of a democratic
society and prevent the full functioning of a free trade
area. They are a threat to peace and stability in the
region and in the CIS as a whole.
For this reason, we must find ways for new forms
of cooperation and joint action among regional
organizations in their areas of responsibility, as well as
new approaches to the stabilization process. We agree
that developing cooperation between regional
organizations is more important than ever, since the
major threat to security stems from new global
conflicts and challenges.
In this connection, we feel it possible to put
forward some proposals designed to consolidate efforts
and cooperation in the prevention and settlement of
conflicts and in post-conflict peacebuilding. The CIS
has adopted a concept on the prevention and settlement
of conflicts in the territory of States of the CIS. Such
documents are being worked out by other international
organizations as well. Through a comparative analysis,
we have been able to prepare an overall document,
which includes a platform for security adopted at the
OSCE Istanbul Summit.
Also, as we see it, one urgent task is the working
out of a comprehensive plan for measures for building
trust in the political, humanitarian, environmental and
other spheres, such as the reasons for lack of
confidence among States, and retaining international
membership of the United Nations, missions, and the
OSCE in areas of conflict. We think we could have a
significant number of members in missions who, to our
mind, could be nationals of CIS countries that are not
parties to the conflict and that are not neighbours to
those in conflict. With this approach, we could avoid
duplication of effort. At the same time, we could
expand the possibility for close cooperation in the
political and military spheres, which are brought into
play in the peacekeeping and stabilization processes. In
order to achieve maximum harmony and effectiveness
in the activities of the CIS and the United Nations, we
should provide a clear machinery for consultations
among the interested structures and an exchange of
information on the status of the settlement of a
conflict, on the situation in the regions and on planned
and implemented stabilization measures.
Joint seminars and conferences, with the
participation of their leaders and specialists from the
relevant structures of international organizations, might
be of some assistance. By using such a form of
cooperation, we could not only exchange information
and experience, but also could promote a quest for new
methods and forms to prevent, localize and settle
conflicts and for post-conflict peacebuilding.
Another urgent matter is cooperation in settling
the conflict around Nagorno-Karabakh. We have in
mind the participation of representatives of the CIS
Executive Committee as observers in the negotiation
process in the Karabakh settlement. That was
expressed by the President of Armenia, Robert
Kocharian, and the President of Azerbaijan, Ilham
Heydar oglu Aliyev.
Regarding the Transdniester conflict, we also
believe that the representatives of the Executive
Committee could take part as observers in the
negotiation process and in settling the conflict in and
around Transdniester.
Regarding a settlement of the conflict in
Abkhazia, Georgia, we are compelled to note the two
key issues — the future political status of Abkhazia
within Georgia, and the problem of the return of
refugees and displaced persons to their homes — still
have not been solved. For this reason, the major task
this year, as we see it, is the creation of favourable
conditions for negotiations, establishing an atmosphere
of at least some minimal degree of trust among the
parties, support for the efforts of the Russian
Federation and development of the Sochi process for a
settlement.
Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Sir, as
President of the Security Council. Your presence in this
Chamber, as well as the participation in today’s meeting
of the Secretary-General and leaders and representatives
of a number of leading regional organizations,
convincingly demonstrates the importance of today’s
discussion.
18
S/PV.5282
In the outcome document of the 2005 summit,
world leaders stated their commitment to ensuring
international security on the basis of a comprehensive,
collective approach and strict observance of the
Charter of the United Nations. An important element
for further efforts to enhance the effectiveness of the
world Organization, as the major multilateral
institution, is the gradual development of multifaceted
cooperation and coordination on the part of the United
Nations and the Security Council with regional and
other intergovernmental organizations, above all in the
sphere of peacekeeping. Such interaction, as is clearly
set forth in the outcome document, must continue to be
firmly based on the Charter, in particular, Chapter VIII.
No less important is the reaffirmation by world leaders
of the need for strict respect for basic principles and
criteria for international peacekeeping activities at all
stages of the processes of preventing and settling
conflicts, and also during post-conflict peacebuilding.
First and foremost, what we have in mind is the
immutability of the principle of the primary
responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security and its
exclusive prerogative to sanction the use of force by
the international community. The agenda of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
partners is becoming ever more multifaceted and larger
in scope.
In addition to peacekeeping and peacebuilding
tasks, we now have the fight against weapons of mass
destruction, the illegal spread of small arms and light
weapons, the settlement of other destabilizing
transborder problems and the fight against drug
trafficking and organized crime. In the area of
cooperation between the United Nations Security
Council and regional partners — and the list of these
organizations is well known — a great deal of positive
experience has been gained. That has to be built upon,
making use of it to solve increasingly complex
problems in the framework of the multifunctional
peacekeeping operations. We welcome precisely this
attitude, expressed today by representatives of the
relevant organizations, including the speaker who
directly preceded me, the Deputy Chair of the
Executive Committee of the Commonwealth for
Independent States (CIS), Mr. Kyrychenko.
The peacekeepers of the CIS, along with the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia, are
maintaining security and stability in the area of the
Georgian/Abkhazian conflict. This is not an easy task,
but there is no real alternative to interaction in this
format. Russia is determined to continue energetically
promoting enhanced trust and cooperation, first and
foremost in the peacekeeping sphere between the
United Nations and the CIS.
Of great potential is the cooperation being
established between the United Nations and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization. In the
framework of this organization intensive work is under
way to create its own peacekeeping potential, and that
includes involvement in United Nations peacekeeping
operations.
The Shanghai Cooperation Organization is playing
an important role in ensuring stability and security in the
Euro-Asian region. At its last summit, in Astana,
Kazakhstan, its members expressed willingness to
develop cooperation with the United Nations on a whole
series of timely tasks, including the fight against
international terrorism and illegal drug trafficking, as well
as promoting post-conflict settlement arrangements in
Afghanistan.
We are convinced that in developing the decisions
of the summit, regional partners and the world
Organization should continue to meet each other
halfway. We hope that the regional and subregional
organizations will offer their resources in a more active
way and help both in the prevention of conflicts and in
peacekeeping. For its part, the United Nations and the
Security Council should continue to pay unflagging
attention to strengthening coordination and cooperation
with these structures, with a reasonable division of
labour and respect for the authority of the Security
Council.
In this context, we note with satisfaction the
decision of the summit in favour of an official
agreement between the United Nations Secretariat and
the secretariats of the regional organizations. One of
the short-term priorities in the implementation of these
summit decisions is the establishment of a
Peacebuilding Commission, which is called upon to
help the Security Council and, to the extent possible,
other United Nations bodies in the speedy recovery of
countries emerging from crisis and establishing
guarantees to prevent conflicts from re-emerging. We
are certain that members of the United Nations will be
in a position to ensure the launching of the activities of
this Commission at the beginning of next year.
19
S/PV.5282
Russia consistently supports the holding of
regular high-level meetings between the United
Nations Secretary-General and the leadership of
regional organizations, and we note the agreements
achieved to increase such a practice, including by
holding such meetings on an annual basis.
We hope that adoption today of the Security
Council resolution at the initiative of Romania and, on
the whole, the outcome of today’s discussion, will
allow us to make progress in the process of improving
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. In that way we will be able, through our
joint efforts, to fully achieve the potential of the
collective security system set forth in the Charter of the
United Nations, the commitment to which was clearly
demonstrated by the participants in the 2005 summit.
Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): My
delegation extends a warm welcome to the honourable
minister of Romania and thanks Romania for
organizing this important and timely debate. We also
acknowledge the presence of regional organizations
participating in this debate.
We find this debate useful because regional
organizations play a vital role in maintaining peace and
stability in their respective regions. It is also timely, as
regional organizations have become increasingly
involved in conflict resolution and peacekeeping
missions, alongside those of the United Nations.
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter provides a
basis for a symbiotic relationship between the United
Nations and regional organizations in the maintenance
of international peace and security.
Numerous regional organizations have actively
participated in the settlement of local disputes, either
on their own initiative or by reference from the
Security Council. The active involvement of the
European Union in Kosovo, the Caribbean Community
and the Organization of American States in Haiti, the
African Union in Burundi and Sudan, and the
Economic Community of West African States in Sierra
Leone, Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire are just some of the
cases in point.
Several comprehensive reports have been issued
by the Secretary-General, noting the level of
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union. The General Assembly has also passed
relevant resolutions on the subject, calling for, among
other things, assistance in strengthening the
institutional and operational capacity of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union. The outcome
document of the High-level Plenary Meeting
underscores the need for a closer working partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations
such as the African Union
As the primary organ of the United Nations
responsible for peace and security, the Security
Council has the power and the prerogative to advance
that cooperation to a higher level in order to make it
more effective and responsive to challenges that
threaten international peace and security. We wish to
support your initiative, Mr. President, and that of your
delegation, in advancing the debate on the subject to
institutionalize cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations. We also support
the practice of holding annual high-level meetings
between the Secretariat and heads of regional
organizations.
While appreciating the existing cooperation and
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations, we strongly believe that more can be
done to improve that cooperation. That is particularly
important in the areas of capacity and resource
mobilization. Regional organizations have the
advantage of physical proximity to conflicts as well as
a greater understanding of their causes, but they are
constrained by capacity and operational requirements.
Supporting stand-by arrangements and rapid
deployment capability is one of the ways to strengthen
regional peacekeeping capacities. The 10-year United
Nations programme to strengthen peacekeeping in
Africa, contained in the outcome document of the high-
level summit, is a most relevant initiative in that
regard.
The new Peacebuilding Commission will usher in
a new era of partnership between the African Union
and its subregions to stabilize peace and to anchor
good governance and sustainable development in
countries emerging from conflict in Africa. There is
also a need for political partnership between regional
organizations and the United Nations to prevent,
manage and resolve conflicts. The working relationship
that has evolved between the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union, as in
the cases of Côte d'Ivoire and the Sudan, needs to be
encouraged and institutionalized. It is a mutually
supporting partnership in a creative and
complementary division of labour. That kind of
20
S/PV.5282
partnership enhances multilateralism in promoting
collective security at all levels.
While we recognize the importance of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, we are also mindful of the advantages of
horizontal cooperation among regional organizations.
That is important in facilitating the sharing of
resources, expertise and experiences. The European
Union, for instance, has been very helpful to Africa in
establishing the African Peace Facility, as well as in
providing technical assistance and financial support to
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States, the Inter-Governmental Authority on
Development and the Southern African Development
Community to support their conflict management
efforts. The ongoing partnership in Darfur between the
African peacekeeping mission there, along with the
support from the United Nations the European Union,
NATO and bilateral assistance, is a case in point.
It is our hope that this debate will contribute
positively to the efforts to establish a more coherent
cooperation framework between the United Nations
and regional organizations that will ensure effective
maintenance of international peace and security,
sustained by regional cooperation in the economic,
social and cultural initiatives undertaken by countries
of the various regions in a much more proactive
fashion.
We thank the delegation of Romania for
preparing the draft resolution on this subject, which we
fully support.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United Republic of Tanzania for his kind words
addressed to the presidency.
Mr. Oshima (Japan): We thank the Romanian
presidency for its timely initiative to once again
convene a meeting as a follow-up to the previous one
held under its presidency in July 2004, to focus the
Council's attention on the important question of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in maintaining international peace and
security. We also appreciate the presence of Romania’s
Foreign Minister to preside over this important debate.
My delegation welcomes as well the participation
in this debate of regional and subregional
organizations, representing different parts of the world,
that are actively involved in conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and in promoting
cooperation with the United Nations. We benefit
enormously from their comments, ideas and proposals.
I welcome in particular the participation today of
an important subregional organization from our part of
the world. I am referring in particular to the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
which plays a vital role in promoting cooperation,
harmony and resilience for economic and social
development, as well as, in recent years, in such
political- and security-related arenas as counter-
terrorism and fighting piracy.
As is widely acknowledged, regional
organizations are playing an increasingly important
role in the prevention, resolution and management of
conflicts, including in addressing their root causes.
That is a very welcome and important development
that deserves our full encouragement and support. The
2005 outcome document of the Assembly’s High-level
Plenary Meeting did just that by supporting a stronger
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations, including through the increased
involvement of regional organizations in the work of
the Security Council and enhanced support for
capacity-building at the regional level.
We note in particular, and applaud, the
increasingly active and effective role played by the
African Union in the prevention of conflict and
political mediation. We welcome the political
commitment and the increasing sense of regional
ownership with which the African Union and Africa's
subregional organizations have engaged in peace
processes in a number of serious situations on the
continent. Just this month, for example, the African
Union Peace and Security Council gave new impetus to
the peace process in Côte d’Ivoire. The African Union
is also engaged in peacekeeping on the ground in
Darfur and in peace negotiations in Abuja. In addition,
the Economic Community of West African States and
other subregional organizations are making efforts to
prevent deadly conflicts in Africa. We pay tribute to
them.
Those welcome efforts made by regional and
subregional organizations in Africa and elsewhere
should, as necessary, be supported or complemented by
the United Nations, and by the Security Council in
particular. To that end, interaction and cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
21
S/PV.5282
subregional organizations needs to be strengthened,
and concrete ways should be developed to facilitate
that. We support, for example, creating more
opportunities for heads of regional and subregional
organizations to brief the Security Council on their
activities as they relate to the maintenance of peace
and security. Likewise, the holding of meetings
between representatives of regional organizations and
members of the Security Council during the Council’s
field missions are useful ways to strengthen the needed
interaction and cooperation.
More specifically, we note and welcome the
growing role of regional organizations in peacekeeping
operations, particularly in Africa, where they are most
numerous. We believe that promoting further
cooperation and creating partnerships between regional
organizations and the United Nations in the area of
peacekeeping is a desirable and feasible goal that
should be positively pursued. To that end, several
issues will need to be considered.
First, the capacity to rapidly deploy peacekeeping
personnel to meet emergency requirements has always
been a challenge. To better cope with that challenge,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations has been
advocating for some time the idea of a strategic reserve
of peacekeepers that can be relied upon for rapid
deployment once a peacekeeping mission is
established. That interesting proposal is still under
discussion, with many questions yet to be resolved.
The outcome document by world leaders also talked
about the idea of rapidly deployable capacities.
In developing such a rapid-deployment capacity,
regional organizations can play a useful role, and in
fact some organizations — the European Union, for
example — have developed such a capacity. Other
regional organizations can follow — if necessary, with
the assistance of the donor community — for the
provision of training, equipment and other capacity-
building assistance to the troop-contributing members
of regional organizations, such as the standby force of
the African Union.
Secondly and more generally, in the area of peace
operations, more effective cooperation and partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations
that are engaged in peace operations is desirable. While
the role of regional organizations in peace operations
has been growing, their capacities for sustainable
operations, particularly in developing regions of the
world, are often limited. The United Nations can play a
useful supporting or facilitating role in order to
strengthen the sustainability of peace operations
conducted by regional organizations, particularly when
the operations in question are authorized by the
Security Council.
To that end, various forms of support can be
considered, ranging from United Nations assistance in
military planning, such as that now being provided to
the African Union mission in the Sudan, to support in
areas where regional organizations and their member
States face difficulties, including in transport, logistics
and engineering.
Before closing, let me state that we believe that
there is an important role in the proposed
peacebuilding commission for regional organizations,
and we strongly support the participation of regional
organizations, as appropriate, in the activities of the
peacebuilding commission.
Today’s discussion is timely and provides an
important opportunity to take stock of the current state
of affairs and consider the future course of action in
meeting the challenges of enhancing cooperation and
coordination between regional organizations and the
United Nations, particularly the Security Council. We
trust that today’s debate will take us one step further in
that direction.
My delegation appreciates the effort of the
Romanian delegation in preparing a draft resolution on
the subject, which we strongly support.
The President: I thank the representative of
Japan for his kind words addressed to the presidency.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I have
the honour to speak also on behalf of the European
Union and those countries that have aligned themselves
with this statement.
We welcome the Foreign Minister’s participation
this morning and thank you, Sir, for convening this
debate on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations, a subject in which the European
Union takes an intense interest. For that reason, the
United Nations and the European Union signed a joint
declaration on cooperation in crisis management in
September 2003. We also see this debate as part of the
implementation process of the world summit outcome.
I should like to thank all those representatives of
22
S/PV.5282
regional organizations and entities who have joined us
today.
Over the past few years, we have seen
cooperation in peace and security between regional
organizations and the United Nations expand,
strengthen and develop in unprecedented ways. In
many senses, that reflects the changing nature of
conflict. Most conflicts of the last 15 years have been
internal conflicts — civil wars that may have erupted
owing to failures of governance, abuse of human
rights, religious or ethnic persecution, and economic
exclusion. Those internal conflicts have invariably
spilled over, causing regional problems.
For countries torn apart by civil war, peace is
hard won and recovery a long and complex process.
And for the international community, support for a
peace agreement following civil war is not just about
observing violations of a ceasefire. It is now a
multidimensional task. It extends beyond observation
to robust peacekeeping, where necessary, but also
encompasses the full range of civilian and civilian
police tasks, from the provision of immediate
humanitarian assistance, to support for long-term
development plans; from the demobilization of ex-
combatants to reintegration programmes for those
returning to their communities; from meeting
immediate need for police on the ground to long-term
institutional reform of the police force and the
monitoring and promotion of human rights. Both the
United Nations and regional organizations have been
involved in all those tasks in conflict situations, in
many cases in partnership with each other. They have
had to adapt their capabilities and modes of
cooperation to meet those new needs.
Let me give just a few examples of how the
United Nations and regional organizations have
cooperated in recent times. In Liberia, Sierra Leone
and Côte d’Ivoire, it was the Economic Community of
West African States that provided the first troops on
the ground and therefore the initial capability for
stabilization in advance of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. In Darfur, as my Tanzanian
colleague has pointed out, the African Union’s
peacekeeping force, the African Union Mission in
Sudan, is carrying the burden on the ground and
functions with the financial support of the European
Union through the African Peace Facility. In Bosnia,
there have been a number of linked interventions by
the United Nations and its partners. The United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina has now
been succeeded by the European Union’s Police
Mission in Bosnia, and the European Union has
replaced the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) in the main stabilization role, with support
from NATO. Another example is Kosovo, where NATO
troops have provided the main stabilization force, the
Kosovo Force, which has operated under a United
Nations mandate and in tandem with the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). Furthermore, UNMIK itself provides an
example of United Nations cooperation with others,
through the European Union’s leadership of UNMIK’s
pillar IV and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe’s leadership of pillar II.
From the development perspective, there are
several instances of useful cooperation. One such
example is the strategic partnerships and agreements
concluded between the European Commission and
several United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes.
The European Union believes that the case for
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations has been emphasized by those examples
and many more, as well as by the interventions we
heard this morning. Cooperation matters because
regional organizations may have a more profound
understanding of the situation in those countries; they
may have leverage where the United Nations or other
international partners do not; and, like good
neighbours, regional organizations care more about
what is happening in their own backyard and may be
prepared to do something about it more quickly than
others.
No one country or organization — not even the
United Nations — can be expected to have all the
capabilities to assist a country in conflict. Partnership
is essential if we are to get the tasks of conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding done. In
doing so, we must, however, keep in mind the overall
responsibility for international peace and security
vested in this Security Council.
Let me turn to some of the opportunities and
challenges of strengthening cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations.
First, the European Union believes that more can
be done to improve cooperation in conflict prevention
and to help regional organizations prevent conflict in
23
S/PV.5282
their own regions. The United Nations and regional
organizations should, as a matter of course, share early
warning information and, where possible, take forward
joint work to prevent the outbreak of conflict. For that
reason, the European Union and the United Nations
Secretariat conduct regular desk-to-desk dialogue, and
that needs to be strengthened.
Secondly, in his report “In larger freedom”,
Secretary-General Annan urged us to establish
“an interlocking system of peacekeeping
capacities that will enable the United Nations to
work with relevant regional organizations in
predictable and reliable partnerships” (A/59/2005,
para. 112).
We need to build an understanding of the comparative
capabilities of different organizations and the know-
how to work together in a range of different
circumstances and at short notice. That is not to say
that there should be a strict division of labour. Rather,
in order to be effective, the international community
needs to know which organization can do what, and in
what time frame. The summit outcome built on “In
larger freedom” by encouraging the efforts of the
European Union and other regional entities to develop
capacities for rapid deployment, standby and bridging
arrangements. We should take forward work on these
areas now, including issues of interoperability and of
how to effect a successful transition from an operation
led by the United Nations to one led by a regional
entity, and vice versa.
Thirdly, the relationship between regional
organizations and the Peacebuilding Commission will
be crucial. The place of such organizations in the
Commission’s country-specific work is assured in the
summit outcome. Regional organizations will have a
key role to play in providing information from the field
and in helping to formulate peacebuilding strategies
during discussions within the Commission. This will
also be the means to build greater coherence between
actions of the United Nations and those of regional
organizations on peacebuilding issues.
Fourthly, building the capacity of regional
organizations needs to be given serious long-term
support. In particular, the European Union welcomes
the reference in the summit outcome document to the
development and implementation of a 10-year plan for
capacity-building with the African Union. Direct
contact and cooperation among regional organizations
should be encouraged. The United Nations also has
role to play in this, given its wide experience, its
network of expertise and its potential to play a
coordinating role.
Fifthly, developments relating to regional
organizations should become a regular part of the
Secretary-General’s reporting to the Security Council,
and, as appropriate, the Council should meet regularly
with the heads of regional and subregional
organizations. In this way the Council will be better
informed about the situation on the ground and about
the options available for a given country. In this
respect, the European Union welcomes the provisions
of the draft resolution that has been agreed for this
meeting.
Finally, let me say a word about cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in combating terrorism. Pursuing terrorists or
proliferators requires a cross-border response. Regional
organizations may often be ideally placed to help
countries make that successful response. But at the
same time, to be able to tackle these threats with really
effective international cooperation, we as individual
States need to have some common ground. We need a
common vision and a common language. We need
common standards in what we do, in the form of new
legal or political norms. This is where the
intergovernmental bodies of the United Nations have a
major role to play. The European Union would
welcome the opportunity to further enhance counter-
terrorism cooperation with the United Nations.
In conclusion, regional organizations now play a
major role in assisting the Security Council, and the
United Nations as a whole, in the maintenance of
international peace and security. This is a fact that is
being borne out today in conflict and post-conflict
situations all around the world. The European Union
looks forward to strengthened cooperation with the
United Nations and regional organizations in all
capacities.
Like other members of the Council, the United
Kingdom welcomes and will support the proposed draft
resolution on this item.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Hamidon Ali, Chairman of the New
York Committee of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations.
24
S/PV.5282
Mr. Hamidon: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), namely Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia,
Indonesia, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Viet
Nam and my own country, Malaysia.
ASEAN joins others in congratulating you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month.
ASEAN is pleased to note that cooperation with
the United Nations has been pursued in many areas of
common interest and concern. ASEAN fully supports
multilateralism and the central role of the United
Nations in maintaining international peace and
security. In that connection, and with a view to
promoting peace and stability in the region, the eighth
ASEAN summit, held at Bangkok in 1995, agreed that
ASEAN should explore ways and means of enhancing
cooperation with the United Nations.
With regard to pursuing that commitment, we
recall the successful and fruitful meeting held between
ASEAN leaders and the Secretary-General of the
United Nations at the first ASEAN-United Nations
summit, held on 12 February 2000 in Bangkok. The
summit called for closer cooperation between ASEAN
and the United Nations in activities such as exchanging
information and organizing conferences and seminars
on issues relating to regional security, with financial
support from the United Nations. Since that summit,
ASEAN member countries and the ASEAN secretariat
have worked closely with the relevant United Nations
entities, in particular the Department of Political
Affairs and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), in organizing a series of annual
regional seminars. The fourth United Nations-ASEAN
Conference on Conflict Prevention, Conflict
Resolution and Peacebuilding in South-East Asia, with
the theme of “The ASEAN Security Community and
the United Nations”, held in Jakarta on 24 and
25 February 2004, was a product of such cooperation.
The fifth such United Nations-ASEAN conference is
scheduled to be held in the first half of 2006.
To further strengthen the foundations of ASEAN-
United Nations cooperation, the second ASEAN-
United Nations summit was held on 13 September
2005 at the periphery of the recent High-level Plenary
Meeting of the General Assembly. In addition to
ASEAN leaders, the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the ASEAN Secretary-General, the World
Health Organization, UNDP, the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS were invited
to participate in the summit. ASEAN leaders and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations took the
opportunity to review and discuss broad areas of
cooperation, including energy security, debt relief,
health, disaster management, trade and investment and
peace and security. The summit also discussed the
High-level Plenary Meeting and United Nations
reform.
On peace and security, ASEAN leaders and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations recognized the
linkages between development, security and human
rights and committed themselves to enhance
cooperative efforts to combat international terrorism at
the national, regional and international levels. The
United Nations also welcomed the possibility of
ASEAN seeking observer status in the United Nations.
The ASEAN-United Nations summit affirmed its
support for multilateralism, with the United Nations at
its core. The summit also expressed support for the
efforts of the Secretary-General of the United Nations
to enhance the effectiveness of the Organization and
the multilateral system it represents to meet the
challenges of the millennium. ASEAN looks forward
to future summit meetings with the United Nations to
maintain and promote closer cooperation between the
two organizations.
Moreover, the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 57/35 in 2002 generated additional impetus
in our cooperation, as it encouraged both ASEAN and
the United Nations to increase contacts and to further
identify areas of cooperation, as appropriate. In that
regard, ASEAN and the United Nations, as well as the
specialized agencies, must explore ways and means of
promoting further ASEAN-United Nations cooperation.
We wish to emphasize that for the past 38 years
ASEAN has succeeded in fostering an atmosphere of
peace and cooperation in South-East Asia, as ASEAN
moves towards the establishment of the ASEAN
Community, with the ASEAN Security Community as
one of its three pillars, along with the ASEAN
Economic Community and the ASEAN Social-Cultural
Community. We are contributing to global peace,
stability and comprehensive security. We will also give
particular attention to the efforts of the United Nations
in peacemaking, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
25
S/PV.5282
preventive diplomacy as well as to the strengthening of
the work of the United Nations in the social and
economic fields.
In coping with non-traditional threats and the
challenges of globalization, ASEAN wishes to reiterate
the urgent need to further strengthen cooperation with
the United Nations in the areas of disaster management
and dealing with emerging and resurgent infectious
diseases such as avian influenza and severe acute
respiratory syndrome.
ASEAN, as a driving force for the ASEAN
Regional Forum, has maintained contacts with various
international and regional organizations, including the
United Nations and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, with the aim of exchanging
experiences and best practices in promoting peace and
security. As an established multilateral regional
security forum, the ASEAN Regional Forum embodies
the principal regional process, initiated by ASEAN to
engage its dialogue partners and other interested
countries in the Asia-Pacific region to come together
for confidence-building dialogue and cooperation
activities.
ASEAN Foreign Ministers also hold regular
consultations with their counterparts from other
regional organizations on the margins of the annual
General Assembly sessions in New York. Under this
arrangement, ASEAN Foreign Ministers have met their
counterparts from the Rio Group, the Gulf Cooperation
Council, the Economic Cooperation Organization and
the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation.
These meetings serve a very useful purpose by
promoting mutual understanding and cooperation on a
myriad of issues of common interest.
We thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting, which has enabled ASEAN to interface with
the Security Council and hence to expand further the
scope of cooperation between our regional organization
and the United Nations system.
Last but not least, we wish Romania’s presidency
a great success.
The President: I thank Ambassador Hamidon Ali
for the kind words he addressed to the presidency. I
now invite His Excellency Mr. Martin Erdmann,
Assistant Secretary General of the Political Affairs and
Security Policy Division of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, to take the floor.
Mr. Erdmann: Let me first of all join others in
thanking the Romanian presidency for having
convened this meeting, for taking this initiative and for
giving us the opportunity to present our views on
today’s very important subject.
I represent an institution, the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), which is 56 years old,
almost as old as the United Nations. During the first 40
years of its existence, NATO had a very specific role in
the historic context of what we call the period of the
cold war. Those times are long gone, and the once
static and passive alliance of European and North
American democracies has changed profoundly.
Today, NATO is no longer focused on deterrence.
Instead, we have embarked on a journey to turn the
alliance into a provider of stability in Europe and even
beyond. This journey began in response to a brutal act
of violence in the Balkans. Ten years ago, in 1995, the
Srebrenica massacre in Bosnia and Herzegovina
became the symbol of a tragedy that could have been
avoided if the international community had acted more
resolutely.
Srebrenica was a wake-up call. It was a turning
point for Europe, and it was a defining point for
NATO. Srebrenica has taught us that we have to face
challenges earlier. It spurred NATO allies to engage
themselves more resolutely in the search for a solution
to the Bosnian conflict. The result was a major
peacekeeping operation — first the Implementation
Force (IFOR), later the Stabilization Force (SFOR) —
the first even in NATO history.
In 1999, in the Kosovo air campaign, NATO had
already learned how to act faster, but we were still not
fast enough to prevent too many innocent civilian
deaths. Finally in 2001, in the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, we were successful. We
managed to prevent a civil war from breaking out.
That is, so to speak, the past. NATO has become
an organization that defends the security of its
members and provides stability far beyond its own
borders. Although not a regional organization per se,
but an international intergovernmental organization,
the alliance has evolved over the years into a security
manager in a broad sense, first in Europe and now
beyond.
In 2003, under a United Nations mandate, NATO
established the International Stabilization Assistance
26
S/PV.5282
Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan in order to assist the
Government of Afghanistan and the international
community in maintaining security within the Force’s
area of operations. ISAF provided a safe and secure
environment conducive to free and fair elections. In
2004, under a United Nations mandate, NATO
established a training mission in Iraq, helping the Iraqi
Government to exercise its capability to address the
security needs of the Iraqi people by itself. And only
this year, on the basis again of a United Nations
mandate, NATO has started to provide support to the
African Union Mission in Darfur, complementing
efforts of other international players. Only last week,
NATO took quick action in response to the recent
earthquake in Pakistan by opening an air bridge for
providing humanitarian relief, in close cooperation
with the United Nations and the European Union.
(spoke in French)
All of that shows that NATO has learned its
lesson from Srebrenica 10 years ago. There is no
realistic alternative to a policy of engagement. But
there is another lesson that we have learned in order to
meet the new security challenges: the international
community must act together. The challenges of the
twenty-first century do not respect borders. In order to
meet them, we need the broadest possible international
cooperation. No nation and no institution can do it
alone.
We need this community of engagement based on
the particular experience of each institution. In this
context, the alliance has committed itself to
substantially improving its capacity to face up to new
challenges. A successful response requires not only
political determination but also appropriate military
capacity. Our partners — in the Caucasus, in Central
Asia, the Mediterranean Dialogue countries, the Gulf
Cooperation Council countries and the contact
countries, such as Japan, Australia and New
Zealand — have often contributed to our operations
and thus constitute a considerable portion of our
capacity. Besides promoting interoperability, the
alliance assists its partners with defence sector reform
and in addressing together the security and stability
challenges we are all facing, such as terrorism and
border security.
(spoke in English)
Cooperation with international organizations is
equally important, and here we return to today’s
subject. Our experience on the ground in various
missions over the past 10 years shows that we all have
to work together and to play our respective strengths.
In a world in which managing security has become so
complex, it is essential that we develop a common
understanding. That is the first step towards finding
effective solutions. And that is why having regular and
structured relationships between NATO and the
European Union is so important. NATO is ready to
further enhance this relationship, which is already solid
in practice and which has matured in several theatres
on a more formal basis. As for the Standing
Committee, from our point of view it is an important
contribution to strengthening the mechanics of
cooperation, and we stand ready to engage ourselves in
its work.
There is no doubt that interaction will increase. It
is in everyone’s interest to do so, as was highlighted in
the 2005 World Summit Outcome. Be it through a
structured dialogue, the Peacebuilding Commission or
the Standing Committee we will continue to address
pertinent issues for sustainable peace and security.
Here, I would use a concrete example of the need
for closer cooperation — Afghanistan. In three months’
time we will all meet in London to coordinate the
development of a post-Bonn process for that country.
That will be a real challenge, but it is also an excellent
opportunity to show that our organizations are sharing
the responsibility for the daunting job ahead of us.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the
Romanian presidency of the Security Council once
again for having taken the initiative to organize this
important exchange of views.
The President: I thank the His Excellency
Mr. Erdmann for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I would like to express
our appreciation to His Excellency Minister Mihai
Razvan Ungureanu, and to the delegation of Romania
under his able leadership, for convening this meeting
on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations, which affords the Security
Council the opportunity to reassess this pertinent
subject in the light of the recent World Summit. I also
thank the Secretary-General and the representatives of
the various regional and subregional organizations in
attendance for their invaluable contribution to this
debate.
27
S/PV.5282
As stated in the President’s concept paper, the
“time is right for the relationship between the Council
and regional organizations to become more focused
and organized” (S/2005/638, p. 3). Slightly over a
month ago, in the 2005 World Summit Outcome our
heads of State and Government clearly reaffirmed the
importance of regional and subregional organizations
for the international community as a whole and for the
work of the United Nations in the field of international
peace and security in particular. Institutional
cooperation with those organizations is certainly
required in key areas related to the settlement of
disputes, threats to and breaches of the peace, and acts
of aggression. In the outcome document their
indispensable role was recognized in the fields of
peacekeeping, peacebuilding, responsibility to protect
and in efforts to meet the special needs of Africa.
The position taken in the outcome document
stems from undeniable empirical realities: in Darfur,
the African Union bears the brunt of the operations to
oversee the ceasefire; in West Africa, the Economic
Community of West African States has gone extra
miles to quell critical situations; in Nagorny-Karabakh,
OSCE relentlessly pursues an end to the territorial
dispute; in Kosovo and in Afghanistan, NATO provides
support to the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, within the framework of the
relevant Security Council resolutions; and in Bosnia-
Herzegovina, the European Union has taken over the
task of consolidating peace.
In addition, I would like to focus on two
instances that are particularly close to Brazilian hearts
and minds. In Guinea-Bissau, the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP) has done
remarkable work — even more so if we consider its
restricted means — in helping to organize the recent
elections, which were deemed free and fair by
international observers. Now, CPLP is turning its
efforts towards providing support for institution-
building and restructuring. As is also the case with the
International Organization of la Francophonie,
organizations originally based on common cultural
backgrounds have been consistently increasing their
involvement, support and direct assistance to
peacemaking and peacebuilding initiatives. The
Council should expand cooperation with such
institutions.
In Haiti, the Organization of American States
(OAS) is closely cooperating with the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti in organizing elections
and has succeeded so far in registering more than 3
million voters for the coming ballot. That amounts to
more registrations than in the last two elections in the
country. Such commendable work is not restricted to
the electoral field. In Haiti, electoral registration
provides a large segment of the population with its
only credible civil registration, another essential
instrument of citizenship. In the spirit of promoting the
kind of cooperation that this initiative by the Romanian
presidency stimulates, my country is making a
substantial contribution to the elections in Haiti, based
on an agreement recently signed between Brazil and
the United Nations Development Programme, and
based on our cooperation with the OAS.
Brazil welcomes increased coordination and
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations. In establishing such
important connections, however, we must be careful
not to overstretch the limited resources of some of
those organizations and be mindful of their respective
competences. Constitutive charters do not always allow
for the kinds of cooperation the United Nations might
be seeking. Moreover, we believe that whenever the
situation of a country is brought to the attention of the
Council, the view of countries in the affected region
and members of regional organizations should be heard
and taken into account.
I would like to emphasize the need for increased
attention to an area where regional organizations can
play a crucial role: conflict prevention. More than
once, my delegation has stated in the Council that
major efforts by regional organizations should be
targeted at the root causes of conflicts, in particular
those that may be region-specific. Eradicating the root
causes of conflict usually demands time and strenuous
efforts. Regional organizations are in a unique position
to address those causes, be they of a political,
economic, cultural or social character. Their proximity
and inside knowledge of local conflict situations allows
regional organizations to deal with the specific
elements that may precipitate even more critical
situations.
Certainly, the Security Council can strengthen the
capabilities of regional organizations in conflict
prevention, and in the field special representatives of
the Secretary-General should be attentive at all times to
28
S/PV.5282
the views and capacities of relevant regional
organizations. Nevertheless, the principles determining
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations should be sufficiently broad and based on
the central idea that for each afflicted area it is possible
to devise the optimum level of an organization’s
contribution.
The delegation of Brazil believes that the
Peacebuilding Commission established by the outcome
document will greatly contribute to increased
coordination among regional organizations and the
United Nations, through the Economic and Social
Council and the Security Council. We expect that the
Commission will soon be operational and we are
working determinedly with other delegations towards
that end.
Regional organizations have the ability and
flexibility to muster support for initiatives aimed at
breaking vicious cycles of insecurity and violence that
plague so many countries all over the world. In areas
such as the illegal trade in small arms and light
weapons they can and do make a difference. They are
also key players when it comes to involving civil
society, which quite often plays a major role in
peacebuilding as they possess the essential
understanding of domestic dynamics.
Brazil is acutely aware that no peace can be
expected to last if the people concerned cannot live a
dignified life. In that sense, the most relevant
contribution we can make is fostering development and
combating hunger and poverty, those infamous
seedbeds of conflict.
I would like to conclude by emphasizing that the
United Nations bears the primary responsibility among
international organizations to promote peace and
security, foster development and guarantee respect for
human rights. Those are the main pillars of our
collective endeavours. Enhanced cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations will make our own tasks easier and our
efforts more efficient, thus strongly increasing the
likelihood that the Charter responsibilities of the
Security Council will be effectively met.
Finally, I would like to thank the Romanian
delegation for the draft resolution proposed on this
issue, which my delegation is prepared to support.
The President: I thank the representative of
Brazil for the kind words he addressed to me and to my
Minister.
Mr. Baja (Philippines): We are honoured by the
presence of the Foreign Minister of Romania to preside
over this important meeting. We congratulate the
Romanian mission, led by your dynamic self,
Mr. President, on its initiative in developing the theme
of our debate. We are also grateful to the
representatives of regional organizations, whose
presentations enrich our insight into cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security.
At this stage of our discussion, the importance
and usefulness of cooperation between the United
Nations — in particular the Security Council — and
regional organizations in maintaining international
peace and security has been sufficiently acknowledged.
The United Nations and regional organizations are, and
should be, mutually reinforcing partners in that
endeavour. The challenge before us is to look for
opportunities to enhance that partnership and areas in
which to do so.
There are some operational guidelines we must
bear in mind here. The first obvious consideration is
that no two regional organizations can be so similar as
to admit of a uniform standard for cooperation or
partnership. Regional organizations embody regional
norms. The simplest way to understand a regional
organization — thereby making cooperation more
effective — is to study its charter or, in the absence of
such a document, the instruments establishing the
regional grouping. Regional organizations have
emerged from particular regional developments, as
reflected in the preambles of regional charters or
instruments.
The second obvious consideration to bear in mind
is that in most cases, a regional organization can be no
more than the sum total of the political orientation, the
level of economic development and the cultural and
religious diversity of its members. Those are important
factors in the equations affecting the competence of
regional organizations and the degree to which they
interact and cooperate with the United Nations, and
particularly with the Security Council, as it carries out
its mandate of maintaining international peace and
security.
29
S/PV.5282
The search for appropriate modalities for
cooperation between regional organizations and the
United Nations should aim to promote speedy and
effective responses to situations likely to threaten
regional or even international peace and security. Such
modalities should optimize the resources of concerned
regional organizations and of the various components
of the United Nations system on the basis of their
comparative strengths. That will ensure the
complementarity of efforts and will eliminate
duplication. This concept should hold true regardless
of whether the cooperation or partnership is in the area
of conflict prevention, peacekeeping or post-conflict
peacebuilding.
There are fertile areas that the United Nations and
regional organizations could cultivate in the
maintenance of international peace and security. In the
area of conflict prevention, the United Nations could
stimulate the use of regional mechanisms or
arrangements in the pacific settlement of disputes.
Such stimulation could come in the form of
confidence-building measures and technical assistance
aimed at the capacity-building of such mechanisms. In
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia
provides for a High Council, which is available to
members for the settlement of disputes. The United
Nations could also enhance its support for and
assistance to regional seminars — for example, the
United Nations-ASEAN Conference on Conflict
Prevention, Conflict Resolution and Peacebuilding in
South-East Asia. The next such conference is
scheduled to be held in the first half of 2006.
It is also relevant to mention that, as borne out by
ASEAN’s experience, a parallel track undertaken by
the academic sector of civil society or by regional
think tanks has been useful. The ASEAN Regional
Forum — the regional process initiated by ASEAN to
engage its dialogue partners and other interested
parties in the Asia-Pacific region in confidence-
building and cooperation activities on political and
security matters — should attract the attention of the
United Nations with regard to its conflict prevention
efforts.
In the areas of peacekeeping and post-conflict
peacebuilding, it is essential to establish a dedicated
communication procedure for the exchange of relevant
information. That would permit the identification of
activities likely to disturb regional peace and would
serve as a device for early warning and monitoring to
prevent their escalation into hostilities. Such
communication procedures or processes could also
serve as a repertoire of best practices through which
other regions could successfully address similar
situations. That would also provide an opportunity to
develop an integrated operational response aimed at a
negotiated political settlement.
During the recent ASEAN-United Nations
summit held on 13 September 2005, ASEAN leaders
and the Secretary-General of the United Nations
reviewed and discussed broad areas of cooperation,
which included energy security, debt relief, health,
disaster management and peace and security. In the
area of peace and security, they committed themselves
to enhancing cooperative efforts to combat
international terrorism at the national, regional and
international levels. It cannot be overemphasized that
cooperation between the United Nations, particularly
the Security Council, and regional organizations to
combat a common enemy — terrorism — should be
further enhanced.
The United Nations should also encourage
dialogue and cooperation among regional
organizations. ASEAN Foreign Ministers, for example,
have consultations with their counterparts from other
regional organizations — such as the Gulf Cooperation
Council, the South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation, the Economic Cooperation Organization
and the Rio Group — in the margins of the annual
sessions of the General Assembly in New York.
Finally, Mr. President, we welcome and support
the draft resolution formulated by your delegation,
which would, among other things, request the
Secretary-General to include in his reporting to the
Security Council assessments of progress made in
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Philippines for the very kind words he addressed to the
presidency.
Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French): I
wish to thank Romania for having once again taken the
initiative to convene a debate on the subject we are
considering today. Given the growing needs in the area
of peacekeeping, regional organizations have an
essential role to play in both taking over from and
supporting United Nations activities.
30
S/PV.5282
I fully associate myself with the statement made
earlier by Ambassador Jones Parry on behalf of the
European Union. I wish only to make a few
supplementary remarks.
Regional organizations have recently made
significant progress in giving full effect to the
provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter. I believe it is
accurate to say that today, such organizations are often
able to make a major contribution to peacekeeping at
every stage and in all its dimensions, from conflict
prevention to the rebuilding of a country emerging
from crisis. We can see that clearly in our daily work in
the Council: they intervene, sometimes, proactively,
sometimes by taking over, and sometimes by
supplementing United Nations activities. We also note
that the capacities of various organizations are not
identical and that progress is still needed. But major
efforts are being undertaken everywhere, and they must
be recognized and continued.
As Ambassador Jones Parry underlined, the
European Union is actively strengthening its ability to
support the crisis management activities of the United
Nations. We can see the evidence of that in the
Balkans. The European Union’s actions now take place
in the framework of the 24 September 2003 joint
declaration of the United Nations and the European
Union on cooperation in crisis management. The EU is
also involved in strengthening the capacities of African
regional and subregional organizations through the
Peace Facility, which finances operations conducted by
regional actors on the continent.
In that regard, I pay tribute to the initiatives that
African countries have taken. Our Council, which
devotes more than 50 per cent of its time to the
management or the prevention of crises in Africa, is
well aware of them. The African Union has been able
to make a vital contribution to the transition process in
Burundi, among other actions, while the Economic
Community of West African States has taken action in
Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau and Côte d’Ivoire.
It has often been seen that subregional
organizations work in good harmony and cooperation
with regional organizations and the Security Council
and that we all arrive together — or at least try to — to
make our actions complementary. Quite often, the
actions of regional organizations have ensured a
presence on the ground on occasions when the United
Nations was not yet prepared to deploy a peacekeeping
force. That is, in fact, what happened in Burundi. The
Organization of American States has taken action in
Haiti, and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe is continuing its work on the
Eurasian continent.
We now regularly study the relations between the
Security Council and regional organizations. I think
that at each stage, we have to consider the nature of the
value added by cooperation between regional
organizations and the United Nations. With respect to
the difficult area of crisis and conflict prevention, I
think that we are all aware that an effective regional
organization often — more often than the United
Nations — has the means to play an early-warning
role.
That is what countries of the region are doing. We
increasingly see that they tend to work through
regional organizations or get them involved directly.
That is a good thing, because it facilitates information
and communication. I think it is necessary to have
good information and communication going back and
forth between the United Nations and regional
organizations. My delegation welcomes the fact that
progress has been made in that regard, but I think that
we can do even better, as Article 54 of the Charter
invites us to do.
I would add that a concrete step that prevention
effort would be for the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations to take into account the
instruments created by regional structures for marking
and tracing small arms.
Beyond crisis prevention and management,
regional organizations have a role to play in the stages
of the political and economic reconstruction of a
country emerging from a major crisis. In our work to
establish a Peacebuilding Commission, I think it is
right to give regional organizations a place in the
Commission’s consideration of a given situation. I
think that the contributions of regional organizations
on a case-by-case basis will be one of the conditions
for the success of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the new, ambitious vision it embodies of joint action
among all actors seeking the resolution of a conflict.
We are working for, and are increasingly seeing,
complementarity among the actions of regional
organizations as they contribute on the ground through
their presence in peacekeeping activities. We see more
and more that regional organizations constitute one of
31
S/PV.5282
the options for peacekeeping capacities that the
international community should have at its disposal in
coming years. Some operations will be classic United
Nations peacekeeping operations, and others might be
regional actions authorized by the Security Council.
Some, as was the case in Burundi, might precede a
United Nations operation. Some will allow for a
substantial, long-term deployment, while others might
be emergency operations. For its part, the European
Union is actively developing tactical units to fulfil
such emergency operations functions.
We look forward to the observations in the report
of the Secretary-General on consultations related to the
conclusion of agreements establishing a framework for
cooperation between the peacekeeping operations of
the United Nations and regional organizations,
including the contribution of the regional
organizations. I believe that it would be very useful for
the draft resolution to be adopted to refer to that in the
paragraph concerning the report of the Secretary-
General.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm France’s
support for all those efforts, which should enable the
Council, to which the Charter assigns the primary
responsibility for international peace and security, to
better involve regional actors in its mission, but also to
thus strengthen the effectiveness of the peace efforts
that are the foundation of the Organization and that
bring us together today.
I simply wish to add that this effort for
cooperation and coordination should take place
especially in the field. Earlier I described situations
where the United Nations took action on the ground
alongside regional organizations and where they are
able to take action in the same country. That
coordination is not easy or automatic. I believe it
requires an effort on the part of both the United
Nations and regional organizations in order for that
developing coordination on the ground to go as well as
possible.
The President: I now call on the Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States.
Mr. Mahmassani (spoke in Arabic): I am
speaking on behalf of Mr. Amre Moussa, Secretary
General of the League of Arab States, in this debate on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in the maintenance of global peace and
security. I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on presiding over the work of the
Council for the month of October. We appreciate your
effective and unique role and wish you every success. I
would also like to thank the Foreign Minister and the
delegation of the Philippines for their successful efforts
last month.
This meeting is a follow-up to last month’s
summit of heads of State or Government, who
expressed support for firmer relations between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations. The High-level Plenary Meeting of the
Assembly also reaffirmed the importance of the
participation of regional organizations in the work of
the Security Council and stressed the need to
strengthen cooperation between the United Nations and
such organizations in all areas.
The Security Council, at the summit meeting held
on 14 September, stressed the need to strengthen the
role of the United Nations in the prevention of conflict
and to establish effective partnerships between the
Council and regional organizations in order to facilitate
confronting conflicts and crises at an early stage. In a
resolution, the Council also stressed its determination
to strengthen the capacities of the United Nations in
several areas through, inter alia, support for regional
mediation initiatives, in close cooperation with
regional organizations. The Council stressed the need
to strengthen regional capacities for early warning and
the creation of rapid reaction systems. Likewise, the
Millennium Declaration also noted the need to
strengthen cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations, in conformity with Chapter
VIII of the Charter.
Heads of State or Government also stressed that
regional organizations can work in complementarity at
the international and regional institutional levels for
the achievement of international peace and security,
given the regional organizations’ knowledge of the
region. This is an integral part of international peace
and security.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Security Council on the one hand, and international
organizations on the other, should be governed by the
provisions of the Charter, and should include
peacekeeping operations, general reform and
development, all of which can contribute to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Chapter VIII also deals with aspects of coordination
32
S/PV.5282
and cooperation that are enshrined in many agreements
between the United Nations and such organizations.
Thus, there are many relationships based on
cooperation that go beyond matters relating strictly to
the maintenance of peace to other, broader concepts.
Over and above political considerations, there are
many economic, social and human issues facing the
international community today, including poverty,
diseases, underdevelopment and terrorism, that require
us to fine-tune Chapter VIII so as to enable regional
organizations to face up to the challenges of the
twenty-first century with regard to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Given the new international order, cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in the area of international peace and security is an
absolute necessity, because such organizations can be
effective and helpful partners with the United Nations
when dealing with questions pertaining to various
regions of conflict in the world. That is why the
Security Council must maintain stable and organized
relations between itself and regional organizations and
why such cooperation would be more effective. Here, I
would like to highlight the tasks carried out by regional
organizations and the practical role that they play in
the area of peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations
through the Security Council.
Article 52 of the Charter sets out the traditional
role of regional organizations in the management of
local conflicts. The Security Council must reactivate
the role of such organizations and must be seriously
attentive to their opinions and initiatives in the area of
conflict management and conflict resolution. This
would contribute to the maintenance of international
peace and security in an effective way.
The League of Arab States has taken several
initiatives, in accordance with the purposes and
principles set out in the Charter, with regard to the
relationship between the Security Council and regional
organizations with a view to the peaceful resolution of
conflicts in the Middle East. In this context, I would
like to refer to the Arab peace initiative launched at the
Beirut summit in 2002. We had hoped that the Security
Council would give serious consideration to that
initiative to put an end to the Arab-Israeli conflict and
achieve peace in the region. Unfortunately, the Council
has not made any sincere attempt to consider it to date,
and we have therefore lost an opportunity to bring
peace and security to the region. I would like to remind
the Council that that initiative is still on the table.
The League of Arab States is currently working
with the African Union and the United Nations with a
view to bringing about peace in Darfur. The Secretary
General of the League of Arab States is also in the
process of preparing an initiative with regard to the
Iraqi situation.
We must re-examine the relationship between the
Security Council and regional organizations in order to
consolidate it and to ensure that the Council is better
informed of events in conflict areas, in addition to its
mission in preventing such conflicts. The regional
organizations must be invited to participate in
activities, meetings and negotiations in the Security
Council that relate to countries that are party to such
organizations, with a view to strengthening their role in
those conflict areas in which they are involved.
I would also like to underline the role that
regional organizations play in conflict resolution,
peacebuilding and in coordinating humanitarian
assistance for those in need in areas of conflict, crises
and natural disasters. We must also ensure that contacts
are maintained between the President of the Security
Council and the chairpersons of the regional
organizations, particularly with regard to relevant items
on the Council’s agenda. We must also take the lead
from the heads of such organizations with regard to
drawing up strategies for implementing Security
Council resolutions and any reforms that are under
way. The strengthening of relations with regional
organizations, for example, will enable such
organizations to become active partners in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Maintaining international peace and security
requires us to respect international relations and the
principles of international law. Regional organizations
must therefore be strengthened to enable them to make
a contribution to conflict resolution and crises. That
will enable the international community to establish an
international democratic system of collective security.
The President: There are a number of speakers
remaining on my list. In view of the lateness of the
hour, and with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, I intend to suspend the meeting now.
The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m.

United Nations S/PV.5282(Resumption 1)
Security Council
Sixtieth year
5282ndmeeting
Monday, 17 October 2005, 3 p.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.
05-55653 (E)
*0555653*
President: Mr. Ungureanu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Romania)
Members: Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Katti
Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. D’Alotto
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Djakpo
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Tarrisse da Fontoura
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Cheng Jingye
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Kardel
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. De Rivière
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Vassilakis
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Matsuura
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mercado
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dolgov
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . Mr. Thomson
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Taj
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Patterson
Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security
Letter dated 10 October 2005 from the Permanent Representative of Romania
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2005/638)
2
S/PV.5282 (Resumption 1)
The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m. and
resumed at 3.15 p.m.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece, who will also speak on behalf
of the Chairman-in-Office of the South-East European
Cooperation Process.
Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Mr. President, thank
you for taking the time to come to New York to preside
over this important debate on cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security. I would
also like to welcome the representatives of regional
and subregional organizations.
Greece fully aligns itself with the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom on behalf of the European Union (EU).
Today, it is a particular honour for me to speak on
behalf of the South-East European Cooperation
Process, the chairmanship of which is currently held by
Greece. It is a genuine mechanism of regional
cooperation that springs from the countries of the
region themselves — Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Romania, Serbia and
Montenegro, The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey and Greece, as well as Croatia as
an observer.
This timely debate is taking place in a year that is
crucial for the United Nations, just a few weeks after
the High-level Plenary Meeting of world leaders in
September 2005, where important decisions were taken
to strengthen the capacity of the United Nations so as
more effectively to meet the security challenges of our
time.
The heads of State and Government recognized
the importance of multilateralism in addressing those
challenges. They also recognized the important
contribution to peace and security by regional
organizations, as provided for under Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter. At the same time, they
expressed their resolve to strengthen and expand
cooperation between our global and regional
organizations and to ensure that regional organizations
that have the capacity for preventing armed conflict
and for peacebuilding consider the option of placing
such capacity in the framework of the United Nations.
Allow me to remind Security Council members
that the need for a closer and more structured
relationship between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations was also recognized by
the sixth high-level meeting between the United
Nations and regional and other intergovernmental
organizations that was held on 25 and 26 July 2005 at
United Nations Headquarters in New York, with the
participation of 20 organizations.
In his opening statement, the Secretary-General
called for, among other things, a common vision of a
global architecture of peace and security, with
interlocking capacities, based on comparative
advantages of the global and regional institutions.
Participants at the meeting endorsed proposals and
agreed on measures aiming at a more structured
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations.
In our view, the decision of the high-level
meeting to convene on an annual basis to monitor
developments in international security, to promote the
goals of the United Nations and to have these meetings
coincide with those held by the Security Council with
regional organizations is a most important decision in
terms of achieving better coordination and
complementarity of agendas.
While stressing the primary responsibility of the
Security Council for the maintenance of international
peace and security, I wish to emphasize the
complementarity of regional and subregional
organizations in facing new threats and challenges and
in promoting peace and stability, as I said in my
statement at the aforementioned high-level meeting,
speaking on behalf of the Security Council during the
Greek presidency last July.
Today, more than ever, regional organizations
have a vital role to play in conflict prevention and
management, as well as in post-conflict peacebuilding.
Geographic proximity and close historical and cultural
ties among their members give regional organizations
comparative advantages to better understand the root
causes of regional conflicts and to find peaceful
solutions to these problems.
Recent peace-support operations of the United
Nations have been carried out in close cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations. Successful and sustainable
peacebuilding also requires the active involvement of
regional and subregional organizations, in particular as
3
S/PV.5282 (Resumption 1)
regards implementation of post-conflict reconstruction
policies.
As a member of the European Union, Greece
strongly supports cooperative and effective
multilateralism and fully subscribes to the EU security
strategy adopted in December 2003, which
incorporates, among other things, the objectives of
enhancing stability, promoting the rule of law, good
governance and international justice and tackling
global challenges and threats.
Regional cooperation is a key priority to an
agenda for peace, stability and development. In South-
Eastern Europe, it is also a key element for the
fulfilment of our common strategic goal, which is
integration into the larger European family — itself the
most successful example of regional cooperation — in
close synergy with the United Nations, as well as with
other regional organizations, for the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts.
Following a succession of painful conflicts and
crises on a long and bumpy road, our region today
stands at a turning point. We are moving away from the
syndrome that the Balkans were doomed to endemic
and endless crises, and we are moving closer to
political and social stabilization and economic
development. We have a common responsibility to rise
to the challenge and turn our region into a beacon of
peace, stability and cooperation, acting in solidarity for
the fulfilment of the aspirations of our peoples.
In this context, the South-East European
Cooperation Process is gradually showing itself to be
the organized voice of the region, an efficient and
results-oriented mechanism aspiring to effectively
contribute to peace and stability and committed to
building and sustaining mutually reinforcing and
effective relationships throughout our region.
This meeting offers a good opportunity to
identify methods of enhancing cooperation and
interaction between the United Nations and regional
organizations. We believe that a closer and more
effective partnership between them and a greater
coordination in both policy and action is needed if we
are to establish genuine complementarity.
Likewise, regional organizations should further
develop their organizational capacities in conflict
prevention, resolution and peacebuilding. In this
respect, we support the development of the 10-year
capacity plan of the African Union.
In closing, we are convinced that the
recommendations agreed by the high-level meeting
between the United Nations and regional and other
intergovernmental organizations concerning the
institutionalization of this relationship are crucial for
forging an effective partnership able to face the new
challenges and threats of our time.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation feels highly honoured by your
presence, and we should like to thank you for the
initiative of the delegation of Romania to hold this
public meeting on the subject of cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security. We
should also like to express our pleasure at the presence
of the representatives of regional and subregional
organizations, as well as that of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations.
The future creation of the Peacebuilding
Commission, together with the commitment of world
leaders regarding the necessity to strengthen the United
Nations with a view towards making it more efficient
and effective, mean that cooperation with regional
organizations has become a priority subject on the
agenda of the United Nations. Regional organizations
have the relative advantage of proximity to the conflict
zone, which allows for a timely detection of symptoms
of conflict in the region and the possibility of acting
quickly to offer effective solutions for the peaceful
settlement of conflicts. A recent example of this has
involved the African Union and the Economic
Community of West Africa in regard to events in
certain African regions.
The added value of the regional organization in
this sense is that it belongs to a geographic, economic
and social environment that, in a special way, brings it
closer and makes it more sensitive to the local conflict.
The tasks of prevention and warning may, in many
cases, require this proximity as an essential condition,
as does the important function of stabilization in the
construction of a stable environment. Consultation
mechanisms, both formal and informal, must be
promoted because they allow the United Nations to
take advantage of the perspectives they offer and vice
versa.
4
S/PV.5282 (Resumption 1)
When our universal Organization examines a
specific conflict, before it takes action in the field, it
should, under ideal circumstances, receive the opinion
and advice of the relevant regional organization and
give it due consideration. Institutional experience and
operational capacity must be the bases for defining the
areas in which regional organizations can cooperate
with the United Nations. In this sense, the experience
and cooperation in the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti seems an eloquent example. The
Organization of American States (OAS) has provided
its specific technical knowledge and has collaborated
actively in the political area, specifically in voter
registration, in a very satisfactory manner. In this way,
the regional organization, the OAS in this case, has
given fundamental support to the final goal of peace
and stability in Haiti.
The Charter of the United Nations confers upon
the Security Council the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. This
arrangement could now include the Peacebuilding
Commission, which would act as a liaison body
between the Security Council, other bodies of the
United Nations and regional organizations and create
new synergies in a post-conflict situation. By taking
advantage of existing elements we avoid an
unnecessary duplication of effort. Since there is a
connection between security, peace and development,
the specialized knowledge of regional organizations,
whose original mandate used to focus on the
stimulation of economic integration and commerce,
may be valuable to guarantee success of the strategies
for economic growth and stability in the long run.
We have referred to the important role of regional
organizations in the early detection of symptoms of
conflict, the offering of solutions for peaceful
resolution of conflicts and the elaboration of strategies
in peace consolidation in the post-conflict phase.
However, we must not forget the importance of
establishing official cooperation agreements between
the secretariats of regional and subregional
organizations and the United Nations, incorporating, if
possible, armed conflict prevention and peacekeeping
capacities within the forces, services and back-up
equipment system of the United Nations.
Systematic cooperation of the United Nations
with regional organizations would increase the capacity
of the United Nations to prevent conflicts, respond
quickly in the event of a conflict and provide solutions
for the construction of lasting peace. The draft
resolution that will soon be adopted urges us to make
progress in the right direction and Argentina fully
agrees with these commitments.
Mrs. Patterson (United States of America): My
delegation welcomes your presence here. Your decision
to preside personally over the Council’s debates
highlights the importance that your country places on
improving the coordination between the United
Nations and regional organizations. My delegation
shares your interest in exploring ways to enhance that
coordination as part of our continuing joint efforts to
identify efficient and effective methods to help ensure
international peace and security.
We welcome in particular the opportunity that
today’s debate represents to review cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations as well as ways to increase
the impact of such cooperation in advancing Security
Council objectives. The activities of regional and
subregional organizations, when properly planned and
capably implemented, can strengthen and reinforce a
variety of critically important United Nations
objectives, such as promoting democracy and human
rights, strengthening international security cooperation,
countering terrorism and transnational crime and
supporting economic development.
Regional and subregional organizations bring
unique and important connections, knowledge and
experience to any effort to address a given regional
issue. A cooperative, multilateral approach between the
appropriate United Nations organ and the appropriate
regional organization has the potential to create
valuable synergies and to increase the probability of
successful interventions.
Allow me to highlight a few of the relevant
initiatives that the United States is undertaking in this
regard. The Global Peace Operations Initiative (GPOI)
is global in scope, as its name implies, but has a
particular regional emphasis on Africa. The Initiative is
designed to increase the capacity of participating
African countries to deploy highly trained personnel in
international peace-support operations. Cooperation
between GPOI and the United Nations Department of
Peacekeeping Operations will enhance interoperability
among peace-support units from different countries.
Increased interoperability translates into greater shared
abilities to address some of the issues raised in the
5
S/PV.5282 (Resumption 1)
draft resolution that we will adopt at the conclusion of
today’s debate.
The African Contingency Operations, Training
and Assistance programme (ACOTA) is a specialized
African peacekeeping training component of GPOI and
will train selected African military contingents to carry
out peace-support and humanitarian relief operations.
ACOTA works with African partner armed forces and
with regional and subregional organizations to
coordinate crisis-response training. It is our hope and
belief that ACOTA-trained units will be among the
most capable available anywhere for these challenging
assignments.
Partnerships with ACOTA have been developed
after extensive collaboration with African countries
and other stakeholders. The programme enables
African military contingents from different countries to
execute multinational peacekeeping operations by
providing them with interoperable peace-support
operations skills, including the requisite training and
equipment. The programme’s comprehensive approach
integrates humanitarian, non-governmental and
international relief organization participation into its
training in order to improve critical coordination when
ACOTA-trained personnel are deployed in real-world
operations. The programme’s support to African
regional security organizations will assist the
development of strong planning and organizational
units capable of responding to humanitarian and
peacekeeping crises in the region. Moreover, greater
regional stability, created by an enhanced African
peace-support capacity, will be instrumental in
promoting African democracy and economic growth.
In other regions, similar efforts to enhance
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations can yield similar benefits.
My delegation is encouraged by today’s debate
and will study carefully the report that the Council has
invited the Secretary-General to prepare on the
challenges presented and the opportunities offered, as
we seek to maximize the effectiveness of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
The United States will be an active participant in that
ongoing and collective effort. Today’s debate has been
a useful way-station along that road.
Finally, my delegation concurs fully with the
statement made by Assistant Secretary General
Erdmann, that NATO is not a regional organization
per se — the long-held and widely shared view among
Member States.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Paulin
Djakpo, Director of Cabinet of the Ministry for Foreign
Affairs and African Integration of Benin.
Mr. Djakpo (Benin) (spoke in French): The
Minister for Foreign Affairs and African Integration of
Benin very much appreciates the invitation addressed
to him to participate in this meeting. As it was
impossible for him to come to New York personally, he
has asked me to represent him today in this public
debate in the Security Council and to make the
following statement on his behalf.
My country, Benin, is very grateful to the
President for having organized this public meeting on a
subject whose importance is undeniable in the context
of the debate under way regarding the reform of the
United Nations. As in other areas, it is not a question
of reinventing the United Nations but of creating the
conditions for the judicious application of the Charter
in the spirit of the fundamental principles enshrined
therein.
The Charter of the United Nations has established
a system of collective security based on two pillars,
namely, the primary responsibility vested in the
Security Council for the maintenance of international
peace and security and cooperation with regional
organizations working in that field on the basis of
subsidiarity and the obligation to be accountable. The
relevant provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter are
unequivocal on that point and there is no need to cite
them here.
The international environment has not always
been favourable to the effective implementation of
those Charter provisions. However, since the fall of the
Berlin Wall and the end of ideological confrontation
between East and West, we have seen the emergence of
a new community of values and an increase in
cooperation between the great Powers in the area of
promoting international peace and security. That has
enabled the Security Council to play a greater role, as
conferred upon it by the Charter. At the same time, we
have seen a renewed interest on the part of States
towards regional integration aiming at the promotion of
peace and stability.
6
S/PV.5282 (Resumption 1)
Among other things, that has been manifested in
Africa the praiseworthy initiatives of regional
economic commissions — such as the Economic
Community of West African States — to find solutions
to domestic armed conflicts. Both the African Union
and its Peace and Security Council were established for
that very reason.
Those positive developments have created the
conditions for more active cooperation with the
Security Council. They have also served to promote the
revitalization of the collective security system
instituted by the Charter, which is in line with the
humanistic ideal that presided over the establishment
of the United Nations itself, namely, to save future
generations from the scourge of war and to promote the
dignity and worth of human beings.
In that connection, we would like to pay tribute to
the Secretary-General, who very early on understood
the importance of both those virtuous endeavours and
favoured consultations between the United Nations and
representatives of regional organizations. Important
results were achieved at the sixth high-level meeting
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
which was held in New York on 25 and 26 July 2005
and organized around the telling theme of “Partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations
for a safer world”.
In that regard, Benin in particular welcomes the
decision to establish a standing committee charged
with mobilizing political will, promoting the adoption
of a long-term perspective and monitoring the
decisions taken. This is an act of great importance that
augurs well for the deepening of concrete institutional
relations.
Similarly, we welcome the participation in
today’s debate of eminent representatives of major
regional organizations. This is a key opportunity to
define the parameters of partnership in the area of
promoting international peace and security. That
partnership requires the establishment of consultative
mechanisms for more effective interaction between the
Security Council, regional organizations and Member
States, with a view to facilitating sound management of
situations that could pose a threat to international
peace and security. The Security Council could thereby
meet its primary purpose, to prevent the breakdown of
peace and, where necessary, act collectively with
Member States.
However, regional organizations cannot fulfil
their commitments in that partnership unless their
early-warning and response capacities are strengthened
to deal with situations posing a threat to international
peace and security. The constraints that have surfaced
as part of the efforts of the United Nations and the
African Union to bring stability to the African
continent demonstrate concretely the scope of the
challenges that must be overcome to strengthen the
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations in the area of conflict prevention and
resolution, as well as in the area of peacebuilding
throughout the world. The international community as
a whole stands to gain much, and must therefore act
with clear-sightedness and determination.
It is in that spirit that my country fully supports
the draft resolution we are to adopt at the end of our
debate.
Benin would like to pay tribute to Romania not
only for having undertaking this initiative, but
especially for having strengthened relations between
the United Nations and regional organizations and
having made that a priority of its mandate in the
Security Council. History will record and take the true
measure of the substantial contribution that Romania
has made to structure relations between the United
Nations and regional organizations to further integrate
the collective security system established by the
Charter of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Benin for his kind words addressed to
my country.
(spoke in English)
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it,
which is contained in document S/2005/649. Unless I
hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Algeria, Argentina, Benin, Brazil, China,
Denmark, France, Greece, Japan, Philippines,
Romania, Russian Federation, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America
7
S/PV.5282 (Resumption 1)
The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1631 (2005).
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
May I take this opportunity to extend my
gratitude to all the participants in this joint and fruitful
exercise to strengthen cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations. I thank you all for
your resilience, help, patience and good work.
The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.
