United Nations S/PV.5359
Security Council
Sixty-first year
5359thmeeting
Friday, 27 January 2006, 10 a.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.
06-22513 (E)
*0622513*
President: Ms. Migiro . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (United Republic of Tanzania)
Members: Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. D’Alotto
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wang Guangya
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Adada
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Løj
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. De La Sablière
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Nana Effah-Apenteng
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Vassilakis
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Oshima
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. De Rivero
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Al-Mahmoud
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Denisov
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Burian
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . Sir Emyr Jones Parry
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Yamamoto
Agenda
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Peace, security and development in the Great Lakes region
Letter dated 18 January 2006 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Republic of Tanzania to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2006/27)
2
S/PV.5359
The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Peace, security and development in the Great
Lakes region
Letter dated 18 January 2006 from the
Permanent Representative of the United
Republic of Tanzania to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2006/27)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Angola, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Botswana, Brazil, Burundi, Cameroon,
Canada, the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Guatemala, Kenya,
Namibia, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan,
the Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Senegal, South Africa,
the Sudan, Tunisia, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
It is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: I am pleased to acknowledge the
participation at this meeting of a number of ministers:
Mr. Karel De Gucht of Belgium, The Honourable
Lieutenant General Mompati S. Merafhe of Botswana,
Madame Antoinette Batumubwira of Burundi,
Mr. Rodolphe Adada of the Congo, Mr. Raymond Baya
Ramazani of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mr. Raphael Tuju of Kenya, Mr. Marco Hausiku of
Namibia, Mr. Ahmad bin Abdullah Al-Mahmoud of
Qatar, Mr. Lam Akol Ajawin of the Sudan, Mr. Sam K.
Kutesa of Uganda, Lieutenant General Reverend Ronnie
S. Shikapwasha, M.P., of Zambia, Mr. Simbarashe S.
Mumbengegwi of Zimbabwe, and Mr. Georges Rebelo
Chicoti, Deputy Minister for External Relations of
Angola.
On behalf of the Security Council, I extend a
warm welcome to each of them.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule
39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ibrahima
Fall, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for the Great Lakes Region.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Ibrahima Fall to take the seat
reserved for him at the side of the Council Chamber.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 25 January 2006 from the Chargé
d’affaires of the Permanent Mission of the Congo to the
United Nations requesting that Mr. Said Djinnit,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, be invited to participate in the meeting under
rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Djinnit.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Djinnit to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule
39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Louis
Michel, Commissioner for Development and
Humanitarian Aid of the European Commission.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Louis Michel to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the preparations for
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
region, document S/2006/46.
3
S/PV.5359
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2006/51, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council’s prior
consultations. I should like to draw the attention of
Council members to document S/2006/27, which
contains the text of a letter dated 18 January 2006 from
the Permanent Representative of the United Republic
of Tanzania to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously.
As another measure to optimize the use of our
time in order to allow as many delegations to take the
floor as possible, I will not individually invite speakers
to take seats at the table and invite them to resume
their seats on the side. When a speaker is taking the
floor, the Conference Officer will seat the next speaker
on the list at the table.
With the agreement of the members, I will give
the floor to a number of Security Council members,
and then to a number of non-Council members, until
the list of speakers is exhausted.
I am now pleased to welcome participants to this
historic meeting on peace, security and development in
the Great Lakes region under the presidency of my
country, the United Republic of Tanzania. It is my
singular honour and privilege to lead this open debate.
We are meeting here today to refocus world
attention and our thinking on ways and strategies to
prevent and resolve recurrent conflicts in the Great
Lakes region. Our shared vision has been to create a
region where lasting peace and stability would prevail
and allow for sustainable development.
The Great Lakes region peace process is an
initiative of countries of the region with the support of
the United Nations, the African Union and the Group
of Friends of the Great Lakes Region. The initiative is
embodied in the Dar es-Salaam Declaration, adopted at
the end of the first International Conference on Peace,
Security, Democracy and Development in the Great
Lakes Region, held in Dar es-Salaam in November
2004. The Declaration is a foundation upon which
countries of the region seek to build a framework for
realizing enduring peace, democratic governance and
respect for human rights, economic cooperation and
sustainable development.
The 1994 genocide in Rwanda will remain a
painful reminder of our collective failure to stop it. On
the other hand, the genocide unveiled deficiencies in
the societal moral fabric. It should never happen again.
The violent conflicts, human displacements and
refugee influxes that have plagued our region in the
past decades have adversely affected all of us. We
therefore have to work together to avoid a repeat of
such catastrophes and create a better future for our
people. We need collective political will to prevent and
resolve conflicts, consolidate peace and build
institutions of democratic governance based on the rule
of law and respect for human rights. Peace is a
necessary prerequisite for development, and, in turn,
development reinforces political stability and underlies
socio-economic prosperity. We must strive to attain and
uphold those ideals.
For us, the countries of the region, the Security
Council is our key partner in promoting and
maintaining peace and security in our region. We
appreciate the response and initiatives of the Council to
work with us. Nevertheless, we are still facing residual
and new challenges. We therefore need to consolidate
what we have achieved so far and mobilize the support
of the international community in accomplishing our
objectives. The newly established Peacebuilding
Commission should focus its early attention on the
countries of the region as we create the necessary
political environment for irreversible peace.
We in the region want to assure the Security
Council and other members of the international
community of our collective political determination to
make the Great Lakes process a practical
accomplishment. We are working at national and
regional levels to create mechanisms to strengthen
mutual confidence and trust as a basis for peace and
stability in the region. In that regard, we are committed
to developing arrangements that will deepen
cooperation and sustain peace and security. Similarly,
we have embraced democracy and good governance
not only as intrinsic values but also as necessary for
our peaceful coexistence and crucial for our
development. The desirability of a regional approach in
this endeavour cannot be overemphasized. At the next
Summit, in Nairobi, we should be able to codify and
adopt these undertakings.
4
S/PV.5359
The work of the United Nations Office in Nairobi
was pivotal in preparing for the first Summit and will
be equally so for the upcoming Summit. We need the
support of the Office and of our friends in sustaining
the process leading to the Nairobi Summit and its
follow-up.
In conclusion, I wish to say on behalf of the
United Republic of Tanzania that Tanzania pledges to
continue working closely with the Security Council
and the Secretary-General in implementing the current
mandate of the Council in the Great Lakes region.
Together, we should be able to evolve future initiatives
that will consolidate international peace and security in
our region.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Congo, His Excellency Mr. Rodolphe
Adada.
Mr. Adada (Congo) (spoke in French): First of
all, Madam President, I would like to say how proud
we are to see the United Republic of Tanzania
presiding over the Security Council in January 2006,
when a number of particularly sensitive African issues
are receiving priority. Today’s meeting gives us another
opportunity to express our appreciation for Tanzania’s
role in building an Africa that is free and united,
peaceful, prosperous and confident in its future.
It is no coincidence that, for many years, the
Organization for African Unity (OAU) Liberation
Committee had its headquarters in Dar es-Salaam,
which caused the Ugandan head of State, His
Excellency Mr. Yoweri Museveni, to say at the first
Summit of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, held in Dar es-Salaam, that Tanzania
was the Mecca of freedom fighters in Africa.
My delegation therefore welcomes today’s debate
on a question that encompasses the full scope of issues
on the future of our continent in the areas of peace,
security, democracy, good governance, good-
neighbourliness, development, regional integration and
international cooperation.
During last September’s world summit, the head
of the Congolese State, His Excellency Mr. Denis
Sassou Nguesso, recalled the importance and the
relevance of the appeal contained in the Dar es-Salaam
Declaration on the Great Lakes region, which must be
recognized as a special area of development and
reconstruction. Like any other integration project, it is
a vast construction site and a long and complex process
that must be conducted in stages.
Looking at the ongoing developments, we can say
today that significant progress on peace and security is
being made in our region. In Burundi, the transition has
led to the organization of democratic, free and
transparent elections, after which new institutions were
established. The security situation has improved
considerably, and the process of national reconciliation
is continuing.
The political transition in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo brought about by the Pretoria
Agreement is moving along favourably following the
organization of the constitutional referendum. We
encourage all parties in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to work tirelessly in the context of this peaceful,
inclusive transition, so that after 30 June 2006, the
country will rediscover peace and stability. But we
must first do everything we can to prevent the armed
groups that are operating in the eastern part of the
country from jeopardizing the ongoing process. We
must also encourage the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda to use all existing
mechanisms of tripartite cooperation and verification
to pursue their efforts to ease tension and to establish
relations of trust in the region. That would undoubtedly
contribute to resolve such problems as the illicit
circulation of small arms and light weapons; refugees
and displaced persons; the presence of armed groups
on the territory of neighbouring States; and the illegal
exploitation of natural resources.
It is in this spirit of mutual trust that, in
cooperation with the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
my Government has undertaken the voluntary
repatriation of Rwandan refugees and elements of the
former armed forces of Zaire to their countries of
origin. But, as the High Commissioner for Refugees
observed during the Council’s debate on 24 January
2006 (see S/PV.5353), the return of refugees and
displaced persons is closely linked to support from the
international community for economic recovery and
peacebuilding in the countries concerned.
A similarly positive development took place in
the Central African Republic after the elections that led
to the establishment of new democratic institutions. We
need to confront the insecurity and consolidate the
5
S/PV.5359
social process, a task to which the international
community, beginning with the neighbouring countries,
members of the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community, is working relentlessly.
In the light of these favourable developments, I
reaffirm today the commitment of our countries to
promote regional integration, based on a common
vision of our interests in the areas of peace, security,
the rule of law, democracy, good governance and
human rights. Increasingly, those concerns and those
values are finding their place in the policies of our
States. The missions that the Security Council
regularly dispatches to the region have taken note of
this progress. So, I would like to say to Council
members and to the entire international community that
there should be no mistaking the degree of our
commitment to building an integrated political and
economic space in the Great Lakes region.
The postponement of the second Summit, which
was caused solely by timetable constraints in a number
of countries, does not signal any slackening or lack of
interest. On the contrary, the postponement has allowed
us to better prepare ourselves to address, with greater
objectivity and determination, the issues on the second
Summit agenda. The common thinking among our
countries, with the participation of all segments of
societies — the non-governmental organizations, civil
society, women, young people and others — with a
view to the speedy adoption of the proposed regional
Security, Stability and Development Pact, is an
encouraging sign, which clearly indicates where we
wish to go and where we wish to extend our efforts.
We want to gain peace and development through
a comprehensive and integrated approach. That lies at
the heart of the second Summit of the International
Conference. The adoption of the proposed Security,
Stability and Development Pact would enable us to
give real content to our common vision; to promote,
consolidate and implement our cooperation; to provide
a formal framework for our political consultations,
which will become regular; and to create the
momentum necessary for the harmonious development
of our countries.
Madam President, I would like once again to
thank you for having given us an opportunity to tell our
partners that the flame lit in Dar es-Salaam in
November 2004 continues to illuminate our path and
will not be extinguished on such a worthy path. The
old images of people fleeing Rwanda or Burundi on
foot to take refuge in Brazzaville, Gabon or Cameroon
are enough to remind us of the horror of armed
conflict. They also remind us that our geographic and
human space is one. It is up to us to transform it into
an integrated political and economic space.
This is what is at stake, and I have come here to
reaffirm that we are working on a daily basis for the
stabilization of the situation in our region and that we
continue to count on our partners to continue this battle.
We need to consolidate our gains to avoid backsliding.
In that respect, the Peacebuilding Commission recently
established by the United Nations may find a vast
proving ground in our region, particularly in Burundi
and later on in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Finally, at a time of active preparation for the
second summit of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, I welcome the Security Council’s
initiatives for peace and stability in our region,
encourage our partners not to lose patience and to
continue to provide their crucial assistance throughout
the process, and openly profess our full commitment.
With the individual and collective concerted efforts of
the countries concerned, from the African Union, the
United Nations, the development partners and the
entire international community, we will succeed in
building a zone of peace and prosperity in the heart of
Africa, commensurate with our immense human and
natural potential.
The President: I give the floor to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, His Excellency Mr.
Raymond Ramazani Baya.
Mr. Ramazani Baya (Democratic Republic of
the Congo) (spoke in French): As I address this plenary
meeting of the Security Council, allow me to extend
my congratulations and encouragement to your
country, Madam, and, like the representative who
spoke before me, to highlight the outstanding role
played by the United Republic of Tanzania in the
search for solutions to the conflicts in the Great Lakes
region.
I also wish to express the great appreciation of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the initiative
taken by you and the Security Council in organizing
this special meeting on peace, security and
development in the Great Lakes region. We thank the
United Nations for its sustained interest and efforts to
6
S/PV.5359
transform the Great Lakes region into a true
community in which confrontation, mistrust, fear and
hatred will give way to peace, trust, solidarity, security,
democracy and development.
Through various follow-up and monitoring
mechanisms and the implementation of resolutions and
recommendations that have led to numerous meetings
on the Great Lakes region — culminating in the Dar
es-Salaam Declaration of 20 November 2004 — we
can say most assuredly that a new awareness is
gradually developing in the region. We welcome the
partnership that has been established between the Great
Lakes States and the international community to find a
new way of living together in our region. That positive
development is due, in part, to the initiatives of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and his
Special Representative, Mr. Ibrahima Fall, whose work
we welcome and support.
That momentum is based on the hope for a new
regional security order, greater economic and
commercial integration, democracy and good
governance, stabilization and improved collective
management of social and humanitarian problems. The
new understanding is to be crowned by the signing this
year of a regional pact for stability, security and
development, but we still have a long way to go. Much
remains to be done, everyone must contribute and each
of our countries must adapt internally and to the rules
of the new peaceful coexistence among States. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, considerable
progress has been made in meeting the commitments
we have undertaken to establish a new domestic
political order and to normalize relations with
neighbouring States.
The electoral process has now reached cruising
speed. Some 25 million citizens have been identified
and registered as voters to participate in the general
elections to be held by June this year. On 18 and 19
December 2005, the Independent Electoral
Commission organized a constitutional referendum
throughout the national territory. The Congolese people
voted overwhelmingly and in accordance with
democratic norms in favour of the draft constitution.
To mark national reconciliation following the
trauma and upheavals caused by years of war, the
President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mr. Joseph Kabila, following its adoption by
Parliament, on 19 December 2005 enacted a law
providing amnesty for acts of war, political infractions
and crimes of dissent. The electoral law has been under
discussion this month and will be adopted by the two
chambers of Parliament in the near future. The path is
now open for the holding of transparent, democratic
and free elections.
On another front, and in accordance with
commitments undertaken by the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, we are focusing on strengthening our
domestic security. With the support of the international
community, we have concluded the initial phase of
brassage for troops from the various warring factions
in order to create a restructured and integrated army.
Six integrated brigades are now ready to go to work.
The second phase of brassage has begun and will
result in the training of six additional brigades by the
end of February. By the time the elections are held, the
Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (FARDC) will have 18 integrated brigades. We
understand that the brassage of troops is a long and
slow process and must be pursued long after the
elections are held. I would point out, moreover, that
similar brassage and integration operations have been
undertaken for our country’s national police, which
now have professional and well-trained units to
maintain order and ensure the security of goods and
persons.
The Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo understands that, without significantly
improved living conditions for the military and the
police, it will be unable to strengthen security. Action
has therefore been taken to make salary payment
mechanisms more efficient and transparent. They are
no longer under the army’s chain of command. The
Government has decided to implement the guidelines
on peace and the distribution of rations to the military
drafted by experts of the European Union mission to
provide advice and assistance for security sector
reform. That series of provisions will improve the
functioning of the army and the police and enable us to
guarantee security in the forthcoming electoral
operations.
In Ituri, the FARDC, in cooperation with troops
from the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), have
successfully launched operations to neutralize the
Congolese militias that remain active in a few pockets
of resistance in the Mahagi and Djugu territories.
7
S/PV.5359
In tandem with security operations for the
internal political process, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has also acted in fulfilment of its
commitments to ensuring its neighbours’ security. I
note the establishment in Beni, in North Kivu, of an
office of the Ugandan amnesty commission in order to
facilitate the return to Uganda of Allied Democratic
Forces (ADF) and National Movement for the
Liberation of Uganda (NALU) combatants. In
December 2005, faced with the refusal of the ADF and
NALU forces to respond to the appeal for voluntary
repatriation through the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme organized by our
Government, the Congolese armed forces, with the
support of MONUC, dismantled their positions in the
North-East Beni communities of Benim-Mbau,
Watalinga and Ruwenzori, and in the Bashu
community in South-West Beni. A cache of arms and
communications equipment was collected and the
FARDC took more than 40 combatants prisoner.
In August and September 2005, in South Kivu
province, 200 combatants of the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda (FDLR), under the command
of Colonel Amani, laid down their weapons and were
repatriated to Rwanda. In the first two weeks of
December 2005, at the initiative of the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 149 additional
FDLR combatants led by Colonel Amani were
repatriated to Rwanda, with the assistance of MONUC.
Since the beginning of the year, 150 FDLR combatants
and civilians have been regrouped in the Mulengwe
camp with a view to repatriation.
In North Kivu, dismantling operations were about
to begin when the political/military leadership of the
FDLR requested a delay in order to set an agreement
on modalities for repatriating FDLR elements and ex-
combatants and their dependants.
I would point out that, within the framework of
the Tripartite Plus One Commission that unites
Uganda, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda, as well as Burundi, a unit for the collection
and dissemination of information has been set up in
Kisangani, where shelters are ready.
I cannot close this chapter on security without
referring to the most recent events in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. On Monday, 23 January, eight
Blue Helmets from Guatemala were killed in an
ambush in the Garamba Park in the Upper Uélé, in the
Eastern Province, when MONUC forces carrying out
search operations encountered some of the armed
groups that are still active in that part of the country.
The Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo once again extends its heartfelt condolences
to the Government of Guatemala, to MONUC and to
the families of those soldiers who fell on the field of
honour serving peace and security in the Congo and in
the Great Lakes region. That tragedy gives our
Government the opportunity to once again welcome the
commitment of MONUC in actions to make that
province safer, side by side with the Congolese armed
forces.
That unfortunate event is painful proof that
MONUC and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
are doing everything they can to end the presence of all
armed groups on Congolese soil. We must point out
that, unfortunately, those armed groups still have some
capacity to cause harm and could again bring about a
tragedy like that we mourn today, with the death of the
eight Guatemalan Blue Helmets.
Far from discouraging us, that sort of tragedy can
only further strengthen our determination to eradicate
all the armed groups creating insecurity along the
eastern border of our country. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo will spare no effort to identify
those responsible and to bring them to justice.
Another regrettable event took place during
military skirmishes in North Kivu, in the territory of
Rutshuru, in mid-January. Thanks to the rapid
intervention of the coalition forces of the FARDC and
MONUC, calm has been restored. Without doubt, we
must welcome the cooperation existing today between
MONUC and the FARDC, and their growing capacity
to respond more rapidly to such situations.
Our Government welcomed the publication on
1 November 2005, by the Security Council committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, of a list of persons
and entities subject to sanctions for violating the arms
embargo in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It
also welcomed resolution 1649 (2005), adopted on
21 December 2005, which provides for the
implementation through 31 July 2006 of individual
sanctions against those responsible for the armed
groups, and which prohibits countries neighbouring the
Democratic Republic of the Congo from illegally
exploiting the natural resources of our country. Our
8
S/PV.5359
hope is that those resolutions will be strictly
implemented in order to discourage any attempt to
disrupt the transition process taking place in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Although we are aware of the improvement in
relations with neighbouring States, our Government
nonetheless deplores the fact that cooperation remains
insufficient and permits some of those States to
continue to harbour criminals whose extradition the
Democratic Republic of the Congo had requested, in
accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions
and decisions taken during other, regional meetings.
Here we wish once again to request the Security
Council to exert further pressure on those States to
cease, if not their support to the militias, then at least
the understanding and tolerance shown to them.
We welcome the establishment by the United
Nations, on 20 December 2005, of the Peacebuilding
Commission. Our hope is that the Democratic Republic
of the Congo will be one of the first and one of the
main beneficiaries.
On 19 December 2005, a page of history was
turned in the Great Lakes region with the ruling by the
International Court of Justice in The Hague
condemning Uganda for military acts against the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Our Government
welcomes that judgment. Can true reconciliation be
established if we do not mention the evil, if we do not
recognize the errors committed, if we do not shoulder
our responsibilities and if we do not right the wrongs?
We therefore believe that judicial decision, rather than
interfering in the momentum of the new relations
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Uganda, will instead place our future relations under
the light of the law, and no longer under the influence
of force and weapons.
Concerning development — also one of the main
themes of the present meeting — let me point out that
the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
have paid a heavy toll for the conflicts that have
troubled the Great Lakes region — as noted, among
others, by the ruling of the International Court of
Justice. Thus, the main victims should be the main
beneficiaries in the reconstruction efforts in the Great
Lakes region. Our people must clearly see what the end
of the wars, and the negotiations in the region among
the countries of the region and with the international
community, have brought them.
Therefore we reaffirm our hope that the
humanitarian and economic problems will be taken into
consideration in the framework of the fund for regional
reconstruction that has been discussed since Dar es-
Salaam and that should be implemented from the
perspective of the proposed Stability, Security and
Development Pact.
We are aware that the signing of that fundamental
act is of concern to all States in the region, as well as
to our partners. The deferral of the timeline has been
justified. Many countries in the region, in particular
Burundi, Tanzania, Kenya, Uganda and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, were occupied with carrying
out their internal electoral processes.
Our Government, taking account of the crucial
time we are going through with the organization of an
historic election, after almost 40 years, does not see the
possibility of preparing for a summit, even if it is held
next June or July. We believe the summit for the
signing of the Pact should take place at the beginning
of September 2006. The Congolese delegation can then
legitimately be present and can commit itself with
other States of the Great Lakes region in that ambitious
project to create a zone of peace, understanding,
cooperation and economic integration from the Atlantic
Ocean to the Indian Ocean. Until then, we must maintain
contact through meetings of this type, and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo commits itself to be present.
In conclusion, we reaffirm the determination of
our Government to pursue the peace and stability
process in the Great Lakes region to the end. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo renews its
commitment to participate in establishing conditions of
peace and security for its people and for the fraternal
peoples of neighbouring States.
As our people prepare to enter fully into the
delicate and crucial period of the voting process to
choose the future leaders of our country’s institutions,
we expect of all the neighbouring States an attitude of
active solidarity so that no outside threat of any kind
will disrupt that process.
We reiterate our gratitude to the international
community for the attention and sustained efforts in the
birth of a new era of relations of trust, security and
mutual benefit for the States of the Great Lakes region.
That is something that not only the people of the region
wholeheartedly wish, but the people of the entire
continent as well.
9
S/PV.5359
The President: I now give the floor to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Namibia, His
Excellency Mr. Marco Hausiku.
Mr. Hausiku (Namibia): It is a great honour for
me and my delegation to participate in this important
meeting of the Security Council. At the outset, allow me
to extend to you, Madam President, our congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for January 2006. We are confident that your able
leadership and diplomatic skills will ensure success in the
work ahead, and I would like to assure you of my
delegation’s support and cooperation during your tenure.
We are delighted, Madam, that you and other
members of the Council have organized this debate on
peace, security and development in the Great Lakes
region. That demonstrates that the Security Council
continues to devote most of its programme of work to
issues related to peace, security and development,
particularly in Africa. You have once again shown your
commitment, and that of your country, Tanzania, to
resolving one of Africa’s most pressing problems by
bringing the issue to the Council’s attention early in the
year.
We thank you, Madam, for the non-paper that you
have circulated, which is the basis of our discussions
today, and hope that it will result in the Council’s
making informed decisions on the matter.
Namibia attaches great importance to the security
situation in the Great Lakes region, not only because
the people of that region have suffered for too long
from conflict and its consequences, but also because
the absence of peace in that region negatively affects
the rest of the African continent. The situation also
continues to pose a threat to international peace and
security. We are confident that participation in this
debate at the ministerial level will give great impetus
to the Council’s deliberations.
We are cognizant of the fact that a conflict affecting
one country can rapidly engulf the entire region because
of the social, economic and cultural links that exist
among our people. The current trend of conflict and the
complexity thereof has consistently dictated the need
for concerted efforts by all stakeholders involved in
finding durable peace and security, which in turn paves
the way for sustainable economic development.
While there has been commendable progress in
the region, such as the holding of democratic elections
in Burundi and the referendum in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, continuing instability in other
parts of the region undermines peace efforts in the
Great Lakes region.
The presence of militia and foreign armed groups
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has created a deplorable situation that threatens
the civilian population and increases the widespread
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. The situation thus requires the
cooperation of the African Union (AU) countries of the
Great Lakes region. Bilateral and regional initiatives
focusing on confidence-building measures should be
encouraged. We urge the countries of the region to
strengthen bilateral cooperation and commit
themselves fully to the effective implementation of the
African Union Non-Aggression and Common Defence
Pact, adopted in Abuja on 31 January 2005, as a
regional security mechanism for conflict prevention,
management and peaceful settlement of disputes.
The process of demobilization, disarmament,
repatriation and reintegration in that part of the region
can be successfully carried out only through the
cooperation of all of the countries in the region. We
therefore reiterate our support for resolution 1649
(2005) and call for its full and urgent implementation.
Furthermore, efforts should be made by the
neighbouring countries to reach a comprehensive
agreement aimed at a long-term strategy for sustainable
peace and development and mutual understanding
among the countries of the region, thereby ensuring
that the region is transformed into one of peace and
security, where political and social stability, economic
development and regional integration, as well as
democracy and social justice, prevail.
We fully recognize the primary responsibility of
the Security Council for the maintenance of
international peace and security as mandated by the
United Nations Charter. At the same time, we also
acknowledge the role played by regional and
subregional organizations in finding durable peace in
the region.
The AU, for its part, has consistently maintained
that security is a sine qua non for development; hence,
the establishment of the African Union peace and
security organ, with the sole purpose of dealing with
conflict prevention and resolution and peacekeeping in
Africa. In this regard, we call for the speedy
10
S/PV.5359
implementation of resolution 1631 (2005), which urges
international organizations to contribute to the
strengthening of the capacity of African regional and
subregional organizations.
Women and children suffer the most during conflict.
In that connection, we strongly believe that in order to
achieve a comprehensive and sustainable peace, every
effort should be made to ensure the full participation
and contribution of women during peace negotiations and
during the execution of post-conflict strategies and
programmes. In this regard, we reiterate our commitment
to the full and effective implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security.
The first International Conference on Peace and
Security, Democracy and Development in the Great
Lakes Region, held in Dar es-Salaam from 19 to
20 November 2004, provided an opportunity for the
countries of the region to devise effective ways and
means of finding durable solutions to the problems
facing the region. Namibia regrets the postponement of
the second International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, which was scheduled to take place in
Nairobi in November last year, and hopes that such a
conference will be convened in the near future.
During the 2005 world summit, our leaders took
important decisions, which provided an impressive
agenda for the reform and strengthening of our
Organization so as to enable it to meet the challenges
that we face today. The Summit Outcome document
mandated the General Assembly to finalize and
continue to deliberate on issues, including the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission, which
was operationalized by the General Assembly and the
Security Council through resolution 60/180 and
resolution 1645 (2005), respectively. We commend
your delegation, Madam President, and that of
Denmark, for the effective leadership during the
difficult negotiations. We look forward to the
contribution of the Peacebuilding Commission to the
achievement of durable peace and sustainable
development in the Great Lakes region.
The international community should therefore be
encouraged to continue to support the people of Africa
in their quest for sustainable peace and development.
In this context, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
proposal to support the 10-year capacity-building plan
for the African Union, as outlined in his report on the
implementation of the recommendations of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, contained in
document A/60/640.
Finally, my delegation supports the draft
resolution on peace, security and development in the
Great Lakes region, and calls for its adoption by the
Security Council.
The President: I give the floor to The
Honourable Lieutenant General Mompati S. Merafhe,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Botswana.
Mr. Merafhe (Botswana): I am delighted to
congratulate you, Madam President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of January. I am particularly pleased to
extend our commendation to your country, the United
Republic of Tanzania, and its people for the successful
election held during the last month of 2005.
Over the years, Tanzania has demonstrated
political vision. It led the way in the transformation of
African political systems when it ended one-party rule,
introduced multi-party elections and brought about a
constitutional provision for presidential term limitation
and the peaceful transfer of power. For the third
consecutive time, it has shown how power can be
transferred democratically, smoothly and peacefully.
We are grateful to Tanzania for its admirable and
exemplary leadership.
Recent developments in Tanzania are relevant to
the subject of this open debate on peace, security,
democracy and development in the Great Lakes region
of Africa. The right of people to exercise their
sovereign will in deciding on the nature of institutions
that govern their affairs on the basis of consent is
central to the question of peace and development. We
therefore welcome the deliberations of the Security
Council on the Great Lakes region — a region of
Africa whose people have experienced some of the
worst forms of atrocities in recent history.
This debate is taking place a few weeks after the
Peacebuilding Commission was put in place. We
welcome the establishment of the Commission and,
once again, are deeply grateful to your delegation,
Madam President, for the pivotal role it played in the
negotiations that produced a resolution that enjoyed
broad support.
We look forward to the constructive and practical
work of the Peacebuilding Commission in helping
11
S/PV.5359
countries emerging from conflict to manage the
difficult and painful process of reconstruction, national
reconciliation and development. It is our hope and
expectation that the Commission will adopt an
effective, timeous and action-oriented approach to
post-conflict peacebuilding. The work of the
Commission should be inclusive, transparent and
measurable; that is the only reason for its existence.
While we welcome without reservation the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission, let us
never forget that when the United Nations was
established 60 years ago, the founders declared their
determination to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war. Today, 191 countries have freely
committed themselves to the noble and great enterprise
of ending war. Our business as Member States is to put
the business of making war out of business by
enhancing the capacity of the United Nations to
prevent the outbreak of conflicts and to manage and
resolve disputes. It is deeply regrettable that we have
not always succeeded in doing that.
The Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, but we recognize that in the final
analysis, every State has the ultimate responsibility for
establishing institutions that can ensure peace and
stability within its borders. We have come here because
we have abiding faith in the instrumentality of the
Council to play an effective role in the search for peace
and stability in the Great Lakes region.
If the Security Council has been actively seized
of the situation in the Great Lakes region for several
years, 2006 should be the year in which we can expect
to see increased determination to move from dialogue
to action. The Dar es-Salaam Declaration of November
2004 has already established a solid foundation for
negotiations on the four themes of peace and security,
democracy and good governance, economic
development and regional integration, and
humanitarian and social issues.
The Great Lakes region is one of the African
regions that are richly endowed with natural resources,
fertile soils, good rains and, above all, industrious and
enterprising people. It is the cradle of human
civilization, and many people in Africa trace their
origins to this area, which is at the heart of the African
continent. And yet it is here that we witnessed one of
the worst forms of man’s inhumanity to man. It is
therefore in the interests of the Great Lakes region,
Africa and the wider international community that this
area be helped to emerge from violent conflicts and
human suffering to embrace peace and stability and
engage in economic cooperation, regional integration
and development.
There can be no doubt that the Great Lakes
region has great potential for development and
economic prosperity if only peace can be given a
chance. The restoration of peace in the region should
also have a positive impact on the prospects for
economic growth and development in the Southern
African Development Community region and, indeed,
in Africa as a whole. It would open up greater
opportunities for the implementation of the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development.
The people of the Great Lakes region expect to live
in peace. Peace is indivisible. We wish for the people of
the region the peace, stability and security that the rest
of humanity enjoys and sometimes inadvertently takes
for granted because it is as natural as breathing. It is only
under conditions of peace and stability that, together, we
can devote our resources and energies to improving the
human condition and attain the Millennium
Development Goals. The immediate beneficiaries of a
comprehensive peace agreement would be the people
of the Great Lakes region themselves, who have borne
the brunt of untold human suffering. Any further delay
in achieving durable peace in the region can only
condemn all of us in Africa to economic stagnation and
the vicious circle of violence and crises.
There can be no doubt that the people of this area
have a common history and a shared future. It is in that
context that we call upon the militia groups that have
so far refused to join the peace process and continued
to be a source of instability and mayhem to voluntarily
disarm and join the movement towards peace. That
they can do by agreeing to live under and participate in
an alternative order based on tolerance, consensus,
compromise and democracy.
The time has come for the Security Council to
send a clear message to the militias that it can no
longer tolerate continued defiance of the collective will
of the international community. In that regard, we
commend the recent joint military action by the
Government and the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
disarm militias in that country.
12
S/PV.5359
The international community has a crucial role to
play in facilitating the development of the will to peace
in order to help usher in a new political dispensation in
this troubled area. Given the area’s violent history, the
people of the Great Lakes need assurances that entering
into agreements on the governance issues outlined in
the Dar es-Salaam Declaration would not be
tantamount to surrendering their own security and that
of generations yet unborn. They should be encouraged
to see these governance issues as underpinning durable
peace, embracing good-neighbourliness and peaceful
coexistence in exchange for a larger share of expanded
opportunities in a larger region.
The international community must demonstrate a
readiness to support a comprehensive peace agreement
by providing resources to underpin such an agreement.
That means providing financial, material and technical
resources for the resettlement of returning refugees and
internally displaced persons, the reintegration of
former combatants and the provision of education,
health care, potable water and, above all, assistance in
building and strengthening institutions.
Consistent and assured support in the
rehabilitation of infrastructure and the reactivation of
the economies of the region’s countries should go a
long way towards reinforcing the process of economic
cooperation and regional integration. A comprehensive
package of assistance would be the greatest peace
dividend that the international community could
provide to assist in consolidating a lasting political
settlement. In helping the countries of the Great Lakes
region, the international community would be helping
countries such as my own, Botswana. Our prosperity
depends on the prosperity of our neighbours and of
Africa.
We encourage the countries of Africa’s Great
Lakes region to begin the new year with a sense of
hope and determination to work towards ensuring that
peace is possible and achievable in our lifetime. We
have witnessed a period of violent conflicts, and never
again should our continent and people be subjected to
the same painful slaughter of the innocent: men,
women and children.
The mandate of the newly established
Peacebuilding Commission and today’s Council
meeting at the initiative of our industrious Tanzanian
brothers and sisters should serve as challenges to the
countries of the Great Lakes to play their part, to make
the transition to peace, tolerance and inclusiveness.
This conference presents a great opportunity. This is
the African and universal human way: a culture of
botho, which in my language means a culture rooted in
the strong belief that one is human because of the
humanity of others.
We therefore urge the Security Council to call
upon Member States participating in the International
Conference on Peace, Security, Democracy and
Development in the Great Lakes Region to approach
the negotiations constructively and with a spirit of
compromise and moderation so that reason and
common sense can prevail.
The second International Conference should be
held as early as possible, because progress on the
regional dimensions of the peace process would have a
salutary effect on the gains attained at the country
level. A democratically elected Government has been
installed in the Republic of Burundi. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Congolese approved a
national Constitution in a referendum held in
December 2005. Preparations for national elections are
in progress. The Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo deserves the support of the
international community to ensure that the elections are
held as scheduled.
The success of the elections would be another
historic milestone in the democratic process. It would
be deeply regrettable if the militia marauding in the
region were to endanger a climate conducive to free
and fair elections and thus have an adverse impact on
the gains made on the road to peace. The international
community should not allow this to happen, because it
would be tantamount to abandoning the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is for these
reasons that the second International Conference must
be convened as a matter of urgency, so that we can not
only build on the achievements made at the country
level, but also reinforce such gains at the regional
level. It would be highly regrettable if countries
making progress in building peace and strengthening
national and democratic institutions were to relapse
into conflict because of slow movement or a lack of
progress in tackling the regional dimensions of the
peace process.
Let me conclude by stating that a number of
resolutions have been adopted by the Security Council
on peace and security in the Great Lakes region. Those
13
S/PV.5359
decisions should be implemented. Chapter V, Article
25, of the United Nations Charter states:
“The Members of the United Nations agree
to accept and carry out the decisions of the
Security Council”.
Let us implement these decisions as a matter of
urgency, in order to give peace a chance.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria, who will speak on behalf of
the European Union.
Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): It is for me a great
privilege to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and those countries aligning themselves with this
statement.
We welcome today’s open debate, since it is
taking place at a time when the Great Lakes region is at
an important crossroads.
I should like to draw the Council’s attention to
the written statement that is being distributed at this
time. I shall therefore limit myself to highlighting the
most salient points of our statement.
Never before have we been so close to a
settlement of the conflicts in the region. Since the
creation of the African Union, Africa has increasingly
taken up its responsibilities. The African Union has
fast become a reliable partner, which is essential when
we talk about strengthening our collaboration between
the United Nations and African partners at the regional
and subregional levels. The European Union sees itself
as a key ally in that effort. Now, with the European
Union’s Africa Strategy, we want to make a
contribution to a peaceful, prosperous and democratic
Africa, in close cooperation with the African Union,
the United Nations.
Substantive progress has been made in recent
years in the Great Lakes region. Burundi last year
witnessed the successful conclusion of the transition
process. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, too,
the successful holding of the referendum on the
Constitution and the strong support for it bear witness
to the desire of the people for a new beginning. The
adoption of the Declaration on Peace, Security,
Democracy and Development at the first Summit of
Heads of State and Government of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, held in Dar es-
Salaam in November 2004, represented a landmark in
regional relations. Member States are expected to adopt
the Pact on Security, Stability and Development later
this year. It is important that all countries live up to the
commitments contained therein.
That progress would not have been possible
without the dedication of the staff of the United
Nations missions in Burundi and in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, especially the peacekeepers,
who risk their lives on a daily basis. Just this Monday
we were tragically reminded of this when eight
Guatemalan peacekeepers lost their lives in an ambush
by suspected Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) elements
in Garamba National Park. The European Union
expresses its sincere condolences to the families of the
victims and to the Government of Guatemala and pays
tribute to the contribution of the thousands of men and
women who have been working with the United
Nations for peace in the region.
Progress has been made possible first and
foremost because of strong African ownership, whether
through the South African mediation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo or the regional initiative in
Burundi. Furthermore, the way in which all international
partners worked closely together with African partners
and the United Nations ensured coherence in their
support for the transition in the region.
The European Union’s contribution to this effort
has been substantial. Our involvement dates back to
1996, when Mr. Aldo Ajello, who is here with us, was
appointed EU Special Representative for the African
Great Lakes Region. To this day, the EU is deeply
involved at the political level, as the recent visits by
High Representative Solana and Commissioner Michel
to Kinshasa show. But we have also taken very
concrete, practical steps to help in the stabilization of
the region. In 2003, the EU deployed Operation
Artemis, the first-ever European Security and Defence
Policy (ESDP) mission outside Europe, to the city of
Bunia. The determined military effort by the European
Union stabilized the situation until the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) was able to take control of the
area, and thus helped to save the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo from collapse.
In Burundi, the EU was actively involved in the
Arusha peace process and was part of the Commission
de Suivi of the Arusha Agreement. The European
Union also supported the deployment of the African
14
S/PV.5359
Mission in Burundi, which, again, paved the way for
the subsequent takeover by a United Nations mission.
Therefore, that African Union mission represented the
first successful test of AU-United Nations-EU trilateral
cooperation in African peacekeeping.
We are also heavily engaged in the humanitarian
and political fields. The EU has contributed more than
80 per cent of all the funds required for the election
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Recently, we have been opening new avenues by
supporting the crucial restructuring of the security
sector, in line with our common goal of providing
security to all Congolese. The European Union security
mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
been providing advice and assistance for security
sector reform since June 2005.
The EU civilian police mission — the European
Union Police Mission in Kinshasa — is assisting the
Congolese authorities in setting up, training and
monitoring, on a daily basis, an integrated police unit
in charge of the protection of State institutions and the
main political leaders.
However, much remains to be done. In Burundi,
the problem of the Forces Nationales de Libération
(FNL) must be solved. Burundi will need continued
international assistance after the gradual and careful
phasing out of the United Nations Operation in
Burundi. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
delay in the adoption of the electoral law is
jeopardizing the electoral calendar and the conclusion
of the transitional period by June 2006. Also, a
solution has to be found urgently for the problem of the
negative forces in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo — be they Congolese or foreign in origin —
including the Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda (FDLR). The activities of the Lord’s
Resistance Army are reason for considerable concern,
not just because of the humanitarian crisis of immense
proportions in northern Uganda. As recent events
show, the LRA’s activities have intensified in southern
Sudan and have spread to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo as well, causing more insecurity and
threatening the peace processes under way in these
areas.
For lasting progress to be achieved, international
partners need reliable, democratic partner
Governments. It is important that political systems be
democratic and inclusive and that they create a climate
of trust and participation by all. Good governance and
the rule of law will create an environment that is
conducive to reconstruction. It is, therefore, essential
to take decisive action against corruption, ensure
respect for human rights, strengthen the rule of law and
fight against the climate of impunity. The International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the International
Criminal Court have a central role to play in the efforts
to bring to justice those responsible for serious human
rights violations, war crimes or crimes against humanity.
The international community’s support for
reconstruction efforts has to be well coordinated and
coherent. In particular, we need to think now about the
post-transitional phase and how best to support
reconstruction and institution-building. This is an area
where donors need to work harder and where the
Peacebuilding Commission could add particular value.
The provision of security is pivotal in all these
efforts. The question of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, repatriation or resettlement of the
various armed groups is a central issue in the
stabilization of the whole region. The European Union
welcomes the robust action undertaken by MONUC in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo in
support of the Armed Forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Equally, the EU welcomes the
fact that the Security Council has recently given more
attention to this specific question and its regional
implications. We also need to ensure that the arms
embargo is implemented in good faith and that
measures are taken against the illegal exploitation of
natural resources. We believe it is important that the
international community not disengage too rapidly and
that an adequate United Nations presence be
maintained in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
after the elections. Phasing out the United Nations
missions in Burundi and in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo should follow clear established benchmarks.
The future of the countries in the region must be
built on good-neighbourliness and regional
cooperation. The proposed Security, Stability and
Development Pact, which is to be adopted at the
second Summit of the International Conference on
Peace, Security, Democracy and Development in the
Great Lakes Region, to be held in Nairobi later this
year, will be the basis and reference point for all these
efforts. We believe that, given the recent history of the
region, the peace and security cluster of the Pact
warrants the most urgent attention.
15
S/PV.5359
All the elements I have outlined are intertwined.
The transformation of the Great Lakes region into an
area of lasting peace, stability and prosperity requires
sustained, coordinated efforts by all parties involved.
The European Union stands ready to play its part and
to continue its support for this collaborative effort.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Louis Michel, Commissioner for
Development and Humanitarian Aid of the European
Commission.
Mr. Michel (European Commission) (spoke in
French): First of all, I would like to congratulate the
United Republic of Tanzania on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January. I would like, Madam President, to hail your
initiative to organize, at this very critical juncture, a
debate on peace, security and development in the Great
Lakes region. You know better than anyone that today
we have a real opportunity we must seize — indeed, an
opportunity we must wrest from the hand of fate.
I understand very well the honour the Security
Council has bestowed upon the European Commission
(EC) presided over by José Manuel Barroso by
allowing us to address the Council. We would see this
as reflecting a conviction that is too often ignored: that
while there can be no development without peace or
stability, there is no chance for peace or stability
without development. And that is precisely what gives
specific added value to the institution that I represent.
From that perspective, the Commission fully
endorses the statement just made by the European
Union presidency, which defined the framework and
strategy of the European political contribution to
bringing about peace in the Great Lakes region, whose
stability is so important for balance, harmony and
economic restructuring and human recovery throughout
the African continent.
I would recall the steady commitment of the
European Commission, which is often at the forefront of
the international community, and which is mandated by
the European Union to seek a conclusive solution to the
crises and conflicts that, for too long now, have affected
this region, which is so rich in potential in many areas.
We have always counted on the virtues of a
political dialogue that is active and frank, but also
respectful and without a hidden agenda. We have no
objective other than that of peace, security and the
well-being of people. We believe that we can attain it
only by rebuilding States that can protect and mediate
among their populations and that are legitimate
because of democratic systems — States that possess
institutions capable of fulfilling the major governing
functions that, alone, can ensure for all citizens equal
rights, such as access to education, health services,
justice, administration and culture.
Beyond our duty to provide emergency
humanitarian assistance, our policy has always been
based on the conviction that poverty will be
vanquished only through the establishment and
consolidation of an impartial Government that
encourages vigilant civil societies that are able to take
on full responsibility for their destiny.
Since 2002, the Union has mobilized more than
€1 billion — more than $1.3 billion — for this region
and these countries. The Commission has invested in
key areas, such as governance and the electoral
process — where we are the top donors, with €149
million for the Democratic Republic of the Congo —
as well as the rebuilding of services and basic
infrastructure. To consolidate these gains, we need to
release further funds. But those funds would not and
will not be sufficient without unified analysis, action
and commitment on the part of all international actors.
We will need to maintain this holy alliance until the
end of the peace processes, and even beyond.
Until the end, the process will remain fragile, and
the enormous promise of a Central Africa that is finally
at peace, open and headed for the future will always
run the risk of being shattered by, irresponsible
behaviour — individual or collective — by sterile
quarrels and even by foolish blunders. Our
commitment to ourselves and to our African friends
will have to remain unshakeable if we are to ward off
these dangers once and for all.
But I am optimistic. In Rwanda, the painful
wounds of the genocide are starting to subside, little by
little. There is already a new economic recovery that
can give hope and motivation to members of the young
generations, who now know that, if they wish, they can
fashion a future of prosperity, solidarity and justice. A
little more than 10 years after the abominable tragedy
there, we can finally believe that reconciliation is
going to take place among the people.
As to Burundi, a few months ago Burundians
successfully took up a challenge that we all believed to
16
S/PV.5359
be out of reach. They democratically elected a
Parliament representing their entire population. They
wisely gave the President the broadest possible
legitimacy with which to establish the conditions for
reunification. The President has created a Government
with more than one-third female representation and
developed a modern agenda that is generous and
ambitious, beginning with free primary education.
Those are all undeniably positive signs.
Today in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
a drawn-out and fragile transitional process is
gradually being completed. In a few months, more than
25 million Congolese men and women have received
their voting cards, providing them for the first time
with identity, citizenship and a sense of belonging to a
single nation and people. How can we not believe in
miracles when we see the miracle being enacted at the
registration centres in the hearts and souls of men and
women who were hitherto mere phantom citizens? On
18 December, more than 60 per cent of them voted, for
the first time in 40 years. Eighty-four per cent of the
voters ratified a balanced and democratic constitution,
because they instinctively understood that, through that
founding gesture, they held the key to turning the tide
of their own history.
To the very end, the international community
must help and encourage them and exhort their leaders
to adhere to the electoral timetable. An electoral law
must be enacted that will, I hope, provide for the
broadest possible representation of all sectors of
Congolese society in order to avert any resurgence of
the sense of exclusion.
How can we fail to see that these countries have a
shared destiny? I am deeply convinced that the
successful completion of the process may be difficult,
not only regionally, but throughout Africa. The
regional dimension strikes me as being fundamental.
We need to join forces and to focus attention on themes
of common interest, basing our action on the
principle — one that is at the very heart of the
construction of Europe — that it is by sharing our
interests, problems and resources that we are able to
achieve and maintain peace and increase prosperity. I
am therefore pleased to see the determination of those
three countries to give new impetus to the Economic
Community of the Great Lakes Countries. We
ourselves are determined to provide substantial funding
for that project.
In considering the prospects, how can we fail
unequivocally to denounce the barbarous acts and
inhuman attacks perpetrated this week by several
criminal groups, which, in their own sordid interests,
are terrorizing innocent citizens and even killing those
who, at their own peril and on our behalf, went there to
protect them?
The European Commission has always taken a
voluntarist approach, along with its special partners in
the United Nations, the Bretton Woods institutions, the
African Union and other donors. The Peacebuilding
Commission will have a major role to play in that
respect. The European Commission will become even
further involved in the development strategy as an
essential factor in conflict prevention and in the re-
establishment of the rule of law through independent
and trustworthy judicial systems, effective public
administrations that can control their territory, and
reformed security forces subject to strict democratic
oversight.
In conclusion, I deeply believe that relations
between us and Africa have been reborn and are
evolving in mutual respect between partners that are
equal in rights and responsibilities and capable of
engaging in dialogue and debate and of living with
their differences in the firm resolve to reach a common
understanding of the concepts of democracy and law. I
believe that we must resolutely and consistently look to
the largest possible common denominator — the major
concepts that regulate the organization of modern
societies. Such notions as justice, solidarity and
freedom must be subject to debate. The international
community cannot unilaterally impose its terms of
reference.
We must also be guided and persuaded by our
partners. Their experience, history, perceptions and
culture can enrich ours. I believe that, if we wish, we
can finally begin to exorcise the demons of our
respective pasts and achieve a common reading of
history. Only thus can we build together a world of
peace, justice and freedom.
The President: I give the floor to the Minister of
State for Foreign Affairs of Qatar, His Excellency
Mr. Ahmad bin Abdullah Al-Mahmoud.
Mr. Al-Mahmoud (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): It
gives me pleasure to begin by congratulating you,
Madam, on the great competence and statesmanship
with which your delegation has conducted the work of
17
S/PV.5359
the Council in order to realize the purposes and
objectives of the United Nations Charter. The initiative
to convene this ministerial meeting of the Security
Council to discuss the question of peace, security and
development in the Great Lakes region of Africa is
undoubtedly a step in that direction. It indeed reaffirms
the importance you attach to the African continent,
which has suffered terribly from the scourges of war,
conflict and marginalization that have negatively
influenced the development of a great continent
distinguished by its time-honoured history, great
peoples and resources.
We would also like to extend our thanks to
Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his efforts to
highlight the suffering and marginalization of the
majority of the people of that continent, including
those living in the Great Lakes region. We value his
search for appropriate solutions that will preserve the
dignity of the African people, realize peace and
achieve development.
This meeting is important because it is convened
to support the initiatives of the Security Council and
the Secretary-General to address issues related to
African conflicts, primarily those highlighted in
resolution 1625 (2005) on the prevention of armed
conflict, especially in Africa. The Security Council
adopted that resolution at the summit it held on the
margins of the High-level Plenary Meeting of the
General Assembly in September 2005. In that context,
we cannot dismiss the sheer determination of the
African States in establishing the African Union’s
Peace and Security Council and entrusting it with the
tasks of conflict prevention, resolution and
peacekeeping in Africa. That achievement has allowed
the African Union to develop a genuine partnership
with the Security Council towards achieving a better
understanding of the region’s difficulties and
consequently addressing, in a comprehensive manner,
the root causes of conflicts in Africa.
We have little doubt that the memory of the
violent conflicts and crimes of genocide that raged in
the Great Lakes region will remain vivid in our minds
for a long time to come. For that reason alone, we
should redouble our efforts and work tirelessly to
prevent the outbreak of new conflicts and to resolve
those that are still festering. We are all aware of the
extremely complicated demographic and geopolitical
realities of that subregion of the continent, which can
affect the region as a whole. It is therefore incumbent
upon us to search for innovative solutions based on a
regional approach, as called for at the first
International Conference on Peace, Security,
Democracy and Development in the Great Lakes
Region, held in Tanzania in 2004.
In view of what I have said, one question remains
to be answered is how and to what extent the United
Nations and the international community can assist the
countries of the Great Lakes region in the
implementation of the Dar es-Salaam vision. It is true
that the United Nations has achieved great success in
bringing about stability in the region, but the remaining
challenges are equally great. We must therefore
approach that question more realistically, work to
consolidate the gains that have been achieved so far,
and explore which avenues could be pursued in order
to face future challenges, even if that means a more
robust United Nations field presence, including
peacekeeping forces.
As we speak of United Nations staff in the field,
allow me to extend my country’s condolences to the
families and the Governments of fallen peacekeepers
who have lost their lives in the line of duty while
discharging the noble tasks entrusted to them.
Although we are currently focused on questions
of peace, security, democracy and good governance, as
well as on social and humanitarian questions, we believe
that there are other issues of equal importance included
in the vision of the Dar es-Salaam Declaration. These
pertain to economic development and regional
integration, which, in our view, are two basic pillars of
lasting stability in the region. Regrettably, those issues
have not received the attention they deserve from the
Security Council. It is not that the Council has no
interest in such questions, but those two issues fall
outside the Council’s purview and involve other
stakeholders, such as international financial institutions
and donor countries, who must assist the countries of
the region in translating their aspirations into reality.
We in the State of Qatar are convinced that the
countries of the South can shoulder their share of the
responsibility for the development of the South. For
that reason, His Royal Highness Sheikh Hamad bin
Khalifa Al-Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar, took the
initiative of establishing the South Development Fund
which we hope, when it becomes operational, will
contribute to the economic development and regional
integration of the Great Lakes region.
18
S/PV.5359
The Peacebuilding Commission, established by
Security Council resolution 1645 (2005) and General
Assembly resolution 60/181, fulfils a cherished
aspiration; it represents a suitable mechanism to assist
countries emerging from conflict in preserving peace
and achieving sustainable development. It can also
prevent such countries from regressing to a state of
conflict. We cannot fail to praise the efforts that led to
the adoption of the wise decision to establish the
Commission, which we hope will play the role
expected of it, as articulated in the relevant
agreements.
In conclusion, let me affirm that we support the
draft resolution before the Council on peace, security
and development in the Great Lakes region, and we
call for its adoption.
Mr. Burian (Slovakia): At the outset, I would
like to affirm that the Great Lakes region represents
one of the major security challenges of the
contemporary world. We think it is high time to
address the problems of the region in all their
complexity, and to achieve a lasting peaceful
settlement that will contribute positively to the stability
and development of the entire continent.
In that context, we commend the United Republic
of Tanzania for taking this very relevant and timely
initiative. We agree with you, Madam President, that this
meeting of the Security Council is truly a historic event.
Slovakia associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Austria on behalf of
the European Union, and with the statement delivered
by Mr. Louis Michel of the European Commission.
That is why I will limit myself to a few points that we
feel strongly about. The full text of our statement will
be circulated.
In recent months we have witnessed encouraging
developments in the field of political consolidation in
the Great Lakes region: democratic elections in
Burundi and a successful constitutional referendum in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Those positive
moments provided proof of the political maturity of the
peoples of Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and can serve as a beacon of hope within the
grim reality of the current situation in the Great Lakes
region.
We are aware that there are possible spoilers who
could benefit from postponements in the peace and
national reconciliation processes. It is therefore crucial
to prevent such attempts and not to allow the
deterioration of the security situation to have a
destructive effect on political processes that have
proceeded well so far. Slovakia is deeply concerned
about the recent instances of renewed fighting in North
Kivu and Katanga, and especially about the attack
against the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) that
occurred on 23 January 2006.
In that context, we want to emphasize a problem
that has been overlooked by the international
community for a long time. I am speaking of the most
violent and cruel criminal activities carried out in the
region by the Lord’s Resistance Army. In that
connection, we would like to stress two points. First,
we note the efforts made by the Ugandan Government
to tackle the issue. However, we cannot overlook the
fact that innocent civilians continue to die. There are
new patterns emerging in the campaign of the Lord’s
Resistance Army, including attacks on humanitarian
workers and peacekeepers who are on the ground to
help refugees and internally displaced persons and to
safeguard peace. We think that decisive action is
needed to stop the destructive activities of the Lord’s
Resistance Army and to bring perpetrators to justice by
executing the warrants of the International Criminal
Court.
Secondly, we agree that the primary
responsibility to protect lies with Governments.
However, it is the responsibility of the international
community to help and protect the most vulnerable if
the national authorities are not able to cope with the
magnitude of the problem. That is the reason Slovakia
is ready to support initiatives of the international
community that would, in cooperation with the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Uganda and the Sudan, identify possible
measures that could then be taken by the Security
Council to eliminate the activities of the Lord’s
Resistance Army.
Since the situation in the Great Lakes region is
extremely complex, the responses must be
comprehensive and far-reaching. There are three levels
on which the problems must be tackled: national,
regional and international.
On the national level, fighting corruption and
implementing the principles of good governance are
19
S/PV.5359
imperatives. Security-sector reform, demobilization
and disarmament processes must be further enhanced
and accelerated. Ownership of solutions to those
problems must be assumed by national Governments.
The regional level of cooperation has special
importance. Neither national, nor international efforts
can bear the desired fruit in the Great Lakes region if
they are not implemented in the regional framework.
We would like to encourage the countries of the region
and other regional stakeholders to accelerate their
efforts to prepare for the second Great Lakes Summit,
which should adopt the proposed Security, Stability
and Development Pact for the Great Lakes region and
enhance the existing forms of dialogue and
cooperation, with special regard to confidence and
security-building measures. The questions of
development and respect for human rights are clearly
issues that will need further attention from the
international community, since there is no security
without development and respect for human rights.
Last but not least, the international community
should bear a major responsibility with regard to
formulating and implementing post-conflict strategies
once the transition is complete. The establishment of
the Peacebuilding Commission could not be timelier.
There is already one suitable candidate in the Great
Lakes region for the Commission’s attention: Burundi.
We believe that there will be another after 30 June.
Slovakia welcomes the draft resolution on peace,
stability and development in the Great Lakes region
(S/2006/51). We believe that it comprehensively covers
the complex issues that the Great Lakes region faces.
The draft resolution has our full support.
Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I wish first of all to welcome you, Madam
Minister, and to thank you for presiding over the
Security Council at this meeting. I wish also to
welcome Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Council
members and States of the Great Lakes region who
have come to New York to consider the question of
strengthening peace, security and sustainable
development in the Great Lakes region.
African issues are constantly at the centre of the
Council’s attention. This reflects the international
community’s grave concern at the complex ongoing
situation on the African continent. Recent
developments in the Great Lakes region show clearly
that the most important way to settle conflict in the
region and throughout Africa is to strengthen the rule
of law by developing democracy and good governance.
The Council’s consideration of current conflict
situations in the Great Lakes region continues to
indicate that the greatest difficulties arise in the
settlement of problems relating to the transitional and
post-conflict periods. The implementation of
legislation and the revival or establishment of legal
systems take place slowly. Programmes of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration are
carried out with difficulty or are completely blocked —
notably by illegal Congolese or foreign armed groups
operating in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in neighbouring States, where their
destabilizing impact on the region’s peace process has
recently taken on an increased cross-border character.
At the same time, we note the generally positive
momentum in the peace processes in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in Burundi. That is
encouraging, and it reflects a solid trend towards
overall stabilization.
To consolidate the success of the Burundi peace
process and to make it irreversible, the democratically
elected Government still has many severe problems to
address. Naturally, that will require considerable
assistance from the international community, including
through the participation of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Friends of Burundi and the leading
donors.
The priority for the leaders and the parliament of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is to accelerate
the establishment of a legal and logistical basis for the
holding of free, honest, transparent and democratic
elections in June 2006. Still pending is the thorny
problem of the disarmament, reintegration and
voluntary repatriation of members of foreign armed
groups operating in the eastern provinces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In our view, it is of great importance that regional
cooperation among the States of the Great Lakes
region — in particular Rwanda, Burundi, Uganda and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo — be
established, along with putting in place confidence-
building measures and resolving outstanding bilateral
issues. This should be done in the framework of
multilateral security mechanisms such as the Tripartite
Plus One Joint Commission.
20
S/PV.5359
In resolving disarmament problems, the regional
dimension must be emphasized by broadening and
deepening cooperation among neighbouring States.
Stabilizing the situation in Central Africa and
putting in place solid conditions conducive to
development are closely linked to a successful outcome
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region. A major task in the upcoming phase will be to
carry out an objective analysis of compliance with the
Dar es-Salaam Declaration of Principles on Peace,
Security, Democracy and Development in the Great
Lakes Region and, at the second summit of States of
the region, to adopt viable, balanced, achievable
decisions binding on all, particularly in the areas of
peace and security.
I wish to note that my delegation fully supports
the draft resolution (S/2006/51) that has been prepared
for adoption at the end of today’s meeting.
Finally, Madam President, I should like once
again to thank you and the delegation of the United
Republic of Tanzania for the great effort you have put
into preparing and conducting today’s meeting.
Ms. Løj (Denmark): Denmark appreciates this
opportunity to discuss the issue of peace, security and
development in the Great Lakes region. We welcome
the Tanzanian initiative to hold this debate and the fact
that you, Madam Minister, are presiding over our
discussion.
We would like to associate ourselves with the
statement delivered by the Permanent Representative
of Austria on behalf of the European Union.
We welcome the participation today of a large
number of ministers. Political dedication is the driving
force, and their strong commitment to promote peace
and stability is absolutely essential.
The progress in the transitional process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is encouraging,
because peace and stability in that country is seen as
one of the key factors in obtaining peace and stability
throughout the region. Respect for sovereignty, non-
interference and closer cooperation between individual
States in the region constitute another key factor. The
International Conference on Peace, Security,
Democracy and Development in the Great Lakes
Region provides a forum for cooperation, and we hope
that the second Great Lakes summit takes place as soon
as possible.
Atrocities and criminal behaviour by militias and
armed groups operating in the Great Lakes region
continue to pose a threat to regional stability. The
countries of the region must take measures to prevent
the use of their respective territories in support of
activities of armed groups. And they must combat the
cross-border trafficking of illicit arms and illicit
resources and the movement of combatants by strictly
enforcing the arms embargo applied to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
In that regard, I should like to underline that the
links among the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, the illegal trade in those resources and the
proliferation and trafficking of arms must be fully
recognized as yet another factor fuelling and
exacerbating conflicts in the region. We urge countries
in the region to enhance their cooperation in promoting
lawful and transparent exploitation of natural
resources. That will promote peace as well as
economic development.
The need for protection of civilian populations is
immense throughout the region. We should like to
stress that Governments in the region have the primary
responsibility to protect their populations in
accordance with international law and to ensure the
full, safe and unhindered access of humanitarian
workers to people in need.
In order to secure long-term stability and respect
for the rule of law, all States concerned must take
action to bring to justice perpetrators of grave
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. And all States should cooperate with
international criminal courts to ensure the
apprehension and surrender of suspects. Where the
United Nations is engaged, it should assist the States in
that endeavour.
Through the combined efforts of the countries of
the region, the United Nations and the African Union,
the various conflicts in the region have now turned a
critical corner towards resolution. We would like to
encourage enhanced African ownership and
participation in conflict-management on the continent.
The Security Council should explore how best to
support ongoing efforts to develop the African security
architecture and to work closely with the African
Union to advance ways and means of cooperation.
We are increasingly drawing on the resources and
legitimacy of a network of multilateral mechanisms,
21
S/PV.5359
regional and global, to provide collective responses to
the peace and security challenges of today. The task
ahead of us is to make sure that our cooperation
mechanisms work as well as possible. They must be
effective, efficient and mutually reinforcing, and they
must be flexible and responsive.
In its regional approach to the Great Lakes
region, the Security Council must focus not just on
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, but also on conflict
prevention and resolution, including governance issues
and the social and economic components of peace.
The issues that I have just touched upon are all
reflected in the draft resolution (S/2006/51) initiated by
Tanzania. The complexity of the draft resolution is a
clear indication of the comprehensive Security Council
engagement aimed at the resolution of the conflicts in
the Great Lakes region. Denmark wholeheartedly
supports the draft resolution.
The President: I give the floor to Mr. Richard
Sezibera, Special Envoy of the President of Rwanda
for the Great Lakes region.
Mr. Sezibera (Rwanda): I would like first of all
to thank you, Madam President, for having associated
Rwanda with the deliberations of this meeting of the
Security Council. We are pleased and honoured to see
the United Republic of Tanzania presiding over the
proceedings of the Council this month. We are
extremely glad to see you, Madam, occupying the
presidency. We have no doubt that your able leadership
will make the work of the Council extremely
productive. We pay tribute to the United Republic of
Tanzania, working in concert with all of its neighbours,
for its tireless efforts in the search for peace and shared
development in the Great Lakes region and, indeed, in
the entire African continent.
This meeting of the Security Council is dedicated
to the examination of events in the Great Lakes region.
More specifically, it seeks to address peace, security
and development in the region. Those issues are,
indeed, all interrelated and crucial. The people of our
region are not only interlinked ethnically, culturally,
linguistically and economically, but they also have —
as the developments in post-genocide Rwanda, the
elections in Burundi and the electoral process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo attest — expressed
their desire and their determination to forge a better
future, despite, and moving beyond, the traumas of the
past.
The countries of the region have been tireless in
the search for peace and stability in the region. They
have played a major role in the return of peace in
Burundi and the advent of a new political dispensation
in that country. They continue to play a key role in
finding solutions to the crises in Somalia and the
Sudan.
The principles of regional ownership of peace
processes and international partnership are not merely
empty slogans. Our region has shown that they are
possible, and that, when applied correctly, they
produce results.
Rwanda is encouraged by the progress of the
political process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Many of the pillars of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement of 1999 have slowly but surely been
realized. The war, which at its peak involved many
States, has stopped. Instead of confrontation and
conflict, States in the region are now exploring avenues
of increased cooperation. The Congolese people have a
new political dispensation and are involved in a
process that will further cement it, as they move
beyond the transitional arrangements agreed on at Sun
City, South Africa, and establish structures reflective
of the will of the people. Foreign troops have
withdrawn from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in a process aided and observed by the region and by
the international community.
Rwanda believes that the prospects for lasting
peace, deepened stability and shared prosperity are
better now than they have been at any other moment
since the genocide of 1994. The region and the rest of
the international community need to work together to
consolidate the gains in peace and security, while also
laying a solid groundwork for sustained and
sustainable shared prosperity. In order to effectively do
that, however, we will all need to address the
unfinished business of the Lusaka process. As I have
already said, many of the building blocks for regional
peace, as identified by that process, have been put in
place. Unfortunately, there still remains one key
impediment to lasting peace: the presence of genocidal
forces and other armed groups in the region, whose
sole purpose is the continued destabilization of our
countries.
Until and unless the people of the region are
freed of the fear, the tyranny and the attacks of the
forces currently calling themselves the Forces
22
S/PV.5359
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR), the
Lord’s Resistance Army, the Palipehutu-Forces
nationales de libération and other armed groups that
currently sow desolation in the east of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the rest of the region, the
emerging peace will continue to be fragile and
development will remain a distant dream for many of
our people.
Rwandans continue to ask why, for 11 years now,
they have had to continue to live with the spectre of
genocide. They would like to know why the Security
Council has not yet permanently ended the threat posed
by those forces, and they question why the sanctions
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) and the Group of Experts re-established under
resolution 1596 (2005) have not yet tackled the issue of
the flow of arms and other supplies to those groups
with the seriousness it deserves. I dare to hope that this
open meeting will provide the answers to those
questions, both through the draft resolution to be
adopted later and through actions taken by United
Nations forces on the ground.
Rwanda would like to take this opportunity to
express its condolences to the Government and the
people of Guatemala, to the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and to the entire United Nations family on
the loss of the Guatemalan peacekeepers in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The deaths of those
valiant peacekeepers should spur the Council to
further, stronger and more effective action.
The Governments of the region, through their
ministers for foreign affairs, meeting in Kampala in
October last year, provided the Council with
suggestions about how that could be done. I hope that
this body will take the necessary decisions. Rwanda,
for its part, will continue to extend to any and all
members of the FDLR who repatriate all the rights and
responsibilities that Rwandans enjoy, as is their
unconditional and inalienable right.
An important building block in the emerging
architecture of peace in our region is the International
Conference on Peace, Security and Development in the
Great Lakes Region. The first Summit of Heads of
State and Government, held in Dar es-Salaam in
November 2004, provided a vision of a region
transformed from a theatre of incessant conflict to one
of shared prosperity. They also provided a road map for
how that transformation could occur. Rwanda hopes
that the postponed second Summit will take place as
expeditiously as possible.
As the region works towards the signing of the
proposed Security, Stability and Development Pact, the
key principles of the region’s ownership of both the
process and the outcomes, sustained international
partnership and inclusion, which are the pillars of the
Conference process, will continue to be critical. It is
also important to reaffirm the link among peace and
security, good governance and economic development.
Peace and security processes that are not anchored by
good governance practices, sustained growth and
poverty reduction are fragile indeed. That is why we
believe that the four themes of the Conference are
equally important.
The Conference process has fostered dialogue
among Governments, parliamentarians, civil society
actors, the private sector, women’s groups, young
people, media professionals, religious leaders and
others. It has raised the expectations of millions of
citizens in the region. In order for those expectations to
be met, additional resources will have to be mobilized
both within the region and from the international
community. If that is not done, then it will simply be
another conference that makes lots of headlines but has
no measurable impact on the region’s poor.
As the region establishes a follow-up mechanism
for the Conference, there is a need for serious
discussions on mechanisms for continued partnership
with the international community in the years ahead.
Serious thought will also have to be given to novel
ways of funding the identified outcomes, which will be
reflected in the pact.
The formal establishment of a Peacebuilding
Commission in December 2005 by the Security
Council through its resolution 1645 (2005) and by the
General Assembly through its resolution 60/180 is a
very welcome event. Many countries in the Great
Lakes region are in transition from conflict to
sustainable peace and development. They are therefore
ideal candidates for assistance from the Commission.
Rwanda, given its history, is ready to contribute
to the Commission’s success. It is important that the
initiatives currently under way in the Great Lakes
region find some link with the Commission. We are
ready to make our contribution when called upon to do
so, be it through the sharing of ideas, material
23
S/PV.5359
resources or personnel. Rwanda also pledges to
continue to make its contribution to the return of peace
and stability to the region and to the protection of
vulnerable populations, especially on our continent, in
concert with the African Union and the United Nations.
I would like to conclude by paying tribute to all
those who have worked tirelessly for peace in our
region. First of all, my tribute goes to the people and
the leaders of the region, who have decided to take its
destiny in their hands. They need the Council’s
support. We wish to recognize the invaluable role
played by the United Nations and all its organs and by
the African Union and all its organs. We thank the
United States of America, the facilitator of the
Tripartite Plus One Commission. The Commission has
contributed to the emerging return of confidence
among the Governments of Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda, enabling
them to identify common threats and to face them
collectively. I thank the Group of Friends of the Great
Lakes Region, co-chaired by Canada and the
Netherlands, for their invaluable assistance to the
International Conference on Peace, Security, Democracy
and Development in the Great Lakes Region.
All those concerted efforts have led the region to
the brink of lasting peace and sustainable development.
Rwanda believes that this is not the time to rest and do
less; it is the time for a recommitment to do more —
much more.
The President: Once again, I appeal to speakers
with longer statements to circulate the texts of their
statements to delegations and to limit their
interventions to no more than five minutes so that we
can accommodate all speakers by the end of the day. I
thank participants for their understanding.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Lam
Akol Ajawin, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Sudan.
Mr. Ajawin (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I wish to
congratulate you, Madam, and the United Republic of
Tanzania on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January. As this is the first
time that I have addressed the Council, I wish to
express our gratitude for the interest that the Council
has consistently devoted to my country, the Sudan,
since the negotiations began in Kenya and since the
Council visited Nairobi last November to provide
impetus to the peace process, and for the role played by
the United Nations in implementing the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. On behalf of the
Government of National Unity, I assure the Council of
our serious commitment to implementing the Peace
Agreement and making it a reality not only in the
south, but throughout the Sudan. That will promote
stability and peace in the Great Lakes region and on
the continent as a whole.
There can be no doubt that the issue we are
discussing at today’s meeting — peace, security and
development in the Great Lakes region — has been of
great importance to international peace and security for
decades. This region, in the heart of Africa, has
endured a number of conflicts and civil wars. The
Sudan is an integral part of the region and is inevitably
influenced by any positive or negative developments in
its other States. Therefore, we have participated in all
meetings concerning the region since the Security
Council, in 1994, supported the holding, under the
auspices of the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity of an international conference on the
Great Lakes region, through the holding of the Dar es-
Salaam Summit in November 2004 and the adoption of
the Dar es-Salaam Declaration on Peace, Security,
Democracy and Development in the Great Lakes
Region.
The Declaration, adopted by the heads of State or
Government, is a programme of action covering all
priority areas, including the establishment of lasting
peace through regional efforts aimed at ending
conflicts and establishing conflict prevention and
monitoring mechanisms. Led by the United Nations
and the African Union, the rest of the international
community and other partners and friends of the Great
Lakes region must also become involved.
We welcome the consensus on collective regional
cooperation and are optimistic that, through such joint
regional and international efforts, we will be able to
consolidate lasting peace and dispel the mistrust and
suspicion among the region’s countries, mentioned in
the second paragraph of the Dar es-Salaam
Declaration. Now we will be able to focus on other
tasks. We urge the international community to
strengthen national and regional capacity, in particular
that of African forces, through the provision of
financing and equipment so that they can shoulder their
responsibility to put an end to conflicts and disputes.
In addition, there are other pressing concerns.
First, strengthening the principles of democracy and
24
S/PV.5359
good governance in the region will lay the foundation
for balanced and sustainable development and
institution-building. That will help to ensure peaceful
coexistence among the States of the region, which in
turn will pave the way for bilateral and regional
cooperation regarding the refugee situation and the
ongoing disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) efforts in a number of countries.
We must combat trafficking in small arms and
light weapons and prevent the circulation of such
weapons among non-State actors. We must also combat
transnational organized crime. That will further
strengthen trust among States of the region, thereby
helping us turn the page and put an end to conflicts. It
will allow us also to exploit our natural resources for
development, undertake joint projects for economic
cooperation and pursue other joint efforts.
Peace and security go hand in hand, in particular
in a region such as the Great Lakes region, which
historically has gone through periods of instability. The
Dar es-Salaam summit, held last year, outlined four
major areas for action: peace and security; democratic
governance and economic development; regional
integration; and humanitarian and social issues. It
paved the way for a second summit, which was to have
been held in 2005, to devise implementation measures
with respect to those areas of concern – hence the
importance of support on the part of the international
community and of international agencies in those
areas. The goal is to build on the advances towards
peace made in some regions and to resolve some
persistent causes of tension.
The goal is to bring about a culture of peace and
cooperation, in keeping with the preamble of the
UNESCO Constitution, which states that: “Since wars
begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds of men
that the defences of peace must be constructed.”
The draft resolution before the Council today
reflects the strong support of the Security Council for
the achievement of peace, security and development in
the region. A time frame must be set for monitoring
and follow-up with respect to the measures undertaken
on the basis of the priorities mentioned earlier, so that
we can work together. Indeed, there have been some
positive developments in some areas of the region,
primarily in Burundi and in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We hope that the draft resolution that is
before the members of the Security Council will lead to
a more committed and effective involvement by the
United Nations to ensure peace, security and
sustainable development in the Great Lakes region.
The President: I give the floor to Mr. Karel De
Gucht, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium.
Mr. De Gucht (Belgium): Madam President, I am
most grateful for your kind invitation to participate in
this debate on peace, security and development in the
Great Lakes region. I commend you, Madam, and the
other members of the Council for the importance the
Security Council continues to give to this region and
for the special attention it is receiving under your
presidency.
Let me at the very outset stress the indispensable
and prominent role played by the United Nations in
Africa, both here in New York and in the field. Let me
also on this occasion share my personal feelings and
those of the people of Belgium with the families of the
eight peacekeepers who just a few days ago lost their
lives in the cause of peace.
Africa is one of the highest priorities for my
country, which is fully committed to its cause,
particularly to peace, security and development in the
Great Lakes region. Africa’s problems are of concern
to us all. They need a forceful response, first and
foremost from Africa, but also from Africa’s partners
within the international community. Belgium, working
bilaterally and very closely with its partners within the
European Union, is fully committed to a progressive
political and economic agenda for Africa. I should like
to associate myself fully with the statement made by
the representative of Austria on behalf of the European
Union.
Conflicts, together with the limited capacity of
many African States, greatly reduce the development
prospects of the whole continent. While Asia is lifting
itself rapidly out of poverty and Latin America
continues to make steady progress, the situation in
Africa is quite disturbing.
It is true that Africa has been a victim of past
history, of exploitation and of the slow response of the
international community to its needs. However, Africa is
also the victim of internal strife, endless war and regional
conflict, corruption and poor management. This cannot
go on — for Africa’s sake and for the world’s.
A real and sustainable take-off of the African
continent as a whole will be successful only if we can
25
S/PV.5359
establish lasting peace and stability in the Great Lakes
region. It is an illusion to think that a continent can be
developed as long as its heart is engulfed in conflict
and poverty. The Great Lakes region, and the Congo in
particular, have the potential to become the motor of
African development. It is therefore of the utmost
importance that the transition in the Congo be a
success and that the other countries in the region —
Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda — continue their
political and economic reconstruction process towards
the establishment of stable and democratic societies,
with a responsible leadership eager to build modern
state institutions based on the rule of law.
It is my strong opinion that the fate of Africa will
to a large extent depend on the future of the Great
Lakes region. We must seize the opportunity to help
the countries of that region pursue and consolidate
change, and we must do it now. How do we proceed?
I think that the time for reflection has passed.
International gatherings and conferences have no doubt
played a role in the overall awareness of the African
plight. But the time has now come to deliver — to
make sure that the average citizen in Africa can see
and feel that things are moving.
That implies a reappraisal of the donor efforts in
Africa. Have we been doing the right thing? Were we
perhaps inspired by colonial reflexes, by rivalry, or
simply by actors wanting to promote their short-term
interests without taking into account the needs of the
population? Are we doing enough to open up our
markets to African products? In short, is the
international community really gearing up for a much-
needed, comprehensive effort to give Africans all the
opportunities they need and deserve?
We, as representatives of the international
community, must dare to ask these critical questions.
But, conversely, Africans, too, must dare to live up to
their responsibilities. Former Minister Ousman Sy of
Mali said: “Africa is not poor, it is badly governed”.
That is definitely too harsh a statement, but we have to
reflect upon it.
When speaking of good governance, I am not
referring to a moralizing concept imposed by outsiders.
Nor am I pleading for a system by which good and bad
points are distributed in a senseless contest. What I
mean by good governance is effective governance. It is
about institution-building, about Governments capable
of producing tangible results for the benefit of the
people. It is about creating the proper conditions for
sustainable development. Of course, it is impossible to
turn failing States into perfectly governed States
overnight. But it is possible to gradually improve and
to relentlessly enhance the performance of
Governments.
In that context, I would like to encourage current
African efforts to redress poor governance, such as the
African Peer Review Mechanism of the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD). But I
am also thinking of concrete economic mechanisms
such as the Kimberley process. That mechanism has
proved to be quite efficient in containing the
smuggling of diamonds and in effectively limiting the
financing of conflicts in the continent. My country,
together with others, is currently studying the
possibility of introducing a similar system for the trade
in other raw materials.
Lasting and sustainable solutions to the
challenges at hand have to grow bottom-up, from the
inside, by empowering civil society and the emerging
political class fully to assume their newly recovered
responsibilities — bottom-up, not top-down; from the
inside, not the outside; and through empowerment, not
through tutelage. If that approach is to be successful,
we, the international community, must redirect our
attention from the abstract level of vague policy
recommendations to the concrete level of effective
implementation, in the field, for the benefit of the
people, whose fate is the ultimate object of our
concerns.
For any development to have a reasonable chance
of success, armed conflict must cease, the security of
people must be assured and the rule of law must be
guaranteed. Peace can be assured only when armies are
integrated, when the military personnel are decently
paid, when police forces are well organized and when
the judiciary is properly functioning.
I am convinced that the regional approach taken
by the Security Council when dealing with security
issues in a number of countries — such as Sudan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi — is
the right one. I commend the Council for its efforts and
refer in this respect to resolution 1625 (2005), as well
as to the resolution the Council will adopt today.
Long-term stability in Central Africa definitely
does require a regional approach. My vision for the
region is one of a growing pool of democratic countries
26
S/PV.5359
with inclusive Governments, stable institutions and a
functioning judiciary. I trust that the International
Conference for the Great Lakes Region, through its
action plan, will foster regional initiatives, including in
the field of development, in a focused way. I see a
stabilizing influence coming from regional economic
cooperation through a revitalized CEPGL — the
“Communauté Economique des Pays des Grands
Lacs” — which can be an instrument of integration
bringing the people of Congo, Rwanda and Burundi
closer together.
I think that, already at this stage, particular
attention should be given to the post-electoral period in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with a special
focus on good governance, development cooperation
and economic reconstruction. It is my personal opinion
that the new Peacebuilding Commission could play a
useful role in post-transition Congo.
I am very much encouraged by the smooth
transition and election process in Burundi, which opens
up prospects for lasting peace and stability not only in
Burundi itself but in the Great Lakes region in general.
In Burundi also, the Peacebuilding Commission may
be called upon to play a useful role.
Before concluding, I would like to stress the vital
contribution that countries of the region have made to
the restoration of peace and security in the Great Lakes
region. Some of those countries, such as Tanzania and
the Republic of the Congo, are currently members of
the Security Council. Others are not but play a role no
less crucial. Allow me to refer specifically to South
Africa and Angola. My country very much values its
cooperation with all these countries.
You can trust, Madam President, that we will
continue to work with all the countries of the region,
with all our partners in Africa and indeed with the
African Union itself, towards the establishment of
lasting peace in the region of the Great Lakes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Netherlands Special Envoy to the Great Lakes Region,
His Excellency Mr. Frederik Racké.
Mr. Racké (Netherlands): The Netherlands
delegation fully associates itself with the statement
made earlier by the Austrian presidency of the
European Union.
As Co-Chair of the Group of Friends of the Great
Lakes Region, the Netherlands has shown its strong
commitment to contribute and assist in promoting
regional and bilateral solutions to the conflicts that
have ravaged the region for so long. Therefore we have
gladly accepted the invitation of the United Republic
of Tanzania to participate in this open debate of the
Security Council and to add a few remarks of our own,
focusing on the achievements so far and challenges
still ahead.
But first of all, Madam President, let me join
other delegations in strongly condemning the attack
against the detachment of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) on 23 January 2006, which
resulted in the death of eight Guatemalan peacekeepers
and the severe wounding of five others. We offer our
sincere condolences to the victims’ families and to the
authorities of Guatemala. We commend the dedication
and courage of MONUC personnel.
The Netherlands Government very much
welcomes the initiative of the United Republic of
Tanzania for this important and timely open debate
emphasizing the continued involvement of the Security
Council with the Great Lakes region. I am particularly
pleased, Madam Minister, to see you presiding over
this meeting.
We saw some quite positive developments last
year. We can wholeheartedly congratulate the
Government of Burundi on the successful completion
of the transition and on the elections. Hopefully, they
will serve as an example for the electoral process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which so
successfully started with the referendum on the
18 December. Despite some delays, preparations for
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
now being carried out with great determination and the
necessary sense of urgency. Let us hope that the
democratic process there is irreversible.
In 2005 we also saw that the countries in the
region had actually aligned themselves in finding
diplomatic and peaceful solutions within the Tripartite
Commission, which has been so successfully facilitated
by the United States. We are pleased to see that
Burundi has joined this Tripartite — now being called
Tripartite Plus — mechanism. We urge that this
mechanism remain in force.
These are all important, positive developments
promoting peace and stability in the longer term.
Concerning the Great Lakes Conference, we still see
27
S/PV.5359
some challenges ahead. The Conference, we think, still
has to find a clear focus, and the postponement of the
Summit, which was envisaged to take place in
December last year in Nairobi, has affected the very
credibility of the Conference.
We call upon the countries of the region to
maintain and to show their commitment to the process
and make sure the momentum will not be lost as a
result of the postponement. We think that in the coming
months strong leadership is required, and in that
respect we count on the Tanzanian presidency of the
Conference. Some serious decisions will have to be
taken and difficult choices will have to be made. In line
with the proposals presented by the Tanzanian
Government, we support the idea of a permanent
regional mechanism to strengthen democracy, good
governance, the rule of law, the protection of human
rights and reconciliation.
We urge the countries of the region to honour
their commitments made in the Dar es-Salaam
Declaration of 2004 and to continue their collective
efforts in developing a subregional framework for
promoting and strengthening good relations, peaceful
coexistence and peaceful resolution of disputes. We
also urge the countries of the region to prepare
seriously for the second Summit, in Nairobi, which
should take place as soon as possible, and to adopt a
security, stability and development pact for the
countries of the Great Lakes region.
As far as peace and security is concerned, there
certainly are serious challenges still ahead. The tragic
events in the east of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo that I mentioned earlier have made clear that the
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) poses a threat to
regional peace and security, affecting the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement in Sudan and the transitional process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The recent briefing by the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, Jan Egeland,
highlighted once more the impact that the activities of
the LRA are having on the civilian populations of
northern Uganda, southern Sudan and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The international community
should assume its responsibility to address this threat
to regional security, which is combined with the
humanitarian crisis. In that respect, we hope that the
International Criminal Court’s arrest warrants
concerning five leaders of the LRA will be effectively
executed as soon as possible, also in the light of their
preventive impact on further atrocities.
We believe that the so-called core group of
countries already involved in the peace process should
develop a comprehensive strategy to end the conflict
and mobilize broader international support for a long-
term strategy, in support of and in cooperation with the
Government of Uganda. Furthermore, we believe the
worsening detrimental effects of the activities of the
Lord’s Resistance Army on regional peace and security
warrant attention by the Security Council. The
international involvement should focus on the political
process, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, return, reconstruction and development
and should also assist the Governments in the region to
address the security problems caused by the continued
presence of the Lord’s Resistance Army on their
territory.
The Netherlands will continue to remain fully
committed in its efforts to alleviate the tragic suffering
of the people and to promote the peaceful solution of
the conflict.
Mr. D’Alotto (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank you, Madam, and the delegation of
Tanzania for organizing this open debate on such an
important subject as peace, security and development
in the Great Lakes region of Africa.
Through the decades, that region has had to face
civil wars and conflicts among countries of the region
that have caused terrible suffering through grave
human rights violations, the internal displacement of
civilians and refugees, and the destruction of property
and national economies. Unfortunately, such facts have
been a historic constant for all those nations, especially
during their period of foundation.
The Great Lakes region has been no exception.
However, a democratically elected Government in
Burundi and progress in the transition towards
democratic elections in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are advances that encourage hope for a future of
peace, stability and progress for the region. Those
advances have been made possible by several
circumstances, including stronger and more decisive
collaboration among Governments of the subregion;
the efforts of the African Union and other multilateral
organs; the organization of such international
conferences as that on peace, security, democracy and
28
S/PV.5359
development in the Great Lakes region which took
place in Dar es-Salaam in November 2004; greater
cooperation in decision-making between the Security
Council and regional organizations; the tireless efforts
of peacekeeping missions in the region; the assistance
of donor countries; and the ongoing monitoring by
non-governmental organizations of human rights
violations committed by the parties to conflicts, as well
as of the need for humanitarian assistance. Equally
essential has been the will of the peoples of the region
to opt for democratic and inclusive solutions.
We do not believe that acts of the past must
inevitably be repeated in the future. Structural changes,
such as coordinated assistance in the creation of stable
institutions, the reconstruction and development
of countries during the post-conflict period — inter
alia, by the recently established Peacebuilding
Commission — and an end to impunity at the national
level for violators of human rights and humanitarian
law, or at the supranational level by the constitution of
international tribunals or by the action of the
International Criminal Court, may generate the
necessary incentives to reduce the recurrence of
conflicts in the region. Once a peace accord has been
reached, structural change may be an effective tool to
guarantee peace and stability.
In our opinion, the granting of amnesty for grave
violations of human rights as a strategy to end a
conflict has not had positive long-term results, since
the combating parties rarely put down their weapons,
while lasting peace cannot be reached without
reconciliation within society. Only by bringing to
justice all violators of human rights and international
humanitarian law will it be possible to end the culture
of impunity, thus promoting a solid starting point for
long-term stability for the countries of the region.
Argentina is committed to the defence of those
values and principles and therefore supports the draft
resolution prepared by the Tanzanian delegation.
Finally, and in accordance with the Secretary-
General’s recommendations in his report, my
delegation reiterates here its message of support for the
timely convening of the second International
Conference on Peace, Security, Democracy and
Development in the Great Lakes Region of Africa, to
be held in Nairobi, Kenya, with a view to adopting a
pact on security, stability and development to ensure a
future of peace and sustained progress in the region.
Mr. Oshima (Japan): My delegation wishes to
thank you, Madam, and the delegation of Tanzania for
your timely initiative of convening this debate and
especially appreciates the fact that you are presiding
over it. We recall the significant achievements to date,
including the Dar es-Salaam Declaration adopted at the
first summit of the Great Lakes Conference in 2004, in
which Japan participated. We are pleased that, through
the processes following the Conference, a framework
has been established and gradually strengthened to
effectively address the key challenges facing the
countries of the Great Lakes region. Today’s meeting is
particularly timely in order to accelerate the
momentum towards further concrete outcomes.
In its resolutions 1625 (2205) and 1631 (2005),
the Security Council has provided guidance regarding
conflict prevention in Africa and cooperation with
regional organizations in dealing with conflicts.
Today’s meeting provides an important opportunity to
discuss the implementation of those resolutions in the
specific context of a region rife with conflicts, but also
holding the promise of the resolution of conflict and
peacebuilding.
In this debate, I would like to focus on the issues
of armed groups, the framework for regional
cooperation and Japan’s efforts for the region.
We commend the encouraging progress made in
the peace processes in Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I would like to convey our
sincere appreciation to Foreign Minister Batumubwira
of Burundi and Foreign Minister Ramazani Baya of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, who spoke earlier,
for the efforts of their respective Governments. At the
same time, we commend the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) and the United Nations
Operation in Burundi for their valuable support to the
two countries.
However, armed groups continue to pose a
serious threat to security and the nascent democratic
processes in the form of the continuing resistance of
the Forces nationales de libération in Burundi and
foreign armed groups and local militias in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The recent tragic
incident in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which involved the killing of MONUC peacekeepers
by suspected Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) soldiers,
and the attacks launched by rebels in the North Kivu
29
S/PV.5359
region show yet again how dangerously fragile the
situation remains.
The threat posed by armed groups is not confined
within the borders of one country, but is already
regional in dimension and as such is fast becoming
more potent. That makes it imperative that, if it is to be
effective in dealing with those armed groups, greater
cooperation among the countries in the region be put in
place. For example, while MONUC is providing
assistance to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
implementing the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation of armed combatants, the
cooperation of neighbouring Rwanda and Burundi in
tackling that issue is also critically important. To deal
effectively with the menace posed by the LRA, there
should be closer cooperation among the countries in
which that group is operating actively.
In addition, in the context of the LRA issue, we
hope that the Government of Uganda will further
strengthen its efforts to improve the security and
humanitarian situation in the northern part of the
country.
While the issue of armed groups is serious and
requires urgent measures, there are other equally
pressing problems for which cooperation among the
countries in the Great Lakes region must also be
strengthened. Thus, the countries of the region are
expected to intensify their own efforts to build mutual
confidence, which will enable them to address issues of
common interest by expanding the framework of
cooperation in the humanitarian areas, such as the
return of refugees and in the management and control
of natural resources.
Japan’s approach to cooperation with African
States in matters of conflict resolution and
peacebuilding, as well as in development cooperation,
is to respect and encourage ownership of the process
and the outcomes by the African countries themselves.
Where there is a lack of such ownership, there is little
chance of a reliable and sustainable outcome.
It is our belief that this principle of ownership
should apply not only to the efforts of individual States
but also to cooperative regional efforts. The
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region is
a forum that should foster this sense of both individual
and regional ownership in resolving problems and
promoting mutual confidence and regional resiliency.
We expect that the members of the core group of the
Conference will work for peace, the consolidation of
peace, peacebuilding and development in the region, in
cooperation with, and with the support of, the Group of
Friends, which includes international partners, United
Nations agencies and the African Union.
Japan’s key framework of cooperation with
Africa is the well established Tokyo International
Conference on African Development (TICAD), which
we have been conducting for more than a decade. A
fourth full-fledged TICAD conference is to be held in
2008. Through this process we have identified three
pillars for development cooperation with Africa: first,
human-centred development; secondly, poverty
reduction through economic growth; and thirdly,
consolidation of peace efforts. Within that framework,
my Government has implemented assistance for the
Great Lakes region in the areas of elections, food,
refugees, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) and community development, and
it intends to continue its assistance efforts. In addition,
within the TICAD framework, my Government will
shortly be hosting a conference in Addis Ababa, on
16 and 17 February, on the topic of consolidation of
peace in Africa, focusing on issues such as DDR, small
arms, security-sector reform, governance and recovery.
At that conference we will share experiences gained on
these issues elsewhere and examine ways of assisting
African countries in addressing these questions. It is
our hope that many leaders and interested individuals
and organizations from Africa and outside Africa will
participate and that the exercise will serve also as a
useful contribution to building momentum towards the
next International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our hope
for the early convening of the second International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region. We also look
forward to the efforts of the countries of the region to
move the process forward through the exercise of their
ownership, with the support and assistance of the
United Nations and the international donor community.
Japan will be pleased to continue to be associated with
this important conference process.
Finally, I thank the delegation of Tanzania for its
work in finalizing a draft resolution on this matter
(S/2006/51), which we fully support.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom):
Madam President, your presence honours the Council
30
S/PV.5359
and testifies to Tanzania’s commitment to security,
peace and development in the Great Lakes region.
I should like to associate the United Kingdom
fully with the statement delivered earlier in this debate
by my Austrian colleague on behalf of the current
presidency of the European Union.
I should also like to convey the sincere
condolences of the British Government to the families
of the Guatemalan peacekeepers killed in action on
23 January. We wish those who were injured a speedy
and full recovery and express our admiration and
gratitude to the Government and the people of
Guatemala for the service, in most difficult
circumstances, that their armed forces are performing
on behalf of the United Nations and in the pursuit of
peace and stability for the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Those responsible for the
peacekeepers’ deaths must be tracked down and
brought to justice.
The brutality and chaos that illegal armed groups
such as the Lord’s Resistance Army, the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda and the Forces
nationales de liberation have inflicted on innocent
civilians in the Great Lakes region must be stopped.
We strongly support the robust role being played by the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo in support
of the Congolese armed forces in operations against
those armed groups.
Military operations need to be accompanied by
close cooperation among the Governments concerned
to cope with armed groups, which respect no borders.
We urge those Governments to work together, and to
work with the United Nations, to take the steps
necessary to better protect their own civilians,
including by disarming the militias, by bringing those
responsible for violence and human rights abuses to
justice and by improving border security to prevent the
illegal flow of the arms and natural resources that are
the lifeblood of those armed groups.
The international community has an important
supportive part to play. The British Government is
fully committed to working with the Governments of
the region towards long-term peace and stability in the
Great Lakes region. Bilaterally and through the
European Union, we are providing assistance for
humanitarian relief and security-sector reform, and in
those areas where peace has taken root we are
providing support for social and economic
development.
The international community can also help to
neutralize the activities of the armed groups by
enforcing the Democratic Republic of the Congo arms
embargo and the targeted measures imposed on those
that violate the embargo. We look forward, therefore,
to the integrated and comprehensive strategy that the
Secretary-General has been asked to prepare, in
consultation with the Governments concerned and with
other key stakeholders, on all aspects of resolving the
issue of illegal armed groups in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
The deaths of the Guatemalan peacekeepers have
tragically highlighted the devastating influence that the
Lord’s Resistance Army continues to have on the Great
Lakes region. Its activities illustrate the
interconnectedness of the problem: a brutal insurgency
launched in one country spreads across borders and
infects two neighbouring countries. In each case,
countless innocent civilians are killed, abducted or
displaced: there are 1.2 million displaced persons
today. It is right that we, the international community,
should do whatever we can to help the Governments
concerned — the Government of Uganda, but also the
Governments of the Sudan and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo — to protect their civilians and
to deal with a threat that is undermining regional peace
and security. The United Nations missions in the region
and entities such as the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs have an important role to play, a
role which we believe should be reinforced: first by
identifying ways in which the international community
can assist, and secondly by providing that assistance
wherever possible. We therefore welcome the request
to the Secretary-General in the draft resolution
(S/2006/51) to be adopted at the end of this meeting to
make recommendations to the Security Council in that
regard.
Dealing with the activities of illegal armed
groups is one challenge to the transition process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. There are, of
course, others. The positive results of the constitutional
referendum in December declared and showed the
desire of the Congolese people to complete the
transition to full democratic government. We urge the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to rise to the expectations of its people, to maintain the
31
S/PV.5359
momentum of the political process and to ensure that
the envisaged timetable for elections before 30 June
2006 can be met. In parallel, faster progress is needed
to reform the security sector and to bring an end to
corruption and impunity. The international community
stands ready to assist.
Today is also an occasion to salute the
achievement of the Burundian people in successfully
completing their transition. We stand ready to support
the new Government of Burundi as it establishes itself
and develops its policies. Our shared interests are best
served, we believe, if the disengagement and
drawdown of the United Nations Operation in Burundi
(ONUB) are gradual. We welcome the detailed work
that is being done on that by ONUB in consultation
with the Government of Burundi, and we recommend
drawing on experience gained, for example, in the
successful transitions under way, and being achieved,
in East Timor and Sierra Leone.
Finally, we note the relevance to today’s
discussion of the recently established Peacebuilding
Commission, and we salute the central role that
Tanzania and Denmark both played in the
establishment of the Commission and that they will
both play as founding members of the Peacebuilding
Commission, selected by the Security Council. The
Commission will have an important role to play in
providing advice on how States in the Great Lakes
region and beyond can complete the transition from
peacekeeping to sustainable reconstruction, institution-
building, the rule of law and development.
We very much welcome the text of the draft
resolution, which the United Kingdom will be proud to
support.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. I
intend, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

United Nations S/PV.5359(Resumption 1)
Security Council
Sixty-first year
5359thmeeting
Friday, 27 January 2006, 3 p.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.
06-22618 (E)
*0622618*
President: Ms. Migiro/Mr. Mahiga . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (United Republic of Tanzania)
Members: Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. García Moritán
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wang Guangya
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Adada
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Jespersen
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. De La Sablière
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Nana Effah-Apenteng
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Vassilakis
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Kawakami
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. De Rivero
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Al-Mahmoud
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Sitnikov
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Burian
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . Mr. Johnston
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Yamamoto
Agenda
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Peace, security and development in the Great Lakes region
Letter dated 18 January 2006 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Republic of Tanzania to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2006/27)
2
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all participants
of the appeals made to them this morning to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I give the floor to Her Excellency Mrs. Anne
Leahy, Ambassador of Canada for the Great Lakes
region.
Mrs. Leahy (Canada) (spoke in French): I should
like first of all, on behalf of Canada, to convey our
condolences to the Government of Guatemala and to
the families of the victims following the deaths on
23 January in the Democratic Republic of Congo of
eight Guatemalan military personnel with the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC).
I thank Tanzania for having taken the initiative to
invite the Security Council, which regularly considers
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and in Burundi, to hold a debate on the regional
environment in the Great Lakes region.
This is a timely debate. The process of political
transition in both Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has reached a significant stage
thanks to the determination of the Burundian and the
Congolese peoples and the support of the international
community. The electoral process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must be concluded. Not only is
a successful electoral outcome in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo crucial for the citizens and
political institutions of that country, but it would also
contribute to the stability of the region.
We believe that those national achievements will
be consolidated only if the leaders of those countries
and of neighbouring States normalize their relations
and work together to eliminate the root causes of
recurring conflict. To that end, leaders of 11 countries
are negotiating a Security, Stability and Development
Pact in the context of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region. In itself, that Conference is a
confidence-building measure. It has already helped
obtain a greater convergence of views on aspects such
as the draft protocol on non-aggression, mutual
defence and the peaceful resolution of conflicts. The
Conference is the only forum in which countries of
three African subregions can deal in an integrated way
with the linkages between conflict, the exploitation of
natural resources, governance and development. It also
provides for the participation of civil society.
Canada urges the countries of the Conference to
finalize the proposed Pact and to hold the second
Summit as early as possible. We look forward to
learning about the priority commitments that they will
be undertaking to bring about peace in the core of the
region and about how they intend to ensure follow-up.
We draw the Council’s attention to resolution
1625 (2005), which requests the Secretary-General to
implement measures agreed by the concerned countries
in addressing the root causes of armed conflict, which
is what they are doing in the context of the
International Conference for the Great Lakes Region.
For those reasons, as a partner and as co-chair of
the Group of Friends of the Great Lakes Region,
Canada calls on the United Nations to continue its
support, in partnership with the African Union, to
enable the Conference to successfully conclude its
work.
This debate is essentially an appeal to the leaders
of countries to fulfil their responsibility to protect their
populations, as hundreds of thousands of people are
suffering as a result of situations of conflict and
insecurity. At the 2005 world summit, our leaders made
a firm commitment to implement the principles of the
responsibility to protect, through the Security Council.
Not only do the leaders of the countries of the
Great Lakes region bear the responsibility for ensuring
lasting peace in their region, but they must shoulder
that responsibility with respect to people who were
victims of the two worst humanitarian crises in the
world, which have been ongoing for a decade in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and in northern Uganda. We believe it is essential that
the draft resolution recognize that responsibility.
Moreover, we underline the importance of the
responsibility to ensure the security and access of
humanitarian personnel and assistance to vulnerable
persons.
During the open Security Council debate on
9 December 2005, we had the opportunity to revisit the
issue of the physical and legal protection of civilians.
We emphasized that it was important that the Council
ensure that that issue remain a top priority in its
decisions and actions.
3
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
We therefore fully support the reference made in
the draft resolution to the provisions of resolution 1649
(2005) aimed at putting an end to the activities of the
militias and foreign armed groups in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo — the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda, the former
Interahamwe, the Forces nationales de libération and
others — which continue to destabilize the heart of the
region.
(spoke in English)
We commend the efforts made by the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Operation
in Burundi and the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan, and we encourage the Secretary-General to find
ways for United Nations missions to further support
Governments in protecting their citizens.
We again draw to the Council’s attention the
atrocities perpetrated by the Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA) in northern Uganda. The LRA is a tragedy for
Ugandans — particularly women and children at
risk — and is hindering United Nations missions in the
region. Once more we call on the Council to include on
its agenda the situation in northern Uganda and to
examine the possibility of adopting a resolution dealing
with the destabilization caused by the LRA in the
region.
We know that there can be no peace without
justice in the region and that there can be no justice
without reconciliation. We acknowledge and support
the efforts in various quarters to put an end, through
political negotiation, to the many intolerable situations
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi, the
Sudan and northern Uganda.
As for the challenges facing the Sudan, and in
view of the impunity with which the militias are still
carrying out their activities in the Darfur region, we
urge the Council to ensure the implementation of the
measures it has taken with regard to war crimes and
crimes against humanity, including the monitoring and
implementing of its resolutions.
Because atrocities, sexual aggression and sexual
violence persist, justice also requires an end to the
impunity with which perpetrators violate human rights
and humanitarian law. To that end, we strongly support
efforts to build independent and reliable national
judicial institutions, and we call upon each country in
the region to cooperate with and support the
International Criminal Court in its investigations of
crimes against humanity.
In its resolution 1265 (1999), the Council
committed itself to responding to situations where
civilians were being targeted or where assistance to
them was deliberately obstructed. Our delegation
firmly believes that the Council must be timely in its
engagement and vigilant in its monitoring and that it
must have the political will to draw upon the full range
of measures at its disposal in support of civilian
protection.
(spoke in French)
The demographic and physical aspects of the
region, as well as decades of population displacement,
are challenges that can be overcome only by joint and
sustained efforts on the part of the region’s leaders and
help from the international community. We believe that
the appropriate regional and subregional bodies, in
conjunction with the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, must work much more closely
together on priority projects aimed at, inter alia,
facilitating the reintegration of young people into
productive life, recognizing the right of displaced
persons to property and establishing infrastructure.
We reiterate the Council’s demand, in resolution
1649 (2005), that all States neighbouring the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as the
Government of National Unity and Transition, impede
any kind of support to the illegal exploitation of
Congolese natural resources, particularly by preventing
the flow of such resources through their respective
territories.
We welcome the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission at the world summit. We
believe that the Commission could focus its attention
not only on countries, but also on their regional
dimension. Furthermore, we believe that this is an
opportunity for the Security Council to follow up on
resolution 1631 (2005) by inviting the African Union
to cooperate with the Peacebuilding Commission on
this issue, thus reinforcing the partnership between the
United Nations and the Union.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Antoinette Batumubwira, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of
Burundi.
4
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
Ms. Batumubwira (Burundi) (spoke in French):
I am pleased to address the Security Council for the
second time in two months. I should like to take this
opportunity, Madam President, to wish you, on behalf
of the Government of Burundi and of my delegation
and on my own behalf, our best wishes for 2006.
I should also like to reiterate our gratitude to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and to the Security
Council for their tireless commitment to the cause of
peace and security throughout the world and in
particular to assisting Burundi in its quest for peace
and reconciliation. My thanks go also to the United
Republic of Tanzania, which took the positive initiative
of holding this meeting after having hosted the first
Summit of Heads of State and Government of the Great
Lakes region.
In addition, I should like to join previous
speakers in expressing my condolences to the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), the Government of
Guatemala and the families of the Blue Helmets who
lost their lives in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. It is also appropriate to ask those gathered
here to think about the many victims of the tragedies
that have taken place and are still taking place in this
region.
In recent years, the Great Lakes region, to which
my country belongs, has been marked by massive
violations of the right to life and periods of paralysis
and unacceptable reverses following promises of
democratic progress. That is why this United Nations
meeting on the Great Lakes region of Africa is so
important, because it is being held at a time when a
number of countries “on the ground” have been making
undeniable progress and laying the foundations for
peace and democracy after years of tragedies and
transitional processes. Indeed, those countries —
which yesterday were in conflict and today are in
transition, emerging from conflict or even
peacebuilding — deserved substantial consultations
with the international community with a view to
appropriate support measures.
With the adoption of resolutions 1291 (2000) of
24 February 2000 and 1304 (2000) of 16 June 2000,
the Security Council has played a crucial role — which
my delegations welcomes — in organizing the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
under the auspices of the United Nations and the
African Union. Those efforts culminated in the first
Summit of Heads of State and Government of the
region, on 19 and 20 November 2004, which concluded
with the signature, in the presence of witnesses from
the region and international partners, of the Dar es-
Salaam Declaration on Peace, Security, Democracy and
Development in the Great Lakes Region.
As a result of the Dar es-Salaam Declaration, we
can say that, after having studied the major issues, the
countries of the region have now agreed on a number
of common principles, protocols and priority action
plans that they have defined and that they are
committed to following in the common interests of
peace, security, democracy and development in the
Great Lakes region.
Having accomplished their part of the task, they
ask that the international community declare the region
a specific zone for reconstruction and development,
provided with a special reconstruction fund.
Accordingly, we should consider Zone 1 — including
Burundi, Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo — which has been the source of the
interconnected conflicts of the Great Lakes region, as a
priority within that specific zone. Until zone 1 is safe
and stable, particularly in the eastern region of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, everything that has
been rebuilt will remain in jeopardy, and the hoped-for
results will not be achieved.
Following 12 years of conflict, five months ago
Burundi proudly took its place once again within the
international community, as a result of a long process
of negotiations and transitions and following six
elections. For us, this is not an end but only one stage
of a lengthy process.
The welcome given by the international
community to the significant progress made by
Burundi is encouraging. I wish to assure the Council of
our commitment to maintaining this momentum and to
strengthening our resolve to consolidate the peace that
has been restored and the exercise of democracy.
We in Burundi are mindful of the fact that we
must urgently take up the tremendous challenges of
reconstruction and development. Indeed, our
institutions — democratically elected in a bottom-up
process — will be judged on the basis of whether they
can meet the minimum, fully legitimate socio-
economic needs of the people of Burundi and achieve
ongoing progress, with every day bringing greater
5
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
peace, stability and prosperity. Indeed, democracy must
lead to socio-economic progress.
Twelve years of lethal conflict and instability
have taken a heavy toll in human life and have resulted
in the displacement of numerous people within the
country and in many refugee flows outside the country,
generalized poverty — the current rate is 68 per
cent — and the destruction and degradation of the
socio-economic infrastructure. The destructive effects
of conflict can be seen in particular in the health and
education infrastructures; in the area of housing and of
the ecosystem; in food insecurity, which is exacerbated
by weather conditions in some parts of the country; the
spread of the HIV/AIDS pandemic; and the crushing
debt load for Burundi, which is now the fourth-least-
developed country in the world — and those are just
some of the issues.
Along these lines, in order to allow the
international community to help us in our efforts to
coordinate and mobilize resources, a programme of
action based on the Millennium Development Goals
will be made available. Initially, a donors conference
will be held on 28 February 2006, on an emergency
basis, which will allow us to take action very swiftly
and implement quick-impact projects to benefit a
population that has very urgent needs. After that, a
roundtable of donors is scheduled for the end of
September 2006, based on the strategic framework to
combat poverty — a document which will soon be
completed.
We are hopeful that these two forums will yield
concrete results. Our hope and our optimism with
respect to international support that is geared to our
specific needs in terms of stepping up reconstruction
and growth, economic recovery and post-conflict
development are based not only on our own success but
also on the commitment of our traditional partners and
of all of those who are working to ensure that our
shared values prevail and who, throughout the world,
understand our insistence on the existence of
interactive linkages between peace, democracy,
stability and development.
On 20 December 2005, the Security Council,
together with the General Assembly, established the
Peacebuilding Commission, which we welcome. This
is for us a very encouraging sign of the will of the
international community to promote, on a priority
basis, greater solidarity and international cooperation
leading to a substantial increase in levels of assistance
to countries emerging from conflict.
That intergovernmental advisory body — which
represents a very positive development — will find in
Burundi an operational framework managed by a
national coordinating committee for assistance,
established by the Government on 12 December 2005,
which is working in concert with our development
partners.
In November 2005, I gave a generally positive
picture of the security situation in Burundi. Reforms in
the areas of defence and security, and particularly the
integration within the Burundi National Defence Force
and national police of the former armed forces of
Burundi and of the six former armed movements that
signed ceasefire agreements with the Government,
have taken place to the satisfaction of the two parties,
and the two entities are already up and running.
Against the backdrop of the upcoming
establishment of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, we have been freeing political prisoners,
in keeping with the recommendations of the Arusha
Agreement. In the area of good governance, an anti-
corruption law has been adopted by the National
Assembly.
With respect to the question of the Palipehutu-
Forces Nationales de Libération (Palipehutu-FNL),
which continues to send mixed messages while
remaining intransigent and maintaining its alliance
with the Forces Démocratiques de Libération du
Rwanda (FDLR) in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, a resolution of the problem will
require robust measures. That is also the view of the
Tripartite Plus Joint Commission, as set out in the
letter dated 21 October 2005 addressed to the Council
and in resolution 1649 (2005) of 21 December 2005,
which requires, among other things, the establishment
of a consistent overall strategy for the disarmament,
repatriation and reintegration of foreign combatants
operating in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
We are pleased to inform the Council that
Palipehutu combatants are surrendering to the
Burundian authorities within the country and to the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to be
repatriated, proof of the isolation of that group, against
whose leadership sanctions have been imposed.
6
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
The Great Lakes region is working actively to
become an area of lasting peace and security, of
political and social stability, and of shared growth and
development. The leaders of the countries concerned
have individually and collectively made a commitment
in that respect. Burundi would like to reiterate its
determination to ensure the successful outcome of the
international conference process in the Great Lakes. In
so doing, we would like to be assured of ongoing
support from the United Nations, the Security Council
and the Group of Friends, to which we would like once
again to convey our appreciation for the considerable
assistance it has provided since the beginning of the
process.
The President: I give the floor to Mr. Georges
Rebelo Chicoti, Deputy Minister for External Relations
of Angola.
Mr. Chicoti (Angola): Madam President, I would
like to congratulate Tanzania on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of January and
to express satisfaction at the attention devoted to
Africa. This is in the best tradition of Tanzania’s
dedication to the most worthy causes of our continent.
May I also commend Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, for the key role that he and his team are
playing in the implementation of the Great Lakes
agenda.
During Angola’s two-year term as a non-
permanent member of the Security Council, this body,
as well as the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, held meetings on
the same issue.
My delegation is therefore very appreciative to
you, Madam President, for keeping alive the interest of
the Security Council, and, through it, the interest of
international community in the problems affecting this
important region.
This is also the right place to thank the
international Community in general and in particular
the members of the Group of Friends of the Great
Lakes region for their moral and material support to the
Conference. We therefore appeal for the continuation
of this support.
The holding of the first Summit Conference and
the adoption of the Dar es-Salaam Declaration
constitute a turning point in the history of the region.
The full participation in the Conference of all States
concerned is a clear demonstration of the regional
dimension of the problem and also an expression of the
capacity of our peoples to overcome differences when
vital common interests are at stake.
The Great Lakes region, considered in the past as
a disastrous and conflict-ridden area, is gearing up for
an overdue revival that has brought hope back to our
peoples.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo held a
constitutional referendum successfully — an important
step towards the consolidation of the transitional
arrangements before the forthcoming elections.
In neighbouring Burundi, the holding of
presidential elections in August 2005 ended the
transitional period and opened a new era of national
reconciliation and economic recovery. In the Central
African Republic, constitutional order has been
restored. The United Republic of Tanzania has held
successful general elections, while Angola, Zambia and
Uganda are preparing for elections. The peace process
in the Sudan is under way, in spite of the instability in
Darfur, the consequences of which should be
adequately addressed. Those are clear signs of the
commitment of the countries of the region to reach
peace, democracy and development, in conformity with
the goals of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes.
My delegation is deeply concerned, however, by
the continuation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo of atrocities committed by criminal groups
responsible for hundreds of summary executions,
rapes, beatings and hostage-taking of civilians. The
national army of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo have taken
action against those criminal groups. We commend that
action. In our view, it represents a sound lesson for the
concept of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
it gives a clear indication of the measures to be taken
against criminal groups that choose to challenge the
international community and the will of a nation to live
in peace.
The sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must be respected
and preserved. In that regard, I want to reiterate the
commitment of my Government to continue to train the
7
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
Congolese national army, together with other partners,
particularly Belgium and South Africa.
In my own country, in the three and a half years
of peace and the post-conflict era that we have
experienced, the strategic priorities of the Government
of Unity and National Reconciliation have been
directed towards the social and productive
reintegration of demobilized soldiers and people
displaced during the war, towards improving the
delivery of basic social services to people throughout
the country, and towards macroeconomic stabilization.
As a result of those efforts, the climate of tolerance and
democratic cordiality between the political parties has
been re-established and the country is rapidly
proceeding with the organization of free, fair and
transparent elections following the approval by the
National Assembly of the electoral package in July
2005 and the establishment of the National Electoral
Commission.
In the economic and social fields, considerable
improvements have been achieved. Since the end of the
conflict, the share of the budget allocated to the social
sector has increased from 12 per cent to 60 per cent.
That has enabled, among other actions, the
reintegration of four million displaced people in their
areas of origin or choice, while we continue with the
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme. Angola needs the
support of the international community in order to
improve its landmine clearing programme and the
rehabilitation and reconstruction of economic
infrastructures destroyed during the war.
Angola is committed to sharing its experiences of
post-conflict recovery and to contributing to the
materialization of the main objectives of the
International Conference on Peace, Security,
Democracy and Development in the Great Lakes
Region.
In that connection, in September 2005 the
Republic of Angola hosted in Luanda the meeting of
the Regional Preparatory Committee of the Conference
on the Great Lakes region. The Luanda meeting dealt
with such issues as the joint security management of
common borders, combating transnational crime and
terrorism, the development of border zones and human
security, as well as non-aggression and mutual defence.
The deployment of four United Nations missions
in States members of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes — Burundi, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the Central African Republic and the
Sudan — should be duly used to address the cross-
border issues and other challenges, including
monitoring of the arms embargo in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
By working out a protocol against the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, the members of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes region
have shown that they are committed to dealing with
that crucial issue. However, the efforts of the region
should be complemented by the implementation of the
relevant provisions of Security Council resolution 1625
(2005), in particular those regarding the illegal
exploitation of and trafficking in natural resources and
high-value commodities.
In our view, finding long-lasting solutions to
African conflicts is also a development challenge,
considering the devastating impact of conflict on
development. That should also be the approach of the
international community towards the problems
affecting the region.
Bearing that reality in mind, the countries of the
Great Lakes Conference are in the process of
negotiating an important legal framework to promote
development, including a protocol on a specific
reconstruction and development zone, as well as a
special fund for the reconstruction and development of
the Great Lakes region.
The adoption of Security Council resolution 1631
(2005) opened a new era of cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and regional
organizations. The African Union and subregional
organizations may play their role if an effective
response is given to the problems of the lack of
resources and of how to make partnerships between the
two mechanisms as efficient as possible. Useful lessons
on the negative impact of the lack of resources should
therefore be drawn from the deployment of the African
Union’s missions in Burundi and the Sudanese region
of Darfur, while reflecting on the improvement in
cooperation between the Security Council and regional
organizations.
Before I conclude, allow me to stress that the
coordinated conduct of the process of the International
Conference on Peace, Security, Democracy and
Development in the Great Lakes Region by the United
Nations and the African Union offers a good example
8
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
of cooperation and coordination between the two
organizations.
For my delegation, the newly established
Peacebuilding Commission should also benefit from
the experience and expertise developed in the Great
Lakes process.
Finally, my delegation expresses its full support
for the draft resolution before us.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zimbabwe, His
Excellency Mr. Simbarashe Mumbengegwi.
Mr. Mumbengegwi (Zimbabwe): I am delighted
to see you, my sister and dear colleague, presiding over
this important meeting as President of the Security
Council for this month. I note with appreciation that,
barely a month after the successful elections in your
great country and your subsequent appointment as
Minister for Foreign Affairs, you have managed to
redraw the attention of this body to the issue of the
Great Lakes region. In doing so, you have redirected
this principal organ of the United Nations to focus on
its core business of the maintenance of international
peace and security.
It is fortuitous that the question of peace and
security in the Great Lakes region is being considered
under the presidency of the United Republic of
Tanzania, a country that, for decades, has borne the
brunt of hosting thousands of refugees from the region
and beyond. Your country was also home to our
liberation movements in the southern African region.
We salute the gallant, hospitable and generous people
of Tanzania. It was therefore logical that
Dar es-Salaam, the haven of peace, was the venue of
the first International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region in November 2004, which was held under the
auspices of the United Nations and the African Union.
Let me indicate here that the Great Lakes region
is the linchpin for the attainment of lasting peace and
stability in many parts of Africa. Conflicts in that
region could impact negatively on countries in other
regions and hamper efforts towards the common goals
of development and regional integration. Zimbabwe is
closely linked to the Great Lakes region through
common membership in regional organizations, such as
the Southern Africa Development Community and the
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa. It is
in that light that we value the resolution of conflict in
the Great Lakes that this debate seeks to promote.
The success of any peace process rests on the
political commitment made by the leaders of the
countries concerned, and that in turn is demonstrated
by integrity, transparency and the ability to trust and be
trusted, each by the other. However, the attainment of
enduring peace takes more than just political
commitment. It requires that the root causes of conflict
in the region, which have long been identified as lack
of development in all its aspects, be addressed. That is
where the international community has a big role to
play.
The first International Conference on Peace,
Security, Democracy and Development in the Great
Lakes Region showed that the international community
was coming to grips with the Great Lakes problem.
The Dar es-Salaam Declaration clearly indicated the
direction the peace process must take and how the
international community can strengthen it. Let me
recognize here the role that the African Union has
played and continues to play in that process. Indeed, it
is only natural that the African Union, through its
Peace and Security Council, should take the lead in
efforts to seek a lasting solution to problems in the
Great lakes region. While welcoming the progress that
has so far been made towards the consolidation of
peace and stability in the region, we are cognizant of
the fact that Africa falls short on the resources
necessary to put in place mechanisms to ensure lasting
peace in conflict areas. We therefore welcome the
continued efforts of the United Nations and the
international community to support the peace process
and post-conflict reconstruction in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Burundi and Rwanda.
With regard to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, there is an urgent need to assist the
Government in order to enable it to hold free, fair and
transparent elections following the successful
referendum on the constitution. Resources are needed
in order to continue to improve the institutional and
infrastructural capacities of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. While violence in the country has
declined in the past year, the need to further create a
stable and peaceful environment, both for the holding
of elections and for the return of refugees and
displaced persons, remains paramount. The United
9
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo requires the continued support
and mandate of the Security Council to enable it to get
on top of the situation and to disband all militias and
rebels based in the country.
The newly elected Government in Burundi needs
to be supported through a visible, predictable and
concerted international effort aimed at instituting a
credible reconstruction effort to lay the basis for
sustainable development.
The attainment of lasting peace in the Great
Lakes region goes beyond the provision of
humanitarian assistance. In our view, the newly created
Peacebuilding Commission should be the leading
United Nations organ to address the challenges in the
Great Lakes region and elsewhere. It has its work cut
out for it with regard to the countries of the Great
Lakes, and its success or failure may be judged by its
ability to address those and other challenges in Africa,
as well as similar situations in other parts of the world.
Let me conclude by calling on the United Nations
to facilitate the holding of a second Great Lakes
summit with a view to identifying ways to implement
the Declaration of the first International Conference on
the region. We need to focus on practical aspects of
cooperation between the United Nations system and the
African Union’s Peace and Security Council. It is our
belief that the inter-agency coordination of the United
Nations system needs to be enhanced to spearhead
post-conflict reconstruction for the long-term stability
of the Great Lakes region.
Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): Let me first
express my delegation’s delight in seeing you, Madam,
preside over the Council’s deliberations. We commend
your delegation for organizing this timely debate on
the Great Lakes region of Africa during your
presidency.
My delegation would also like to welcome the
various ministers of foreign affairs who have graced
this meeting with their presence.
For more than a decade, the Great Lakes region
has been in profound turmoil. Through a game of
shifting alliances, and because of geographical
proximity in an area with porous borders, conflicts
have tended to merge, thus giving rise to a huge zone
of instability. That vast and resource-rich region has
been the theatre of widespread conflicts that have
brought death and destruction, displacement and great
suffering to its inhabitants.
The Security Council has rallied the support of
the international community in responding to the grave
challenges posed by those disastrous conflicts. Apart
from undertaking various field tours in the area, the
Council has mandated the stationing of thousands of
United Nations personnel, including peacekeepers, who
have not only saved lives but also alleviated the
suffering of many displaced persons, including the
most vulnerable segments of the population, especially
women and children.
My delegation remains convinced that the desired
breakthrough for peace can be attained in the Great
Lakes region, as it was in Sierra Leone and Liberia,
after 15 agonizing years of seemingly intractable
conflicts.
Now more than ever, sustainable peace seems
very much within reach. Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have taken their first brave
steps towards a new era of democratic governance and
enduring stability. We also consider as a decisive
turning point in the peace process the First Summit of
Heads of State and Government held in December
2004 in Tanzania, the most important outcome of
which was the Dar es-Salaam Declaration of Principles
on Peace, Security, Democracy and Development in the
Great Lakes Region. The declaration is a bold attempt
to tackle head on the issues that clearly constitute the
foundation for lasting stability and sustainable
development in the region.
It is on the basis of an agreement between the
concerned parties, within this broad framework, that
we can hope to resolve the threats posed by the
continuing presence and activities of the foreign armed
groups and militias, such as the Forces Démocratique
de Libération du Rwanda (FDLR), the Palipehutu-
Forces Nationales de Libération (FNL) and the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA), and bring an end to the
atrocities committed against the local population and
attacks against United Nation personnel and
humanitarian workers. The recent clashes between
suspected elements of the LRA and United Nations
peacekeepers in the eastern part of the Democratic
republic of the Congo, which resulted in the death of
eight Guatemalan soldiers and serious injuries to five
others, serve to underscore the imperative need for
forceful action to counteract the group’s outrageous
10
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
and violent conduct, which continues to pose a threat
to peace, security and stability in the whole region.
The Governments of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Rwanda are to be commended for their
very constructive engagement with the militias, leading
to the peaceful repatriation of some FDLR members to
Rwanda. We also support the ongoing political and
military pressure being exerted on such forces through
joint operations by the Congolese Government and the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). In the
same vein, we welcome the initiatives of the Tripartite
Plus Joint Commission, comprising Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and
Uganda, to increase dialogue among the countries in
the region.
It is evident from the outcome of the first Summit
that only a comprehensive and integrated strategy,
drawn up in a transparent way and with the
participation of all the relevant stakeholders, would
provide the best tonic for a durable solution to the
myriad problems and conflicts that have bedeviled the
region. We therefore endorse the Secretary-General’s
plea to the Security Council to convey a strong
message of support for the International Conference on
the Great Lakes region and to urge the parties to renew
their commitment to respect both the spirit and letter of
the Dar es-Salaam Declaration and to make every
effort to hold the Nairobi Summit and sign the
Security, Stability and Development Pact.
It should also be possible for the parties to agree
on a specific date for the second Summit within the
coming weeks so that the meeting can take place soon
after the end of the transition process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in June this year.
Clearly, the process of achieving peace, security
and development in the Great Lakes region requires a
collaborative effort of regional and international
proportions. Every conflict in the region has been
identified as having cross-border linkages and effects.
Consequently, a regional approach involving African
ownership and international partnership needs to be
enhanced. From this perspective the implementation of
resolution 1625 (2005) on conflict prevention can be
applied to the situation in the Great Lakes region.
In a wider context, there is the need to further
enhance the burgeoning cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union (AU) in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter, and as recently reaffirmed at the world summit
and in resolution 1631 (2005). We therefore call for
strengthened coordination and communications
between the United Nations and the AU, particularly
between the Security Council and the African Union’s
Peace and Security Council in mediation and
peacekeeping efforts in the Great Lakes region.
Aligned to this concept of practical cooperation is the
need to ensure that the time frame for the international
community’s coordinated intervention in crises
identified in the region is shortened.
In the past, Council members have had the
occasion to urge African countries to adhere to the
African Union Non-Aggression and Common Defence
Pact, adopted in Abuja on 31 January 2005, and to
sign, where appropriate, subregional pacts on peace,
security, democracy, good governance and
development. By the same token, the role of the United
Nations system in supporting the implementation of the
Pact needs to be further strengthened. Such action in
the region would be consistent with the objectives of
the New Partnership for Africa’s Development
(NEPAD).
My delegation earlier mentioned the success
chalked up in the Burundi peace process. It is our
considered view that Burundi is a classic case which
provides a maiden and golden opportunity for the
Peacebuilding Commission to exercise its mandate in
helping a smooth transition from war to peace.
Similarly, the Democratic Republic of the Congo could
be considered by the Commission, in the event of the
successful completion of its electoral timetable.
We share the view that wars are not acts of God.
They are caused by men, by man-made institutions, by
the way in which man has organized his society. What
man has made, man can change. This organ, which has
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, has been presented
with yet another opportunity to make positive and
decisive contribution towards the achievement of
lasting peace and security, and bring to closure a long
and protracted period of conflict and instability in the
Great Lakes Region. Let us seize the moment to act.
We support the draft resolution that has been prepared
by the delegations on the region.
Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French):
Allow me first to say how pleased we are to have you,
11
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
Madam President, presiding, and to pay tribute to
Tanzania, whose dedication to peace in the Great Lakes
region — to which today’s meeting attests — is well
known to us. I should like also to greet the ministers
and envoys present, especially those from the countries
of the region, who have come to New York to take part
in our debate. The members of the Council who
accompanied me on missions we have conducted in
Central Africa join me in welcoming them. Finally, let
me say how much we appreciate having in our midst in
this Council another country from that vast region, the
Republic of the Congo, to which I wish to convey our
congratulations upon the accession of President Sassou
Nguesso to the presidency of the African Union.
What is taking place in the Great Lakes region of
Africa concerns us all. To a great extent, it is there that
peace, security and democracy may succeed or fail for
all of Africa, as may the development of that vast
region. It is likewise of concern to us all because one
cannot overstate the suffering that the population of
that region has endured, and which we continue to
witness today.
It is hardly surprising, then, that the United
Nations should be deploying its largest peacekeeping
operation today to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The international community has invested great
efforts in advancing peace in the Great Lakes region.
United Nations activity in this regard is well known. It
is likewise often pointed out that we should pay tribute
to the leaders of the region, of the African Union and
of a number of countries which, like South Africa or
Tanzania, have spared no effort to bring peace to the
region. Thanks to those combined endeavours, we have
succeeded in placing the initiatives being pursued in
the region on a positive track. Burundians can be proud
of the successes scored there, and the Congolese
clearly seem to be moving in the same direction.
Nonetheless, all of this remains quite fragile.
Major obstacles have yet to be overcome, as the
President of the European Union pointed out earlier.
For my part, I would stress the following points.
First, the international community must focus its
efforts on the priorities. The first is elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Those elections
must be brought to a successful conclusion in the time
remaining before 30 June. The elections are important,
but are not an end in themselves. They respond to a
deep aspiration among the population for peace and
reconciliation, and one cannot help being moved by the
hopes that they inspire in the people. When we went to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we clearly saw
how much the Congolese people wanted those
elections.
We must succeed in this process, because we
must dispel the uncertainty. Democratic institutions
must be set up in the Democratic Republic of Congo,
because that great nation — that vast territory within
the heart of Africa — must have a solid and stable
State, and a solid and stable Democratic Republic of
the Congo is the best guarantee for the development of
the entire region and is crucial for the region’s stability.
There are three essential requirements for the
success of the political process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. A truly integrated national
army capable of providing security for the country and
its borders must be established; the reconciliation
efforts must continue, so that no one is excluded and
that no one can exclude himself from public life; and
the rule of law must be established throughout the
territory, with the wealth of the nation being managed
in a transparent fashion.
In Burundi, peacebuilding is a matter of urgency.
More than ever before, we must support that country,
which has become a successful model for
reconciliation in the region, so as to guarantee that the
achievements of the Arusha process become
permanent.
I would like to say a few words about relations
among the countries of the region. Much remains to be
done if we are to improve the dialogue that is essential
among those countries. There is still too much
suspicion, too many hard feelings, too much mistrust.
The second Summit of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region, of which we have high
expectations, must not be a missed opportunity. It is
therefore very important to focus on the crucial issue
of peace and security.
Armed groups are a problem of particular
concern in the region. Whether or not they are a threat
to the security of States, they are, today, the main cause
of the population’s suffering. We must tackle that
problem together. However, there will be no solution
until the armed groups stop receiving support from the
outside and until they stop the traffic in arms and
natural resources that fuels their activities. Of course,
12
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
there can be no solution that is exclusively military in
nature.
In conclusion, I would like to return to the
question of the suffering of the people. In our work in
the Council, this is always at the heart of our concerns.
We must always remember the tragedy of the Rwandan
genocide. At that time, the international community did
not live up to its responsibilities, and today, when
talking about the region, the question of the protection
of civilians is on everybody’s mind. That is one of the
most important elements of the draft resolution that we
will be adopting shortly.
It is not to be tolerated that children, women and
other vulnerable people find themselves at the mercy
of brutal criminal groups, such as the Lord’s Resistance
Army. We must all focus our attention on the
humanitarian tragedy in northern Uganda. Mr. Douste-
Blazy, the French Minister for Foreign Affairs, will be
visiting Uganda in a few days’ time in order to discuss
with our Ugandan partners what we can do in order to
improve the situation.
Eight Guatemalan Blue Helmets serving in the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo were killed last
Monday. The problem has taken on a regional
dimension, and it is time for the Security Council to
address it. We believe that the draft resolution on
which we will shortly be voting, which follows up on
the Jan Egeland, will make it possible for us to move
forward.
Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank Tanzania
for having taken the initiative to convene this public
meeting on the situation in the Great Lakes region. I
would like to welcome you, Madam Foreign Minister,
and to thank you for personally presiding over this
meeting.
I would like to extend a warm welcome to the
Foreign Ministers and other high officials of the
Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Namibia, Botswana, Rwanda, the Sudan, Burundi,
Angola, Zimbabwe, Kenya, Uganda and Zambia, as
well as to the representatives of the African Union,
who have travelled from afar to attend this important
meeting. I would also like to welcome the Foreign
Minister of Belgium, the European Union
Commissioner and the special envoys of the
Netherlands and of Canada, who have come here to
participate in our discussion.
During the past decade or so, the Great Lakes
region has witnessed a great deal of turbulence and
conflict, which has had a huge impact on peace,
security, economic development and social stability in
that region and in the African continent as a whole. In
recent years, despite the continuation of disputes and
conflicts in some areas and the constraints on overall
economic and social development, encouraging
progress has been achieved as a result of the efforts of
the countries and peoples of the region, with the
assistance of the international community.
There is common understanding on all sides that
without stability in the Great Lakes region, there can
be no peace in Africa, and that without prosperity in
the Great Lakes region, Africa’s renaissance cannot
take place. China supports United Nations efforts to
address the special needs of the Great Lakes region and
advocates that the Security Council put the question at
the top of its agenda and make more substantial inputs.
There is an old saying in Chinese: With united
and determined will, mountains can be moved. The
hard-working and ingenious people of the Great Lakes
region long for a stable and prosperous life. That is
their will, which, in due course, will yield the hoped-
for results. The Great Lakes region is endowed with
rich natural resources, and now that the situation is
moving in a positive direction, we are convinced that it
will not be long before peace is fully restored and
stable development achieved in the region.
China is of the view that in order to resolve the
conflict in the Great Lakes region in a comprehensive
manner, achieve national reconciliation and bring the
political transition to fruition so that the region can
embark on the road to sustainable development, a
number of issues require special attention.
First, the will of the countries concerned must be
fully respected. The positive developments in the Great
Lakes region are inseparable from the will and efforts
of the Governments and peoples concerned. The
advance of political transition in both the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi is based on the
broad support of the people. The facts on the ground
show that, without the political will of the countries
concerned and the participation of the local people,
there cannot be lasting peace. In helping the countries
13
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
of the Great Lakes region, the international community
should heed their concerns and their proposals.
Secondly, comprehensive cooperation at the
subregional level should be further strengthened. The
interests of the countries of the Great Lakes region are
closely linked. It is vital for the countries and the
parties concerned in the region to seek a proper
solution to the relevant issues through consultations
and dialogue on the basis of mutual respect for
sovereignty and territorial integrity. All countries
concerned should honour the commitments they have
undertaken and restore stability throughout the Great
Lakes region and ensure good-neighbourly relations
among each other in pursuit of peace, prosperity and
the development of the region as a whole.
We hope that the second Summit of the
International Conference for the Great Lakes Region
will be convened soon and that it will once again be
crowned with success, producing a programme of
action for the promotion of the peace, harmony,
development and progress of the Great Lakes region.
Thirdly, assistance by the international
community should be maintained and increased. The
political process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is at a critical juncture. Preparations for the
elections urgently require the support of the
international community. In Burundi’s transition
towards post-conflict reconstruction, international
assistance remains essential. We hope that the
international community and other African regions will
continue to actively support the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in its disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme and the election process and
help consolidate peace in Burundi. It remains
imperative that we support the unremitting efforts of
those two countries to achieve peace, stability and
economic reconstruction.
China wholeheartedly supports the continued
important United Nations role in that regard. The
Security Council should give positive consideration to
all reasonable requests of the countries of the region
and act accordingly. We hope that the newly
established Peacebuilding Commission will also make
the post-conflict reconstruction of the Great Lakes
region a priority item on its agenda.
As a true friend to all countries of the Great
Lakes region, China has always followed closely the
developments in the situation in the region. We have
made practical efforts to promote the peace processes
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
Burundi, we have actively participated in United
Nations peacekeeping operations, and we have
provided bilateral assistance, within our capacities, to
the economic and social development of those two
countries. We are ready to continue and strengthen our
comprehensive cooperation with countries of the Great
Lakes region and to play a positive role in promoting
the early achievement of lasting peace and prosperity
in the region.
In conclusion, the Chinese delegation supports
the draft resolution prepared by the United Republic of
Tanzania (S/2006/51) and would like to thank the
Permanent Mission of Tanzania for its diligent work in
that regard. We believe that the adoption of the draft
resolution will have a positive impact on the efforts to
promote the stability and development of the Great
Lakes region.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Raphael Tuju, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kenya.
Mr. Tuju (Kenya): I am happy to participate in
this debate on peace, security and development in the
Great Lakes region. Permit me to take this opportunity
to congratulate you, Madam Foreign Minister, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and on your personal efforts in convening this debate. I
assure you of my delegation’s support.
Kenya applauds Tanzania’s initiative aimed at
strengthening collaboration between the United
Nations and the African Union. That initiative has
several antecedents both here at the United Nations and
in Africa, all aimed at preventing armed conflict and
securing thriving democratic peace in Africa. Indeed,
the African Union’s motivation in establishing its own
Peace and Security Council was informed by the need
to address the chronic cycle of conflict and instability
that plagues our continent.
There has been tangible progress in focusing the
attention of the international community on the
problems of the Great Lakes region. Kenya and
countries of the region have been involved in solid
collaborative efforts to stabilize the region. The lessons
learned from previous experience in the region and
elsewhere motivated the international community to
convene the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, which eventually, in November 2004,
14
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
led to the adoption of the historic Dar es-Salaam
Declaration on Peace, Security, Democracy and
Development in the Great Lakes Region.
I consider the second Summit of the International
Conference on Peace, Security, Democracy and
Development in the Great Lakes Region, which will
take place in the middle of this year in Nairobi, to be
very important. But I hasten to add that it will be as
important as we choose to make it; otherwise, it will be
just another of those conferences that come up with the
right resolution language and nothing more. But we
cannot afford that, given the crisis we have in the
region.
I should like to draw the Council’s attention to
one of the most important root causes of conflict in our
region: ethnic tensions. Many of the countries in the
region are actually only geographical phenomena with
ruler-drawn borders and therefore not nation-States.
For example, in my country, Kenya, we have some 42
different nationalities, which are often referred to as
tribes. Our greatest challenge as a country is how to
forge lasting nationhood out of that diversity. Our
diversity is a blessing in many ways, but it is also a
curse of which we are quite aware. The curse elements
include those moments when ethnic tensions require
only a small trigger, and riots in the streets may ensue.
In North America, Europe and Asia, when
tensions such as those along racial divides culminate in
riots in the streets, there are enough resources and
mechanisms to manage and contain the stress. In our
region, where the coping institutional frameworks are
mostly in their embryonic stages, ethnic tensions that
spill into the streets have, sadly, degenerated into full-
scale civil war and, in many instances of which we are
all too aware, genocide. We have seen this even in
those countries that were previously perceived to be
stable: Rwanda and, at the moment, Côte d’Ivoire. We
are all surprised, yet we should not be, because we
know that those tensions are actually there, albeit
below the surface. I submit that because we know that
these ethnic tensions exist — usually below the
surface — we must, as a region, confront the challenge
boldly and decisively within the context of conflict
prevention, rather than relying only on the fire-brigade
and ambulance approach to conflict management.
I would like to congratulate the Tanzanian
Government through you, Madam President, because in
our region it was probably only Tanzania that, quite
early in its history, managed to build a stable
nationhood and to reduce the inter-ethnic tensions that
mark most of the countries in the region. That is a
legacy of the vision of Mwalimu Julius Nyerere, which
all of us, together with Tanzanians, should forever
cherish.
As we work towards the second Summit of the
International Conference on Peace, Security,
Democracy and Development in the Great Lakes
Region, and even as we welcome the establishment of
the Peacebuilding Commission, we must not forget the
fact that, historically, as many as 50 per cent of
resolved conflicts recur within a period of five years.
That is a very high failure rate: odds of 50-50 are for
gambling, not for finding solutions. The high rate of
relapse should awaken us to the fact that a peaceful
settlement that does not address the root causes of a
conflict in the short term or make the necessary
investment in long-term solutions and prevention
programmes is actually very shallow. What is the merit
of continuing with an approach that we know will
result mostly in relapse? Permanent solutions are
within our grasp if we choose to take the right steps.
As we go to Nairobi, let us be bold enough to confront
the challenge and develop visions, strategies and
programmes that can address the root causes.
We are ready to work together, to summon the
courage to look in the mirror, to identify the roots of
the problem and to work together with Ambassador
Ibrahima Fall, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, to address them. We welcome the renewal of
the mandate of his Office. However, we feel that its
mandate and role should be oriented towards the long
term, not just towards conflict resolution and post-
conflict management; it should also prioritize conflict
prevention.
I take this opportunity to express my gratitude to
our partners, the Group of Friends, for their invaluable
support for our region. I pay a special tribute to
Denmark, Canada and the Netherlands, not only for
their engagement in our region, but also for helping to
sustain the interest of others.
We all agree that peacebuilding is important
work, although it is a lengthy process. Rather than
describing the obstacles, of which we are all aware, I
would like to add that the next concrete steps should be
on the humanitarian and social fronts. I propose the
following.
15
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
First, we should create an environment that
ensures better protection and welfare for refugees,
internally displaced persons and stateless persons.
States have to comply with international instruments
on human rights and also identify and disarm
combatants and separate them from civilians.
Secondly, we must set up a regional legal
framework for the protection and assistance of
internally displaced persons.
Thirdly, we must implement the legal framework
on the property rights of returning internally displaced
persons and refugees. Article 69 of the 2004 Dar es-
Salaam Declaration commits us to that objective. We
should finalize the relevant protocol quickly.
Fourthly, we must work within the region to
ensure the safety and security of humanitarian workers
and associated personnel during the conduct of their
duties, as well as to ensure free and unhindered
humanitarian access to persons in need of assistance.
Kenya welcomes the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission. This forum affords us a
historic opportunity to test-run the Peacebuilding
Commission in the Great Lakes region, the Horn of
Africa and other areas of conflict. After our
discussions today, the ideas embodied in the draft
resolution should be adopted and speedily implemented
in the Great Lakes region and in the Horn of Africa,
and the benefits should accrue to the many people who
have longed for peace and tranquillity, which have
proved so elusive.
In concluding, I would once again urge that,
while we convene important forums such as today’s,
we must remember that it is pertinent always to address
the root causes of conflict and to always seek the
direction and the views and input of the victims and
urgently address their grievances to the extent possible.
I take this opportunity to extend a very warm
welcome to those who will be participating in the
second Great Lakes Conference in Nairobi.
The President: I give the floor to Mr. Sam K.
Kutesa, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uganda.
Mr. Kutesa (Uganda): On behalf of my
delegation and on my own behalf, I would like to
congratulate the United Republic of Tanzania on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month of January. I wish to pledge Uganda’s
full support during Tanzania’s presidency, and I am
delighted, Madam President, to see you presiding over
the Council.
May I also take this opportunity to register our
appreciation to the United Republic of Tanzania for the
initiative of convening this important meeting at this
time, when many of the countries of the Great Lakes
region are grappling with the challenges of peace,
security, justice, post-conflict reconstruction and
development.
Before I make my comments, allow me, on behalf
of the Government of the Republic of Uganda, to
convey our condolences to the Government of
Guatemala, the United Nations and the families of the
eight United Nations peacekeepers who died in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
at the hands of the notorious terrorist group known as
the Lord’s Resistance Army.
One of the best formulas that our countries have
designed for resolving the contradictions in the region
was the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement in 1999 in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which was
supplemented by the Luanda Agreement between
Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and the Pretoria Agreement between Rwanda and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in 2002. The
tripartite plus agreement between Uganda, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and
Burundi, which was concluded in 2004 to deal
specifically with the issue of negative forces, is another
mechanism in that respect. We have also witnessed the
successful conclusion of peace initiatives in Burundi
and Southern Sudan. The ongoing International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region has provided a
framework for a vision integrating peace, security,
stability and development.
It is clear that in the last five years the Great
Lakes region has recorded some positive trends. The
fact that the Security Council is discussing the Great
Lakes region today gives us hope that those initiatives
will be supported, so that the positive trends can be
maintained.
My delegation is happy to state that Uganda has
played, and will continue to play, an active role in
support of the implementation of all these processes in
various capacities.
16
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
Uganda has participated in the Regional Peace
Initiative on Burundi, as Chair. It has also held the
chairmanship of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), under whose auspices the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement in the Sudan and the
Somali peace and reconciliation agreement were
concluded. In addition, Uganda chaired the Political
Committee which oversaw and monitored the
implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement.
We continue, along with our partners in the region, to
host the Tripartite Plus meetings and to participate
actively in the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region.
On its own accord, Uganda has taken measures to
ensure that its territory is not used by negative forces
to destabilize our neighbours. Those measures include
expelling Congolese militia in August 2005; handing
over other militia to the Congolese Government in
December 2005; initiating a verification process with
respect to various allegations, jointly conducted by the
Uganda-Democratic Republic of the Congo military
intelligence team, with the support of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC); and engaging with
our neighbours in the region through joint border
meetings, diplomatic representation, exchange of
special envoys, joint verification mechanisms, joint
security liaison offices, Amnesty Commission offices,
and so on.
My delegation believes that there is a strong link
between conflict and poverty in the Great Lakes
region. I wish therefore to pay tribute to the Secretary-
General for the initiative on the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, which will help
to build confidence in the region as well as to create
capacities and an impetus for good neighbourliness,
regional cooperation and economic integration,
together with sustainable peace, post-conflict
reconstruction and development.
We call upon the international community to
continue to support the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region’s constructive process, including
the implementation of the priority programmes,
projects and protocols designed to entrench a culture of
stability, security, good governance and development,
based on the Dar es-Salaam Summit Declaration of
November 2004.
The recent progress made with respect to the
peace initiative in our region clearly indicates that
prospects are more promising than ever before for
transforming the Great Lakes region from a zone of
conflict to a region of peace, stability, prosperity and
cooperation in Africa.
My delegation strongly believes, however, that
the most urgent challenge and the biggest obstacle to
peace in the Great Lakes region remains the problem of
the negative forces, especially the Allied Democratic
Forces (ADF), the Forces Démocratiques de Libération
du Rwanda (FDLR), the People’s Redemption Army
(PRA) and the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA). It is
important to recall that negative forces were the
genesis of the Great Lakes conflict in the 1990s. They
continue to cause untold suffering to civilian
populations, resulting in excessive loss of life,
humanitarian crises in refugee and internally displaced
person (IDP) camps, and deepening levels of poverty
in the region. The LRA, for example, has caused a
massive humanitarian crisis, with 1.5 million IDPs in
northern Uganda, millions of IDPs in southern Sudan,
and the hampering of the return of 280,000 Sudanese
refugees. I therefore appeal to the Security Council to
focus on the question of foreign negative forces as one
of the most urgent threats to regional peace and
security in the Great Lakes region.
Uganda is committed to the objectives and
mechanisms of the Tripartite Plus Joint Commission
mechanism between Burundi, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda as a critical
component of the post-Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement
activities for addressing the outstanding issue of
negative forces in the Great Lakes region. We are
therefore encouraged by the recent joint MONUC-
Democratic Republic of the Congo armed forces
operations to disarm the ADF and PRA and by efforts
to disseminate information about the effectiveness of
amnesty provisions in Uganda.
In that context, we look forward to the report of
the Secretary-General and to a positive debate in the
Security Council in March 2006 on our request for a
strengthened mandate under Chapter VII, to enable
MONUC to carry out an effective disarmament of the
FDLR, the ADF, the National Army for the Liberation
of Uganda (NALU), the PRA and the LRA operating in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
17
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
My delegation wishes to take the opportunity of
today’s debate to engage members of the Security
Council on the question of the LRA, a well-known
terrorist group based in southern Sudan and in the
Garamba National Park in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which has caused thousands of deaths and
inflicted tremendous suffering on the people of
northern Uganda and southern Sudan as well as on
animal populations in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
For far too long, the Uganda People’s Defence
Force has single-handedly fought against the LRA
terrorist group using a two-track policy combining
military pressure and political negotiations based on
peace initiatives and an effective amnesty regime, as
well as measures to protect the civilian population
from attacks and abductions. Uganda is also committed
to working with the United Nations Secretary-General,
the core partner countries — namely, the United
Kingdom, the United States, Norway and the
Netherlands — the European Union and non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) to address the
practical challenges of the humanitarian situation in
northern Uganda.
Although the military campaign has not
completely eliminated the LRA threat to civilian
population and aid workers in the Acholi subregion in
northern Uganda, the UPDF has succeeded in severely
weakening the LRA by reducing it from 3,000 to about
500 to 600 through defections and capture; rescuing
about 18,000 abductees, including women and
children, largely from the southern Sudan; stopping
further abductions; taking over LRA bases in northern
Uganda and the southern Sudan; and restricting LRA
leaders north of Juba and Garamba National Park in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Security has been
tightened around internally displaced persons camps,
including by providing escorts for civilians and aid
workers. Except for the hard core LRA rebels who still
believe in Joseph Kony’s “holy spirit” of cult and
myth, many are now defecting while on mission to
commit atrocities in Uganda. We are convinced that the
leadership of the LRA will never cross back into
Uganda without being captured and handed over to the
International Criminal Court (ICC).
The Government of Uganda has also embarked on
a number of peace initiatives to have the LRA conflict
resolved through a negotiated settlement. An amnesty
act, enacted in the year 2000, and its implementing
Amnesty Commission have been put in place to
accommodate those who renounce rebellion and
promote reconciliation. Over 2,000 LRA rebels have
taken advantage of the amnesty provisions. Major
efforts for a negotiated peace settlement originated or
supported by the Government since 1994 have included
the Government initiatives and those of the Carter
Center and of the Acholi Religious Leaders, and the
Bigombe Initiative. Unfortunately, due to the lack of a
political agenda by the LRA and pressure from its
external backers, efforts for political negotiations with
the LRA have been fruitless. As a gesture of good will
and political commitment to a negotiated settlement,
the Amnesty Act remains in force, and the Ugandan
Government negotiating team is also in place.
I have circulated to the Security Council a
document entitled “Uganda Government Interventions
on the Humanitarian Situation in Northern Uganda”,
which details the Ugandan Government’s commitment
to effective interventions, in cooperation with the
United Nations agencies and NGOs, to deal with the
security and humanitarian situation in northern
Uganda.
My delegation believes that there are strong
factors that create, with the support of the United
Nations Security Council and the international
community, an historic opportunity to decisively deal
with the LRA now. Following the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement for Southern Sudan, both the
Government of the Sudan and the regional government
in southern Sudan have shown willingness to cooperate
with Uganda in dealing with the threat posed by the
LRA. Indeed, we hope that the agreement between the
UPDF, the Sudan People’s Liberation Army and the
Sudanese army will bear fruit in the near future. The
ICC has documented evidence and has indicted the top
five LRA leaders for crimes committed against
humanity in the Great Lakes region. And we have seen
that, when given an adequate mandate, a United
Nations force such as MONUC, working with the army
of the host country, such as the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, can be effective against negative forces
such as the ADF. Lastly, the African Union (AU) and
other subregional security mechanisms are now more
willing and ready to play an effective role in dealing
with negative forces as a threat to the maintenance of
regional peace and security in Africa.
My delegation would therefore like to strongly
urge the Council to undertake the following measures.
18
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
First, it should send a clear message that the
countries in the Great Lakes region have the
responsibility and obligation not to allow safe havens
for terrorists and negative foreign rebel groups to
destabilize their neighbours in the region.
Secondly, the Council should strongly support
sustained efforts of MONUC and the Forces Armées de
la République Démocratique du Congo (FARDC) to
forcefully disarm the negative armed groups in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and to
respond positively to the request contained in the letter
of the Foreign Ministers of the Tripartite Plus Joint
Commission on the Great Lakes region, dated
21 October 2005 (S/2005/667, annex).
Thirdly, the Security Council should strongly
condemn the LRA’s attacks against civilians and
humanitarian workers, call for the immediate cession
of all the violence and urge those countries and groups
that provide financial, material and logistical support
to the LRA to meet their international obligations by
immediately ceasing such support to the LRA.
Fourthly, the Council should call on the Sudan
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to take
seriously their national and international obligations to
ensure that their territories are not used to harbour
negative elements that cause insecurity in the Great
Lakes region.
Fifthly, it should urge the Sudan and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to intensify military
pressure to disarm the LRA as a negative foreign force
operating from their territories and to cooperate fully
with the ICC by implementing the arrest warrants
issued by the Court on LRA terrorist leaders and to
hand them over to the ICC.
Sixthly, under Chapter VII of the Charter, the
Council should mandate MONUC and the United
Nations Advance Mission in the Sudan (UNAMIS) to
assist the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Sudan to disarm the LRA elements operating in the
southern Sudan and in Garamba National Park and in
executing the ICC arrest warrants for the LRA
leadership.
The Security Council should encourage countries
of the Great Lakes region to enter into or strengthen
various bilateral and regional arrangements, including
joint security liaison and coordinated operations, joint
verification mechanisms and other mechanisms to deal
with negative forces, including the extradition of those
not willing to take advantage of existing credible and
effective amnesty regimes, as in the case of Uganda.
The Council should welcome and fully support
the AU initiatives intended to forcefully disarm foreign
negative forces and to urge the United Nations and the
international community to extend to the AU the
necessary logistics and political support.
The Council should support the establishment of
a coordinating and monitoring mechanism in Kampala
between the Government of Uganda, the United
Nations — the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the Department of Political
Affairs, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations
Children’s Fund — and the core countries, including
the United Kingdom, United States, Norway, the
Netherlands and others, as well as the AU and
representative credible NGOs, to strategically address
the humanitarian situation and resettlement of
internally displaced persons in northern Uganda.
The Council should treat the Great Lakes region
as a special post-conflict reconstruction zone with
components for different countries and therefore adopt
the zone as one of the key priorities under the
Peacebuilding Commission recently established by
Security Council resolution 1645 (2005) and General
Assembly resolution 60/180.
Finally, my delegation urges the Security Council
to support the establishment of a Great Lakes
reconstruction fund.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zambia, His Excellency
Lieutenant General Reverend Ronnie Shikapwasha.
Mr. Shikapwasha (Zambia): Madam President,
allow me to congratulate you upon your country’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of January. The occasion is special in
that the United Republic of Tanzania has also served as
Chair of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region since the first Summit, in Dar es-Salaam
in November 2004, when our heads of State and
Government adopted the Dar es-Salaam Declaration on
Peace, Security, Democracy and Development in the
Great Lakes Region. We therefore wish you success as
you preside over the affairs of this Council.
19
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
Zambia shares the view that peace and
development are two sides of the same coin. We
believe that there cannot be durable or lasting peace
and security without sustainable human development
and, conversely, that there cannot be any meaningful
development without peace and security. We also
believe that the absence of war does not always
guarantee human security and dignity, particularly
where poverty levels are high; nor does it guarantee
peace.
Zambia therefore maintains that, since gaining
political independence, many countries in the Great
Lakes region, like other former colonial countries, have
had to deal with the challenges of correcting the ills
and inadequacies of the colonial past, while at the same
time trying to meet the demands of newly independent
populations to provide for new jobs, more schools,
hospitals, housing and so forth. In short, peace and
security have depended very much on the fight against
poverty and underdevelopment; hence, the need to
emphasize peacebuilding and development as a
linchpin of the peace process in the Great Lakes
region.
Furthermore, in accepting the fact that the root
causes of Africa’s wars, conflicts and political
instabilities are complex and multifaceted, Zambia
suggests that the approach of establishing linkages
between the four thematic areas already identified in
the peace process in the Great Lakes region should be
maintained and strengthened.
Within that context, we believe that the emphasis
on peacebuilding and development should take centre
stage in the achievement of peace and security in the
Great Lakes region. Therefore, Zambia would like to
associate itself with the efforts towards the
operationalization of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Commission within the context of the 2005 world
summit outcome. Zambia as a nation is always seeking
peace and peaceful means to attain world peace, looks
forward to contributing to the activities of the
Commission and is available to host any programmes
and projects that will be deemed necessary in order to
add value to the peace process in the Great Lakes
region.
I would be remiss in my contribution if I did not
account briefly for Zambia’s activities in the peace
process of the Great Lakes region. Within the context
of peacebuilding and development, Zambia has
continued to participate in United Nations and African
Union peacekeeping missions, thereby maintaining its
profile in global and international relations. At the
regional level, every effort has been made to share the
regional ownership of solutions to most of the root
causes of poverty and underdevelopment in the Great
Lakes region through Zambia’s participation and
membership in the African Union, the Southern Africa
Development Community and the Common Market for
Eastern and Southern Africa, and, only recently, as a
new signatory to the Peer Review Mechanism of the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development.
At the national level, it is important to note that
in 2005 Zambia held workshops for youth, women, the
media, civil society, non-governmental organizations,
the private sector/permanent secretaries as policy
implementers, and parliamentarians in order to
strategize their respective roles in the implementation
of the Dar es-Salaam Declaration.
In the area of democracy and good governance,
Zambia has just successfully completed a review of its
electoral laws in readiness for this year’s presidential,
parliamentary and local Government elections.
Meanwhile, a new draft constitution is in the process of
being made ready for enactment by Parliament.
Zambia would like to join those members that
have commended the work that the Group of Friends
has been doing in the peace process in the Great Lakes
region. Zambia is aware and shares with the Group of
Friends its understanding of the negatives encountered
in the process. We want to encourage the Council,
however, to see that the road to peace is not always
peaceable in itself. Our experience in the fight for
freedom for southern Africa in particular bears
testimony to that. Let us therefore stand firm together.
We are encouraged that the future holds great promise
for the Great Lakes region. Let us turn those challenges
into a greater vision for that area with such great
potential for regional and world peace.
As we approach the second summit in Nairobi,
which will launch the pact on security, stability and
development, the participation of both the Group of
Friends and the joint United Nations/African Union
secretariat in Nairobi is bound to become more crucial
and dependable. We would therefore appeal to the
United Nations to continue to maintain its important
role in the peace process not only by extending the
presence of the joint United Nations/African Union
20
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
secretariat, but also by strengthening the administrative
role of its staff in Nairobi.
The President: I give the floor to the
Ambassador of South Africa to the Great Lakes region,
His Excellency Mr. Kingsley Mamabolo.
Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): Allow me,
Madam, to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
applaud the initiative you have taken to hold this open
debate on peace, security and development in the Great
Lakes region. We also take this opportunity to thank
and congratulate the Secretary-General and the
Security Council for the various initiatives taken to
address issues related to African conflicts. Those
initiatives have led to tangible results and steady
progress in conflict prevention and the establishment of
peace, stability and security on the African continent.
Africa has, through the establishment of the
Peace and Security Council, created an environment
conducive to the establishment of a strong institutional
partnership with the Security Council in the areas of
international peace and security. South Africa is
encouraged by the visible progress that the partnership
between the United Nations and Africa has made in the
areas of peace and security and urges the strengthening
of that collaboration in terms of Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter. There is a need to create a
structure that will enhance that institutional
cooperation in order to ensure effective and
coordinated action between the Security Council and
the African Union’s Peace and Security Council. It was
in that understanding that we welcomed the Security
Council’s presidential statement on the institutional
relationship with the African Union that was issued
after their meeting in the Sudan in 2004.
Experience has shown us that cooperation with
regional structures can enhance the maintenance of
international peace and security. We believe that the
result of this meeting should intensify collaboration
between the Security Council and other important
actors in the Great Lakes region, notably the
International Conference on the Great Lakes,
coordinated by the Special Representative,
Ambassador Ibrahima Fall, as well as the African
Union Peace and Security Council. We need to develop
collaborative structures that could include the follow-
up mechanism intended to assist in the implementation
of the regional confidence-building mechanisms
following the second summit of the International
Conference.
The debate today should help us focus attention
on the rapid progress being made in the situation in the
Great Lakes. The progress that is being made through
intraregional discussions is commendable, and South
Africa believes that those discussions, not to mention
the success that the decisions have achieved, contribute
directly to the reduction of tensions in the region.
For example, the reduction of regional tensions is
an important backdrop to the progress being made in
the transition process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo itself. South Africa commends the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
on its progress in voter registration. In addition, South
Africa believes that the operational success of the
constitutional referendum is an important indication
that the preparations being made for the general
election are effective.
That does not mean that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will be able to
surmount all the operational challenges that the
referendum brought to light. The international
community has been generous in the financial support
provided to the electoral process. However, some of
the pledged funds have not yet materialized, and we
call on those that have pledged funds to make them
available. South Africa, for its part, is planning to
provide technical support, training and manpower to
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to support the Independent Electoral
Commission’s operations in the field.
The Great Lakes region of Africa is on the
threshold of establishing lasting peace. A lot of work
has been accomplished. South Africa is especially
pleased at the progress being made within the region to
reduce those issues that cause tensions between the
regional States. That progress includes, first, the recent
agreement between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Uganda to deal with the elements of the
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) that were active in
Haut-Uele, Orientale Province, and the subsequent
elimination of LRA activities in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Secondly, the recent agreement between Uganda
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to permit
the establishment of a Uganda Amnesty Commission
21
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
office in North Kivu will also contribute to the
disarming and repatriation of Ugandan combatants.
Thirdly, the success of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) in dealing with the
Congolese Revolutionary Movement (MRC) elements
active in Kilo and Mongwalu and the efforts by the
Congolese Government, in cooperation with Uganda,
to disarm and repatriate those MRC elements that
relocated to Uganda are also commendable. However,
there remain several issues of concern that have been
addressed by the States of the region, albeit without
success. For example, the continued presence of the
Forces démocratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR)
and Mai-Mai forces in the Kivus remains a serious
threat to regional stability and the integrity of both the
transition in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the regional security-sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) processes. The
role of MONUC and the national army in identifying
strongholds, and putting military pressure on those
armed groups to join the DDR process is
commendable. South Africa is involved in those
operations under the command of MONUC and will
continue to support those operations.
The death of eight MONUC soldiers from
Guatemala demonstrates that more needs to be done to
ensure stability in the region. In that context, South
Africa urges States in the region to further strengthen
their cooperation in ending the activities of illegal
armed groups. We now have an opportunity to create a
framework that will strengthen democracy, good
governance, the rule of law, the protection of human
rights, reconciliation and the participation of civil
society, including women concerning issues of peace
and security.
We look forward to the holding of the second
Summit of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region which will enhance the dialogue that has
already been established among countries of the
region, most of which had been engaged, not so long
ago, in a bitter struggle against each other. The
International Conference will also ensure that those
countries own and are accountable for the peace
process in the region, in order to cement post-conflict
reconstruction and development.
In that regard, South Africa welcomes the
establishment on 20 December 2005 of the
Peacebuilding Commission. Clearly the Commission
will have a significant role to play in many African
countries, particularly in the Great Lakes region.
Burundi, which is emerging from conflict and has
successfully completed its peace process, should
benefit greatly. The Peacebuilding Commission should
constantly contribute to stabilizing the post-electoral
phase of institution-building, reconstruction and
development in both the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Sudan.
Madam President, we take the opportunity once
again to commend you for holding this debate, which
focuses attention on the importance of resolutions 1625
(2005), 1631 (2005) and 1649 (2005), and we implore
the Security Council to further strengthen those
instruments with the adoption of the draft resolution
now being considered (S/2006/51).
The President: As 18 more speakers remain, I
request once again that representatives limit their
interventions to 5 minutes so that others may also
intervene. I thank them for their understanding.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Said
Djinnit, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union.
Mr. Djinnit: We are gratified that, at the
initiative of the United Republic of Tanzania, the
Security Council has decided to hold an open debate on
peace, security and development in the Great Lakes
region. Madam President, your initiative comes as no
surprise to us at the African Union as we are fully
aware of the long-standing commitment of your
country to the issue of peace and security on the
continent as a whole and of the laudable efforts it
continues to invest in the promotion of peace,
understanding and cooperation, in the Great Lakes
region in particular.
I wish to pay special tribute to His Excellency
Mr. Jakaya Kikwete who, as Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Tanzania, played a leading role in the efforts
which culminated in the convening in Dar es-Salaam,
on 20 November 2004, of the first Summit of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region. I
cannot but seize this opportunity to renew to the United
Republic of Tanzania our heartfelt congratulations on
22
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
the recently concluded peaceful elections held in that
country resulting in the election of former Foreign
Minister Kikwete as President of the United Republic
of Tanzania.
Today’s meeting provides us with an opportunity
to take stock of the progress so far made in the
initiative since the Dar es-Salaam Summit and to
deliberate on the best ways and means to create the
most propitious conditions for the convening of the
second Summit, which is scheduled to be held in
Nairobi in the course of this year.
It was in the same spirit of building momentum
for the initiative that the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union held, in Addis Ababa on 17 June
2005, its first-ever open session, which discussed the
process of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region. On that occasion, the Peace and
Security Council adopted a declaration in which it
reiterated its strong support for the initiative and
endorsed the decision of the Dar es-Salaam Summit
declaring the region a special reconstruction and
development zone accompanied by a special
reconstruction fund.
It is encouraging to note that all the draft
programmes of action, projects and protocols, and the
document on the follow-up mechanism, have been
prepared and are expected to be finalized during the
forthcoming regional ministerial meeting scheduled to
be held in Bangui in mid-February, thus paving the
way for the adoption of the proposed Security, Stability
and Development Pact at the second Summit.
In addition to the progress in the preparation of
the relevant documents, it is also encouraging to note
that the regional political environment has improved
since the last Summit, in Dar es-Salaam, as a result of
the significant progress achieved in peace processes in
the region on the one hand, and through existing
verification and confidence-building mechanisms on
the other. With respect to the progress in the peace
processes, we welcome in particular the establishment
of the post-transition Government in Burundi, the
progress in the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement signed between the Government of
the Sudan and the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement (SPLM) in January 2005 and, the successful
holding of the referendum on the Constitution in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, laying the basis for
general elections by the end of June 2006 to conclude
the transitional period.
For its part, the African Union, which is strongly
backing the peace processes in the region, also
undertook to contribute to the stabilization of the
eastern region of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo through the neutralization and disarmament of
the various armed groups operating in the area, in
particular, the members of the ex-Forces armées
rwandaises (FAR) and Interahamwe. A reconnaissance
mission was recently dispatched to the region and
neighbouring countries; it consulted extensively with
all stakeholders on the best ways to assist the
Democratic Republic of the Congo armed forces, in
cooperation with the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC), in neutralizing and disarming the armed
groups. The outcome of the mission will be examined
soon by the Peace and Security Council, which is
expected to authorize our Commission to undertake the
preparatory work that is necessary for the deployment
of an African Union force, including the development
of a concept of operation and the definition of the
logistic and financial requirements.
At this juncture, it is worth recalling that the
Organization of African Unity, which was closely
associated with the development of the idea of
convening an international conference on the Great
Lakes region, endorsed the initiative in 1994. Since
then, it has been working hand in hand with the United
Nations in promoting the initiative. In the process,
sustained efforts have been made to generate the
necessary regional political support that was
subsequently solemnly stated in the Dar es-Salaam
Declaration.
In Dar es-Salaam, the leaders of the region also
affirmed their ownership of the process, while the
international community, and in particular the Group of
Friends, pledged continued support. For its part, the
African Union remains committed to supporting the
countries of the region as they prepare for the second
Summit, to be held in Nairobi, and during the
implementation phase of the Pact. While expressing the
African Union’s appreciation to the Group of Friends
for supporting the preparatory process of the
Conference, I would like to call on its members to
remain committed to the process beyond the Nairobi
Summit.
23
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
Although the initial concept of the Conference
was developed from a purely security perspective, it
has since evolved to include democracy, good
governance, economic development and regional
integration, as well as humanitarian and social issues.
That notwithstanding, security issues remain at the
core of the underlying concerns of the initiative. In that
respect, I believe that the initiative provides us with a
unique opportunity to address a significant security
challenge for the continent. Indeed, restoring peace and
stability in a pivotal area of the continent, including
three vast and wealthy countries, Angola, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan, will
undoubtedly have an important and positive impact on
peace, security and economic development throughout
the continent.
I would also like to underline that the Great
Lakes initiative is a clear illustration of the new vision
of the African Union as embodied in its Constitutive
Act, the New Partnership for Africa’s Development,
and the Declaration of the Conference on Security,
Stability, Development and Cooperation in Africa,
recognizing the interlinkages between peace, security,
democracy and development and calling for unity that
is based not only on geography and common borders,
but also on political will and common values.
On the basis of that vision, and inspired by the
progress being made in promoting peaceful solutions to
the various conflicts afflicting our continent, the
African Union has recently embarked on the
elaboration of a strategic framework for post-conflict
reconstruction and development in Africa. Similarly,
the recent establishment by the United Nations of the
Peacebuilding Commission is a most welcome
development, as it provides the international
community with a unique instrument to assist countries
emerging from conflict in their transition to
reconstruction and development.
Finally, through the Great Lakes initiative, the
countries of the region have recognized the value-
added that such an initiative would bring to their
individual efforts aimed at promoting peace, security,
stability and development. They have committed
themselves to owning the process and to mobilizing
their resources to sustain the initiative.
In the same vein, the continued political and
financial support of the international community will
be required so as to enable the countries of the region
to implement the Security, Stability and Development
Pact, to be adopted in Nairobi, in the spirit of
partnership, which, together with the principle of
ownership, has been guiding the process. I am
confident that this Security Council meeting will send
a strong and unequivocal message of encouragement
and support for the initiative, given the important tasks
and formidable challenges that lie ahead in the post-
Nairobi phase of the initiative.
The President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region.
Mr. Fall (spoke in French): I should like at the
outset, on behalf of the Secretary-General, to join
previous speakers in expressing congratulations and
gratitude to you, Madam President, for having taken
the initiative to organize this important meeting, and to
thank your country for the diligent and active manner
in which is has been chairing the International
Conference on the Great Lakes region.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2006/46),
which it is my honour to introduce to the Council,
follows up on his report to the Council of 17 November
2003 (S/2003/1099), in which the Secretary-General
described the state of the preparatory process for the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
Some important progress has been made in that process
since November 2003, and the Council has been kept
regularly informed, here at Headquarters and during
visits on the ground. The most important advance, of
course, was the holding of the first Summit of the
Conference, at Dar es-Salaam in November 2004.
Furthermore, thanks to the momentum generated
by the Conference process, the regional political
dialogue that began in 2003 has continued to make
progress. That regular framework for diplomatic,
political and technical cooperation at the regional level
has been conducive to the emergence and strengthening
of a climate of trust among the countries members of
the Conference, which has helped to facilitate the
preparatory work for the second Summit — the Nairobi
Summit — originally scheduled to take place in
December 2005 but delayed until 2006 at the request of
a country member of the Conference.
The first Summit of Heads of State and
Government of the International Conference was
successfully held at Dar es-Salaam on 19 and
20 November 2004, and marked the end of the first
24
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
phase of the process. The Dar es-Salaam Declaration
was an important milestone for the region. It was the
first comprehensive regional political document
prepared jointly by Governments and non-
governmental actors in which leaders offered a candid
diagnosis of the ills of the region and agreed on a
forward-looking regional vision of peace, security and
development, formulating guiding principles and
policy priorities on the four key themes of the
Conference and charting a road map for the elaboration
of a Security, Stability and Development Pact in the
Great Lakes region, which is to be concluded during
the second Summit.
In the Dar es-Salaam Declaration it was also
decided to establish a mechanism for formulating
action plans, protocols and specific, achievable and
measurable projects. The mechanism has three
components: a Regional Inter-Ministerial Committee; a
Regional Preparatory Committee; and technical
thematic groups.
The Regional Inter-Ministerial Committee, which
will be led by Tanzania, which chairs the Conference
process, until the holding of the second Summit, is
made up of 11 member country ministers in charge of
the organization of the conference — nine of whom
have honoured us with their presence today in this
Chamber — as well as of ministers from neighbouring
co-opted countries, several of whom are also taking
part in today’s meeting. The Regional Inter-Ministerial
Committee has met to shape, consider and approve the
work of the Regional Preparatory Committee. It also
liaises with the Group of Friends of the Great Lakes
Region and the international community in general,
using its good offices to resolve the most difficult
questions relating to projects and protocols, prioritizing
such protocols and action plans and mediating complex
and sensitive political and diplomatic issues. The last
meeting of the Regional Inter-Ministerial Committee
before the second Summit will take place in Bangui
from 21 to 24 February 2006, during which priorities
for the draft Pact will be finalized and adjusted.
The Regional Preparatory Committee is the
executive body of the Conference. It coordinates the
technical preparation of the action programmes,
protocols and projects to be submitted to the second
Summit. It is made up of the national coordinators of
the 11 member countries, as well as of national
representatives of women, youth and civil society, and
submits its recommendations to the Regional Inter-
Ministerial Committee. The technical thematic clusters
are the technical organs of the Conference, composed
of experts from the Great Lakes region, assisted by
experts from the United Nations system, the Group of
Friends of the region and regional and subregional
economic communities. Those experts are responsible
for elaborating projects and protocols.
It is in that context that the joint secretariat of the
Bureau of the African Union and the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Great Lakes Region is responsible for preparing,
coordinating and ensuring follow-up on all
mechanisms, operations, documents, meetings and
other priority Conference activities and for
implementing all of that in order to give substance to
the Security, Stability and Development Pact by
supporting the preparation and finalization of action
plans, projects and selected priority protocols.
In that context, the Special Representative carries
out political activities in support of member States,
preventive diplomacy and confidence-building
measures intended to preserve and strengthen the
atmosphere of trust essential for continuing the
Conference preparation process.
The region’s countries have chosen a number of
protocols and priority projects, which are combined in
action plans corresponding to each of the Conference’s
four themes. The report submitted for members’
consideration summarizes those priority documents.
With regard to peace and security, the protocol on
non-aggression, mutual defence and peaceful
resolution of conflict is emphasized. That protocol is
accompanied by a series of priority projects, all of
which are related to joint border security management
based on an innovative security architecture that
divides the Great Lakes region into 12 cross-border
security zones. Those projects include the disarmament
of armed groups in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the disarmament of farmers
in border regions between the Sudan, Uganda and
Kenya. A third project is related to managing the
common border between Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda. Those are
specific and concrete border cooperation projects that
combine State security with human security, and their
implementation brings together governmental actors
and local populations.
25
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
The other priority projects, in keeping with the
Dar es-Salaam Declaration, seek to support, harmonize
and strengthen the initiatives of existing regional
mechanisms in areas such as combating the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
countering terrorism and transnational crime, demining
and combating anti-personnel mines.
In the area of democracy and good governance,
the priority initiatives are based on the project for a
regional centre to promote democracy, good
governance, human rights and civic education. In
addition, three protocols — on preventing crimes of
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes, on
combating the illegal exploitation of natural resources
and on judicial cooperation — complete this picture.
With respect to economic development and
regional integration, the priority projects include a
mechanism for the certification of natural resources,
which is the operational interface of the protocol on
combating the illegal exploitation of natural resources;
a regional microcredit project; the relaunching of the
Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries;
and a framework project establishing cross-border
developmental zones to strengthen regionalism and
development among States and border populations
through cooperation initiatives concerning cross-border
natural resources.
Other projects are related to the development of
existing infrastructures, such as road, railway and river
transport corridors. The one and only protocol
concerns the specific zone for reconstruction and
development, whose creation was announced by
Conference member States in the Dar es-Salaam
Declaration.
Finally, in the area of priority humanitarian and
social issues, the projects focus on the pioneering
protocols on protecting and assisting internally
displaced persons, on the property rights of repatriated
persons, on sexual violence against women and
children and on humanitarian workers’ access to
populations in need. In addition, Conference actors
have always sought to integrate, in a practical manner,
the highly important cross-cutting themes of gender,
HIV/AIDS, human rights, the environment and human
settlements into the protocols and priority projects.
Once it has been signed, the Pact must be
subjected to the test of implementation. To that end,
the countries members of the Conference have planned
to establish a simple regional follow-up mechanism,
whose activities must be supported by the United
Nations and the African Union. It is already agreed that
its role will be to supervise the implementation of the
Pact, to work to prevent, manage and resolve conflicts
in the region and to maintain close working
relationships with the regional and international
institutions involved in implementing the Pact.
As the protocols and priority projects indicate,
the draft Security, Stability and Development Pact for
the Great Lakes region seeks to address the root causes
of insecurity, conflict and instability in the region
through an integrated regional approach and by
emphasizing the links among the four themes of the
Conference. These projects and protocols might have
seemed numerous during the first phase of the
Regional Preparatory Committee’s work. However, on
the basis of ministerial directives, the Committee
subjected them to a rigorous priority-setting exercise at
its meeting in Luanda in September 2005.
Here, I should emphasize once again the close
links that exist among the priority projects
corresponding to each theme and among the projects
corresponding to the four themes of the Conference,
within the framework of an approach based on human
security. As the Dar es-Salaam Declaration recalls,
although poor governance, systematic violations of
human rights, policies of discrimination, exclusion and
political, social and economic marginalization or
marginalization based on gender, the use of violence
for conquering or conserving political power and
impunity for crimes are all related to the theme of
democracy and good governance, they are — together
with the worsening of poverty, economic stagnation
and the illegal exploitation of natural resources —
among the major causative factors of the insecurity,
conflicts and wars that have ravaged the region.
Therefore, it might seem difficult to isolate and limit
the Conference’s sphere of action to addressing peace
and security issues — although, chronologically
speaking, the urgency of those issues naturally calls for
priority and immediate action.
Participation from the outset by all the region’s
forces and by African subregional organizations and
taking their concerns into consideration — a regional
first at that level — enabled us to bring the entire
region together in support of the Conference and to
place the preparatory work under the seal of
transparency, consensus and pragmatism. Moreover,
26
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
the entire United Nations family, including the
missions in the region, and the lead agencies of the
Conference’s four themes are participating fully in the
process.
Finally, the international community — mainly
through the Group of Friends of the Great Lakes
Region — has been the preferred partner of the
Conference since it was established. The preparatory
process has generated enthusiasm and hopes
commensurate with the scope of the challenges to be
met to pacify, stabilize and develop the region.
In that context, postponing the second Summit at
the request of a member State, has, despite the
legitimacy of that request, affected the momentum of
preparations for the second Summit, which had been
scheduled for the end of 2005. It undermines the
process, given the risk of that postponement being
perceived as a lack of political will. It also increases
the likelihood of the preparatory process’s being
disrupted and has unpredictable and significant
financial implications.
It is therefore imperative that member States of
the Conference agree on a date for the second Summit
as soon as possible so as to demonstrate political will
and maintain the process’s momentum. They must
continue to respect the letter and the content of the
provisions of the Dar es-Salaam Declaration.
The presence of those Ministers who are here
today is undeniable proof of the importance that the
countries of the Great Lakes region and their
neighbours and partners attach to this process. But the
international community is expecting to see other
strong signals of a steadfast political and financial
commitment at the highest levels of the member States
of the Conference. That is a prerequisite if the Great
Lakes region is to persuade the international
community of its determination to transform the region
into a zone of peace, security, stability and
development, which would make it the first proving
ground for the work of the new Peacebuilding
Commission.
The ministerial meeting to be held at Bangui from
21 to 23 February 2006 will be an opportunity to take
specific measures to normalize diplomatic relations
and to implement a number of projects and protocols.
The report of the Secretary-General notes that the
task of pacifying and stabilizing the region and
promoting development there is an immense but
achievable one. Largely as a result of the sustained
work of the African Union and of the small team of the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Great Lakes region, significant
progress has been made during the last two years of the
process, following the last report of the Secretary-
General, in developing concrete and realistic projects
and in strengthening confidence among countries of the
region.
We are nearing our goal. The Secretary-General
believes, therefore, that the Council must continue to
support the preparatory process of the Conference in
general and the work of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in particular.
Every effort should also be made to ensure the
convening, as soon as possible, of the second Summit
and the adoption of the Security, Stability and
Development Pact. It will then be incumbent on the
United Nations, on the basis of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General’s strategy of
preventive diplomacy and with the support of the
international community, and in cooperation with the
African Union, to support and assist the region in the
establishment of a regional follow-up mechanism and
in the implementation of the Pact — the linchpin of the
entire process. It is only through such an effort by the
United Nations and on that basis that the
Conference — to whose preparatory process the
countries of the region and the international
community have devoted so much effort — will yield
dividends of peace, security, stability and development
to the benefit of the peoples of the Great Lakes region,
which have suffered so much.
That is the content of the recommendations with
which the Secretary-General concludes the report that
it has been my privilege to present to the Council.
Allow me to conclude on a personal note. The
Great Lakes region, in its current configuration,
encompasses the States of central Africa, of eastern
Africa and of southern Africa — three of the five
regions of Africa — which means that bringing peace,
security, stability and development to the region will
make a fundamental contribution to ensuring that the
same process takes place on the African continent as a
whole.
Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Over
the last 30 years, in the countries of the Great Lakes
27
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
region, especially in those where conflicts have broken
out, per-capita income has decreased and the
population has continued to grow. The result has been
the widespread pauperization of the peoples of the
countries of the Great Lakes region in which conflicts
have arisen. Indeed, roughly 80 per cent of people in
those countries live on less than $2 a day. Thus there
has been no growth of a middle class but, rather,
impoverishment and an absence of development.
That process of impoverishment has taken place
against a backdrop of considerable natural wealth
which has benefited only businesses and autocratic
Governments. In recent years, due to the explosive
population growth and to the ensuing social demands,
those autocracies collapsed, resulting in the
disintegration of the social fabric of those countries
and in the emergence of factional struggles among
illegal armed groups, which have been, and are still,
trying to appropriate the countries’ natural resources
for themselves.
Against that backdrop of conflicts among illegal
armed groups over the ownership of natural resources,
continuing population growth and a poverty rate of 80
per cent, it is very difficult — let us be candid here —
to ensure the sustainability of democracy. Please do not
misunderstand me; electoral processes aimed at
rebuilding those countries are indispensable in order to
give legitimacy to national reconstruction in those
countries. However, they cannot suffice in a context of
social disintegration.
We have to acknowledge that, thus far, in the
Great Lakes region we have been building democracies
on weak and fragile foundations. For those reasons,
many post-conflict transitions are but the early stages
of fresh democratic crises.
The primary task at hand if democracy in the
Great Lakes region is to be rendered sustainable is
urgently to administer what one might call
“international economic intensive care” to those
countries where electoral processes have taken place or
where they are about to be undertaken. We must
forgive those countries’ debt, increase official
assistance, give them access to markets without
reciprocity, and ensure that the international private
sector, on the basis of the Secretary-General’s
Compact, invests in those countries and modernizes
their primary economies in order to ensure their
competitive integration into the global economy. We
have to understand that democracy is not sustainable
when nearly 80 per cent of the population is poor and
when it is surrounded by rich natural resources that are
in the hands of illegal armed groups. Moreover, the
region’s natural resources by themselves cannot help
these countries emerge from their poverty. The main
feature of underdevelopment is to have natural
resources and to export commodities, which
historically bring low prices, impeding development.
The greatest international economic intensive
care in the Great Lakes region must be focused on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which is the
strategic epicentre of the entire region. Without
stability in that country, we will not have stability,
peace or democracy in the region. In order to build
peace and democracy in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, we need a robust United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) that would deter and dissolve the
illegal armed groups. We also need a national armed
force that would centralize the use of force, a well-
trained police force that would provide security for its
citizens and, lastly, a State that would be in a position
to provide basic public services. Today the Democratic
Republic of the Congo sometimes cannot cover, from
its budget, basic public services such as health,
education and, above all, civic security. In these
conditions, stability and democracy could revert to
crisis in the Great Lakes.
Here, I would like to pay tribute to the Blue
Helmets who have sacrificed their lives, and in
particular to the Guatemalan peacekeepers who were
ambushed a few days ago by the Lord’s Resistance
Army. Such events show that the Security Council
must closely follow developments regarding these
illegal groups, especially the Lord’s Resistance Army,
which has ravaged northern Uganda and which has a
presence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in southern Sudan. My delegation will give due
attention to proposals that may be made with a view to
bringing pressure to bear on these armed groups.
Likewise, we have to be especially vigilant when
it comes to the sanctions regime, to enable the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, with the support of
MONUC — and above all of neighbouring States — to
control its territory, as well as land and air access, to
prevent the smuggling of arms and natural resources.
We should consider whether MONUC could also have
28
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
a regional mandate to address security needs at the
borders.
No democracy can be sustained in the Great
Lakes region without basic economic viability. Hence,
natural resources should once again be under the
jurisdiction of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
so that the new Government to be elected next June
will have the resources to govern.
The matter of national reconstruction in the
countries of the Great Lakes region must be tackled in
a comprehensive fashion. We must promote democracy
and organize elections. But at the same time we have to
provide urgent international economic intensive care in
order to begin to reduce poverty, which, I repeat,
affects 80 per cent of the population. I know that this is
a major challenge but, as I said, democracies are not
sustainable without basic economic viability and social
peace.
For these reasons, Peru supports the proposed
Security, Stability and Development Pact for the Great
Lakes region. We believe that the International
Conference on the Great Lakes should be convened
without delay, and we hope that the recently
established Peacebuilding Commission will include
security and development in the Great Lakes region as
one of the priority issues on its agenda.
Mr. Yamamoto (United States of America):
Madam President, the United States commends you
and your Government, the United Republic of
Tanzania, for your important work on the draft
resolution on peace, security and development in the
Great Lakes region (S/2006/51).
The United States applauds the critical work of
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union,
and we share with the new United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission a commitment to sustain
political and economic development for fragile States.
We stand in solidarity with Ambassador Swing,
General Gaye, General Cammaert and the men and
women who courageously and heroically serve in the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).
To the people of Guatemala and to the families of
the Guatemalan forces who paid the ultimate sacrifice,
we extend our prayers and condolences, and, above all,
our gratitude for their service. We also honour those
innocent victims who have died and continue to die in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda,
Burundi and Uganda each and every day.
We deplore the violence and condemn the
hostilities of the Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda (FDLR), the Lord’s Resistance Army, the
Forces nationales de libération and other negative
forces and militias that continue to operate in the Great
Lakes region.
For over a decade now, the FDLR and those
negative forces have remained a threat. How many
more years must be wait? How much longer must we
stand witness to the continued violence and threats
from these negative forces? We also stand witness to
the devastation and human suffering caused by the
negative forces, armed groups and militias. Over
425,000 refugees, and a larger number of internally
displaced persons, underscore for each of us the
unfinished task that lies before us in the Great Lakes
region.
The United States commends in the highest terms
the Governments and the peoples of Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and
Uganda for their faith, trust, dedication and
commitment to working together in the Tripartite Plus
One Commission. Each of those four countries are
making a difference, not only for their own people, but
also in preparing a more secure and prosperous Great
Lakes region. We also extend our appreciation for the
support this has received from our colleagues in the
African Union, the European Union and the United
Nations.
Let me underscore to Council members the
commitment of the United States to the goal of peace
and security in the Great Lakes region and throughout
Africa. We call on the Council to continue to invigorate
its leadership and cooperation in ensuring a peaceful
and secure Democratic Republic of the Congo after the
elections this year and a new and vibrant Burundi, and
to support the struggles against the negative forces that
Rwanda faces each and every day, as well as the
struggles and challenges faced by Uganda. We should
all stand together, working together, to face the needs
of the refugees and the internally displaced persons in
the Great Lakes area. Let us renew our efforts and
dedicate them to those endeavours.
Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Allow me first of all to
welcome you, Madam, and to thank you for taking the
initiative of convening today’s debate, the interest and
29
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
importance of which are such that we have heard from
more than 10 ministers from Africa and, altogether,
14 ministers from various countries.
Greece fully associates itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Austria on
behalf of the European Union. Nevertheless, I would
like to add some comments.
The region of the Great Lakes has been the scene
of recurrent ethnic violence and interrelated crises in
recent years that have on many occasions challenged
the international community’s capacity for crisis
response and management.
The Rwandan genocide of 1994 had a
destabilizing effect throughout the region. Civil war
has devastated the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Ethnic warfare in Burundi has tormented the country
since its independence, resulting in waves of refugees
and displaced persons. The situation in northern
Uganda has had repercussions for the neighbouring
countries.
However, in recent years, considerable, albeit
painstaking improvements have taken place. Those
include a remarkable national reconciliation in
Rwanda; a successful organization of the referendum in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and an
overwhelming approval of the new constitution;
peaceful and democratic elections in Burundi, a bright
example that led to the election of a new president and
Government; and the weakening of the Lord’s
Resistance Army and the issuing of indictments to its
leaders by the International Criminal Court.
Despite the existence of peace agreements among
the different contending parties, their implementation
is far from self-sustaining. The countries of the area, as
well as the international community, have gradually
realized that achieving peace, stability, security and
development in the Great Lakes region will entail a
strong regional dimension.
Indeed, over the past five years, the progress
made by Rwanda, Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo owes much to regional
diplomatic efforts, such as the Tripartite Plus
Commission, as well as to concerted multilateral
efforts, culminating in the signing on 20 November
2004 of the Dar es-Salaam Declaration of Principles on
Peace, Security, Democracy and Development in the
Great Lakes Region.
The African Union-United Nations International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region is not an event,
but a regional process based on confidence-building
measures, parallel efforts in security and development,
and addressing common problems in synergy. We fully
support it and believe it to be of critical importance to
the area.
We firmly believe that the upcoming Nairobi
summit should continue along that regional approach.
Long-term peace and stability in the region can be
attained only on the basis of a genuine commitment by
all the countries to respect territorial integrity and
national sovereignty and to the peaceful resolution of
outstanding issues. Conflicts and instability in each of
the Great Lakes countries, as well as military
incursions, endanger peace and stability in the region
as a whole and seriously compromise national efforts
for peace, security and development.
In both formal and informal consultations, Greece
has stressed time and time again that security sector
reform, in conjunction with the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants,
together with concerted efforts to establish an
environment of rule of law, are essential to creating the
necessary circumstances in which peace can prevail.
We have expressed our support for the Dar es-
Salaam Declaration, which provides a solid framework
for the elaboration of a security, stability and
development pact to be adopted at the second summit
in Nairobi. We are convinced that the International
Conference process represents a genuine platform for
consolidating and enhancing regional peace without
creating cumbersome and overlapping follow-up
mechanisms.
We firmly believe that, in the light of those
efforts, we should persevere along the same lines. In
particular, besides following closely the transition in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi,
the Security Council could also focus on the regional
context by better assisting in the disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, reintegration and
resettlement of ex-combatants, as well as by improving
the monitoring and strict implementation of the arms
embargo, especially in respect of small arms. It should
also direct peacekeeping operations to pay special
attention to strengthening border security.
The United Nations system in general, including
the Peacebuilding Commission that, hopefully, will
30
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
soon be put into action, should also concentrate on
facilitating solutions to several key issues for the
region, such as combating the illegal exploitation of
natural resources. In that respect, we are ready to
support proposals for special mechanisms, taking into
account such existing initiatives as the Kimberly
Process for diamonds and the European Union Action
Plan on Forest Law Enforcement, Governance and
Trade for illegal logging.
We firmly believe that ending impunity in the
Great Lakes region will contribute to the promotion of
peace and stability there. In that respect, we would like
to emphasize the central role that the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the International
Criminal Court can play in bringing to justice those
responsible for serious violations of human rights, war
crimes and crimes against humanity. In addition, a
national accountability mechanism should be actively
supported. The aforementioned elements are included
in the draft resolution prepared by Tanzania, for which
we are grateful and which we will be supporting.
I would like to close by stating that Greece will
continue to support the peace process in the Great
Lakes region, both within the European community
and bilaterally, to the benefit and prosperity of the
peoples of the area and of permanent stability in the
region.
The President: I call on the representative of
Australia.
Ms. Lisson (Australia): I should first like to
thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to address the
Security Council, and to thank Tanzania for convening
today’s debate at such a crucial point along the road to
the restoration of a secure environment in the Great
Lakes region.
The progress in the peace processes in the Great
Lakes region in recent times demonstrates what can be
achieved through cooperation and coordinated regional
and international efforts. Australia congratulates
Burundi on having moved successfully to government
by democratically elected representatives. We further
applaud the steps already taken by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo towards achieving that goal.
The successful staging of the recent constitutional
referendum augurs well for the forthcoming general
elections.
However, security and the humanitarian situation
in the Great Lakes region remain of concern to the
international community. The United Nations Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Jan
Egeland, briefed the Council last month on the serious
and growing threat to regional peace and security
wrought by the activities of the Lord’s Resistance
Army in the southern Sudan, northern Uganda and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Those activities
have brought suffering and instability to the region and
displaced millions of innocent people.
Peace within the Great Lakes region cannot be
attained while militant groups such as the Lord’s
Resistance Army are rampant. We therefore call upon
the Lord’s Resistance Army to cease its acts of
violence and to cooperate fully with the international
community and regional countries to end the conflict.
We further encourage the three Governments
concerned to work to promote regional solutions.
While Australia’s main focus of humanitarian
activity is our own Asia-Pacific region, Australia has
assisted those affected people of northern Uganda with
donations administered through the United Nations
Children’s Fund and the World Food Programme. Last
year, Australia made $2 million available through the
World Food Programme to assist displaced people
living in camps in northern Uganda. We have also
contributed towards regional stability through the
deployment of 15 Australian Defence Force personnel
to the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS).
In the near future, 10 Australian Federal Police officers
will also be deployed to UNMIS.
Australia welcomes the recent decision to
establish a United Nations Peacebuilding Commission.
We support a stronger and more coordinated role for
the United Nations in assisting fragile States to
negotiate the peacebuilding process. We particularly
support better coordination among the various United
Nations actors on the ground in post-conflict countries.
In the context of the current debate on the Great Lakes
region, we envisage that the Commission will be able
to assist regional countries and regional organizations
in pursuit of their goals.
Finally, Australia encourages the Council to
remain seized of the security and humanitarian issues
facing the Great Lakes region.
31
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Hachani (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I wish
at the outset, Sir, to commend you and your fraternal
country, the United Republic of Tanzania, on the
excellent manner in which you are conducting the
presidency of the Security Council this month. I wish
also to thank you for the initiative to convene this open
debate, which enables States Members of the
Organization to participate in the Security Council’s
deliberations on how to improve the effectiveness of its
approach to this issue of its action to bring stability to the
Great Lakes region.
Tunisia is pleased to note the Council’s renewed
interest in this subject, which can help in formulating a
comprehensive approach to the resolution of the
security and development issues that are of such
urgency in the region. In that context, we welcome the
November 2005 Council mission to countries of the
region and express our support for the conclusions it
reached.
We hail the wisdom of the approach advocated by
the Tanzanian presidency of the Security Council with
respect to addressing these issues in a regional context.
We fully endorse that approach, particularly since,
during our term on the Council in 2000-2001 we
sponsored such an approach. Indeed, mindful of the
close links among the various conflicts in the Great
Lakes region, Tunisia called in the Council for the
adoption of a comprehensive and regional approach to
this matter. Moreover, the President of the Republic of
Tunisia, His Excellency Mr. Zine El Abidine Ben Ali,
proposed the idea of an international conference on the
Great Lakes region, to be held under the auspices of
the United Nations and the African Union, as the
appropriate forum for the comprehensive consideration
of regional issues.
Tunisia attaches the highest importance to the
prevention of conflict in Africa through improved
cooperation and coordination among United Nations
bodies, programmes and specialized agencies, the
international financial institutions and the international
community at large aimed at addressing the political,
social and economic root causes of conflict in Africa.
Let me note also that the end of a peacekeeping
mission does not necessarily mark the establishment of
sustainable peace. Such a peace can be ensured only by
laying the political, economic and social foundations
needed for long-term peacebuilding. The international
community bears the political and moral duty to work
together to that end. The Peacebuilding Commission,
whose establishment was decided upon at the
September 2005 world summit, should provide a key
framework for such action.
Both in conflict prevention and in peacebuilding,
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, under Chapter VIII of the Charter, is of
the greatest importance. Tunisia wishes therefore to
reaffirm its interest in cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union, particularly aimed at
improving the Union’s institutional capacities.
In the Great Lakes region today there are more
than 20,000 Blue Helmets from a number of African
troop-contributing countries, including my country.
Africa’s efforts to exercise ownership merit increased
support from the United Nations and the international
community. The establishment of the African Union
Peace and Security Council with a view to setting
regional conflict-prevention policies will certainly
assist the African States concerned. But efforts to
strengthen the peacekeeping capacity of African
countries must be accompanied by efforts by the
international community in the context of the collective
obligations mandated by the Charter, which gives the
Security Council primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Tunisia once again calls on the international
community, and especially on donor countries, to
provide generous humanitarian and economic
assistance to countries in the Great Lakes region. This
would make it possible for the peoples concerned to
enjoy the peace dividend. It is in the interest of those
peoples to view the current page in the history of the
Great Lakes region as belonging to the past: a page that
is now being irreversibly turned to reveal a
commitment to finding peaceful solutions to remaining
problems, and to doing so in a constructive and
cooperative spirit and in the framework of a
comprehensive, multidimensional regional approach.
Tunisia is proud of belonging to Africa, and it has
steadily taken action on its vigorous commitment to
African causes and to peace and stability in the Great
Lakes region. My country has participated, and is
participating, in many peacekeeping missions in the
region, and we are prepared to continue to do so,
within our means. My country is also prepared to share
32
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
with countries of the region our experience in the
spheres of economic and social development in the
stages of emergence from conflict and of rebuilding.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
to read out a statement by Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Arab Republic of
Egypt. The statement reads as follows.
“I wish at the outset to express the
appreciation of the Government of the Arab
Republic of Egypt for the important initiative
taken by the brotherly United Republic of
Tanzania in convening this meeting during its
presidency of the Security Council. Egypt’s
appreciation is based on its great interest in the
cause of security, peace, development and
democracy in the Great Lakes region. That region
is a strategic centre and the cornerstone of
security in the African continent and its
subregions and of Egypt’s national security.
“The leaders of the Great Lakes region
outlined their vision for the future of their region
in the Dar es-Salam Declaration of November
2004. They reaffirmed their commitment to
ownership of their future. They also emphasized
their awareness of the need for genuine
international support for national and regional
efforts aimed at meeting the aspirations of all
African peoples for a better future, a future of
integrated, mutually reinforcing peace, security
and democracy based on Africa’s own priorities.
To that end, Egypt is convinced that this vision
must remain the primary framework for all efforts
to achieve peace and stability in the Great Lakes
region.
“It is based on that conviction and on
Egypt’s sense of responsibility towards the Great
Lakes region that I will focus my statement on a
number of ideas pertaining to the institutional
aspects of collective international and regional
action to define the modalities of a
comprehensive approach to peace and stability in
the Great Lakes region. I have been guided in this
regard by the concept paper previously
distributed by the Tanzanian presidency.
“First, in order to effectively address the
priority issues in the Great Lakes region, we will
need increasing institutional integration. To that
end, we need to enhance the roles and tasks
performed by all relevant parties in implementing
the collective vision of the countries of the region
based on their own strategic priorities for security
and development. It is evident that we need more
coherence among the various institutions and
bodies involved in the region. The Security
Council should perform its role, consistent with
its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, through its
mandates for peacekeeping missions in Burundi,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Sudan. Meanwhile, the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union should perform its
role as the primary regional body concerned with
continental security. The relationship between the
two bodies must be governed by the provisions of
Chapter VIII of the Charter and guided by the
relevant provisions of Security Council resolution
1631 (2005). In that context, Egypt welcomes the
development of a consultative institutional
mechanism between the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council, including by
exchanging visits and holding ongoing periodic
consultations on most relevant peace and security
issues for Africa.
“However, our experience indicates that
peace in the Great Lakes region cannot be
confined to its conventional political and security
aspects. Rather, we need a more comprehensive
approach that takes account of socio-economic
and development aspects, which contribute to
promoting and sustaining security. These fall
within the purview of other United Nations
bodies, programmes and specialized agencies,
which together constitute an integrated system for
dealing with the major socio-economic needs of
the African States in general, in particular during
the post-conflict phase. That inclusive vision
should be implemented by those bodies and
programmes, in cooperation with their
counterparts in the African Union, through quick-
impact projects on the ground, which can provide
an immediate peace dividend for the peoples in
question, contrasted with the negative effect of
war and conflict.
33
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
“Secondly, the operationalization of the
Peacebuilding Commission is closely linked to
the realization of such a comprehensive approach
to peace, as that body could serve as a unique
institutional focal point for the coordination of
international and regional efforts in support of the
transition from conflict to reconstruction and
development. There is no doubt that the
Peacebuilding Commission will focus directly on
States emerging from conflict in the Great Lakes
region, in particular Burundi, where genuine
cooperation is needed between the national
Government and the United Nations, based on the
priorities currently being developed by the
Government, and with which the necessary
support of the international community. The
Peacebuilding Commission must also focus the
necessary attention to and mobilize international
support for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo as the current transition period comes to
an end. The Peacebuilding Commission is
expected to help countries emerging from conflict
in the Great Lakes region to implement the
provisions of the Dar es-Salaam Declaration and
other regional and international initiatives aimed
at addressing multifaceted cross-border
challenges in the post-conflict environment. That
can be accomplished only by deepening bilateral
and multilateral cooperation among the United
Nations, the African Union and the countries of
the Great Lakes region.
“In this context, I would like to reiterate the
firm position that Egypt expressed during the
consultations preceding the adoption of the
Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions on the establishment and
operationalization of the Peacebuilding
Commission. It is important that any international
peacebuilding effort respect and reinforce the
concept of national ownership of such efforts as a
primary condition for success in order to
maximize the benefits of any type of external
support. In this connection, I would like also to
recall that Egypt presented its candidature for
membership in the Organizational Committee of
the Peacebuilding Commission on the basis of its
conviction that the Committee is an important
forum through which Egypt can support peace
and stability in Africa and other regions of the
world.
“Thirdly, the key to any breakthrough in the
situation in the Great Lakes region is to focus on
a number of critical issues relating to conflict
prevention and resolution and post-conflict
peacebuilding, including by encouraging
confidence-building among the Governments of
the region, capacity-building in the area of border
management and monitoring, establishing
effective channels of communication and
information exchange among national authorities
and coordinating programmes for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and for the
return and resettlement of internally displaced
persons. Other measures that need to be
addressed as a matter of priority include security-
sector reform, which is the key to the extension
of a State’s authority throughout its territory, in
keeping with the social characteristics of the
region.
“In this context, I would like to emphasize
that the international community should adopt a
unified vision with respect to breaking the link
between the illegal exploitation of natural
resources and armed conflict in the Great Lakes
region and eradicating the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons. To that end, Egypt is of
the view that the elements contained in General
Assembly resolution 60/223, on the causes of
conflict in Africa, and those in Security Council
resolution 1625 (2005), relating to the prevention
of armed conflict, particularly in Africa, together
constitute an important conceptual framework
that should be duly complemented by the
adoption of measures focusing the attention of the
international community on addressing the causes
of conflict in the Great Lakes region, in keeping
with the preliminary steps adopted by the
Security Council in resolution 1649 (2005) aimed
at countering the threat posed by foreign armed
groups in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in addition to other
measures formulated and supported by the
African Union.
“In this regard, I would like to take this
opportunity to call on all relevant parties in the
region to take the measures necessary to halt the
cross-border attacks perpetrated by all armed
groups, particularly the attacks by the Lord’s
Resistance Army and by the Forces
34
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda on
Ugandan and Rwandan territory, respectively.
“Finally, I would like to assure the Council
that Egypt will spare no effort in promoting
international and regional efforts to achieve peace
and stability, in the most comprehensive sense, in
the Great Lakes region. Egypt is committed to
working through all the relevant bodies and
mechanisms of the African Union and the United
Nations on the basis of our deep sense of loyalty
to Africa, our historical commitment to its
peoples and our faith in the unity of purpose and
destiny of the continent.”
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Choi Young-jin (Republic of Korea): I
would like to express my delegation’s appreciation to
you, Mr. President, for having convened this open
debate and for having circulated a concept paper on the
subject under discussion.
I would like also to express my delegation’s
condolences on the loss of eight Guatemalan
peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
on Monday.
The Great Lakes region has for decades been the
scene of many violent conflicts, reaching an
unprecedented crisis in the 1994 genocide in Rwanda.
Over the past year, however, peace processes in the
region have made significant progress. In Burundi, a
new Government was established through peaceful and
democratic elections, concluding that country’s
transitional period. Meanwhile, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, a referendum on the draft
constitution was held successfully, creating a solid
foundation for the elections to be held this year.
Despite those positive political developments, the
region is still faced with daunting challenges. Burundi
needs to further consolidate peace and reconciliation.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, it is critical
that free and democratic elections be held before the
end of the transitional period in June. In addition,
foreign armed groups operating in that country must be
disarmed and repatriated to their home countries.
In our view, there are three issues that are most
relevant to the achievement of durable peace, security
and sustainable development in the Great Lakes region:
taking a regional approach; focusing on the
peacebuilding process; and addressing the root causes
of the conflicts.
First, conflicts in the Great Lakes region need to
be seen from more of a regional perspective. The
people of the Great Lakes region are ethnically,
culturally and linguistically interlinked, which means
that an insecure situation in one country directly affects
other countries in the region. For example, foreign
armed groups operating in one country threaten the
security not just of that country but of neighbouring
countries as well, because they operate across borders.
Accordingly, ensuring peace and security in one
country necessitates close cooperation with its
neighbours.
We believe that regional problems can be best
resolved through regional organizations, which have
comparative advantages in leading peace processes at
the community level. In that regard, we welcome the
increasing assumption of responsibility and leadership
by the African Union (AU) in maintaining peace and
security in Africa, playing a role that is complementary
to United Nations efforts. We urge that the cooperation
between the United Nations and the AU be further
developed and institutionalized.
Secondly, peace and security in the Great Lakes
region requires a focus not just on peacemaking and
peacekeeping, but also on peacebuilding efforts. Even
after a new Government is established through
democratic elections, a country emerging from conflict
is likely to remain fragile for some time because of the
many challenges it faces, such as strengthening
national institutions and eradicating poverty. The
abrupt disengagement of the international community
at that stage can trigger the re-emergence of conflicts.
Burundi, for example, is currently at that stage, which
means that peacebuilding efforts must be pursued
vigorously in the coming years. In that regard, we look
forward to the early operationalization of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
Thirdly, alongside those short- and medium-term
approaches, it is critical to address the root causes of
conflicts in order to prevent their recurrence and
maintain durable peace over the long term. These root
causes include chronic extreme poverty, a fragile
private sector, a lack of strong national institutions
based on the rule of law and good governance, and the
prevailing impunity. Although peaceful resolution of
conflict is crucial, it is far better to prevent conflicts in
35
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
advance. In that regard, it is necessary that the
countries in the region implement long-term economic
and social development strategies, with the assistance
of the international community.
The Republic of Korea has actively joined in
international efforts to assist the implementation of
development strategies by African countries. We plan
to double our official development assistance by 2009.
With that increased aid, we will step up our efforts to
support African countries — including those of the
Great Lakes region — in addressing the root causes of
conflict and achieving sustainable development, with a
focus on the fields of medical services, human resource
development and information technology. For this year,
we will provide $3.4 million for development projects
in the Great Lakes region. In addition, we welcome
opportunities to share with African countries our
experiences in implementing successful development
strategies and in strengthening good governance.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Yousfi (Algeria) (spoke in French): Permit
me at the outset to warmly congratulate you, Sir, on
your wise and enlightened guidance of the work of the
Security Council during the month of January. I also
congratulate your delegation on the judicious choice of
topic for today’s open debate.
In addition, I should like to express my
Government’s condolences to the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) and to the Government of
Guatemala following the recent attack that claimed the
lives of eight peacekeeping soldiers in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
The Dar es-Salaam Declaration clearly identified
the causes of the endemic conflicts and persistent
insecurity in the region — particularly economic
stagnation and the worsening of poverty. It also clearly
identified the dangers threatening the region, such as
the lack of a regional strategy for disarming and
repatriating foreign combatants, the illegal circulation
of small arms, the situation of refugees and displaced
persons and the HIV/AIDS pandemic. Above all, it
emphasized the will of the countries concerned to face
those dangers with determination.
The Rwanda genocide in 1994, the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Gatumba massacre in Burundi in August 2004 are
examples — there is no better proof — of the
repercussions that internal crises can have on
neighbouring countries and of the need for a regional
approach to conflict prevention and settlement. We
believe that such an approach must give priority to the
root causes of conflicts and stress the promotion of
national reconciliation, economic and social
development, good governance, the rule of law and the
protection of human rights.
The successful outcome of the transition period in
Burundi and the preparations for the elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are encouraging
signs for the return of peace and stability in the region.
Credit is due primarily to the countries of the region,
which have been able to rise above their differences
and to work together on an approach that favours
dialogue, cooperation and peaceful settlement of
disputes. However, challenges must still be addressed
in order to let peace and security take root in a lasting
manner and to forever dispel the spectre of the
conflicts that have afflicted this part of the continent.
Burundi continues to face obstacles to security
with the refusal of the Forces nationales de libération
to endorse the peace process and economic and social
constraints worsened by the pressure of returning
refugees and displaced persons. The people’s support
for the Government’s political programme depends
largely on the fulfilment of the promises for national
reconciliation, for the combating of impunity, for
democracy and for power-sharing.
Burundi will need assistance and support from
the international community to overcome those
difficulties and to avoid plunging once again into
instability. The case of that country could be referred
as a priority to the just-created Peacebuilding
Commission, which could constitute an excellent
framework for cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union in the peacebuilding process.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
tension prevailing in the eastern part of the country
attests to the risks threatening the peaceful conclusion
of the transition period. The presence of foreign armed
groups is a source of concern with regard to the
security of civilian populations and a source of tension
among the region’s countries. The absence of State
authority throughout the territory and the lack of a
truly united, integrated and properly equipped national
36
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
army have facilitated cross-border movements of
weapons and combatants and have encouraged the
continued illegal exploitation of natural resources,
which finances weapons trafficking, in violation of the
arms embargo.
The measures established by resolution 1649
(2005) can accelerate the process of disarmament and
of repatriating foreign combatants, and regional
mechanisms such as the Tripartite Plus One Joint
Commission should help restore confidence and reduce
the tension among the countries of the region. We pay
tribute to MONUC and to the United Nations
Operation in Burundi for accomplishing their mandates
and for their efforts to re-establish confidence among
and the protection of the region’s civilian populations.
Respect for national sovereignty and for the
inviolability of borders and the establishment of good-
neighbourly relations constitute the foundations for a
regional security framework that the countries of the
region must define. We hope that the objective of the
Dar es-Salaam Declaration and its action plans and
programmes — a Security, Stability and Development
Pact for the Great Lakes region — will be attained at
the second Summit, planned for Nairobi, and that it
will be adopted as the approach to peacebuilding in the
region.
Finally, we salute the role played by the Group of
Friends of the Great Lakes Region and by other
partners, as well as the cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union, in organizing this
Conference. We hope to see the international
community continue and intensify its multiform aid —
particularly financial aid — to enable us to hold the
Nairobi Summit soon and to ensure the success we
seek.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Senegal, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Badji (Senegal) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I should like first to congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January and to express to you
my delegation’s gratitude for your laudable and timely
initiative in organizing a public debate on the question
of peace, security and development in the Great Lakes
region.
Your initiative is particularly welcome given that
this region has for some months now, following a
lengthy period of upheaval, been experiencing a
positive trend towards peace and accord. This was
highlighted by the holding in November 2004 in Dar
es-Salaam of the first Summit of Heads of State and
Government of the International Conference on Peace,
Security, Democracy and Development in the Great
Lakes Region — an area whose stability is vital to the
entire African continent.
For that reason, my country, Senegal, which has
been following developments related to that
Conference with great interest, was extremely pleased
at the Declaration that emanated from it, which
reminded the leaders of the Great Lakes region that
their people share a common fate and that they have a
responsibility jointly to overcome the demons of
division and, in a spirit of solidarity, to build together,
in a climate of confidence, calm and good-
neighbourliness, the future of their peoples, which are
linked by strong ethnic, cultural and linguistic ties.
The impressive momentum that led to that
outcome must not be allowed to fade, because
declarations of good intentions are not enough; action
must be taken quickly to ensure that the commitments
outlined in the Declaration in the priority areas of
peace, solidarity, security, democracy and governance,
economic development and regional integration, and
humanitarian and social issues are translated into
concrete achievements. That is not the task of the
Governments and the peoples of the Great Lakes
region alone; it must be the result of a joint, agreed
initiative whose success will require a major
contribution on the part of the development partners.
Hence my delegation hopes that the Great Lakes region
will enjoy the support of donor countries, particularly
those of the Group of Eight, whose most recent
Summit, held at Gleneagles in July 2005, gives reason
to hope to those African countries that are faced with a
myriad of difficulties.
The continued support of the international
community for the normalization process in the region
is critical. It should not lose sight of the strategic
importance of the second Summit of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes region, which, we hope,
will take place this year.
During the next stage, where protocols and
programmes of action will be adopted, it will be
important to apply the concept of specific zones for
reconstruction, as set out by my compatriot, Minister
37
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
Ibrahima Fall, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Great Lakes region, to whom I convey
my fraternal regards. That concept respects the
geopolitical realities of the Great Lakes region insofar
as it integrates two forms of cooperation: local
territorial cooperation in all sectors, with the
possibility of the joint management of human
resources; and a partnership-based cooperation, with a
strong interlinkage between all segments of the
population, including youth movements, women’s
groups, civil society and so on.
That project will remain utopian, however, if it
does not receive significant financial support to finance
the specific reconstruction fund, which is aimed at
supporting activities in the specific zones for
reconstruction in the region.
My delegation believes also that it is important to
consolidate, at the State level, what has been achieved
in terms of good governance, democracy, justice,
human rights and the rule of law, as set out in
resolution 1625 (2005). That is a political imperative,
because each internal conflict that results from a
failure to respect those principles risks becoming a
transnational conflict with often disastrous
consequences.
Finally, it is more urgent than ever before to
develop regional early-warning capacities in order to
identify, in a timely manner, threats to peace and
stability in the region and to take the appropriate
measures. Of course, such a mechanism should also be
accompanied by active preventive diplomacy measures,
whose role would be to advocate peace and to resolve
disagreements between political actors or groups
within or among States.
In conclusion, Mr. President, I cannot but
reiterate my pride at your initiative in having convened
this public debate and at the leadership and dedication
of Tanzania, a fraternal and friendly country, in the
process of promoting peace and shared prosperity in
the Great Lakes region, an area of the African
continent that is so dear to all its sons and daughters.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of the Central African Republic, to
whom I give the floor.
Mr. Poukré-Kono (Central African Republic)
(spoke in French): The Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Regional Integration and Francophonie of the Central
African Republic, Mr. Jean-Paul Ngoupande, has asked
me to apologize for not being able to be present at this
meeting of the Security Council on the Great Lakes
region. He wishes it every success.
We deem positive and welcome the initiative to
convene, at the request of the Government of the
United Republic of Tanzania, this meeting of the
Security Council, at the ministerial level, to assess the
significant progress made since the preparatory bodies
of the International Conference on the African Great
Lakes region became operational, and, at the same
time, as set out in the Dar es-Salaam Declaration of
20 November 2004, to move forward towards the
achievement of a common vision that will transform
the region into a space of sustainable peace and
security, political and social stability, and shared
growth and development — a space of cooperation
based on joint strategies and policies within the
framework of a common destiny. I should like here to
pay tribute to the commitment of the Government of
Tanzania, within the Security Council, to seeing that
the major decisions of the Council are translated into
reality — the goal of the draft resolution that is before
us for adoption.
The Central African delegation also welcomes the
dialogue initiated by the United Nations, which placed
the issue of the Great Lakes region under a specialized
Office headed by Mr. Ibrahima Fall, whose
commitment is beyond doubt.
At least 7 of the 11 countries in the area have
gone through the horrors of armed conflicts that had
their origins in diverse factors including recurrent
fratricidal wars, endemic poverty, chronic
underdevelopment, power struggles, and others. To
varying degrees, these countries are benefiting from
post-conflict programmes, but the economic and
strategic stakes in the Great Lakes region, which is rich
and bursting with natural resources that are illicitly
exploited and plundered, have placed the region at the
centre of the interest of the United Nations.
The serious human and social consequences of
these crises and armed conflicts are shown by the large
number of refugees and displaced persons throughout
the Great Lakes region, and by the endemic poverty.
Peace, security and development are closely
linked. No crisis is limited to a single country, because
of the direct or indirect effects on neighbouring
countries. As we can see in some countries, political
38
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
stability and good governance can ensure sustainable
development and prosperity, which can end the
suffering of thousands of people wandering through the
countryside, seeking security. With determination, the
Great Lakes countries must overcome their inertia and
give hope to their suffering peoples by acting on the
sacred principle of human dignity.
Furthermore, the issue of humanitarian assistance
should not be the subject of lengthy debate, because
what is needed is to rapidly provide assistance to
human beings. The consolidated appeal for refugees
and displaced persons should not be held up in any
way.
The principles of the peaceful settlement of
disputes between States and good-neighbourly relations
should prevail during the ongoing consultations on
adopting an integrated comprehensive strategy for
these policies. To do this, the Central African Republic
supports the proposal to adopt two protocols to
strengthen security cooperation among the States in the
region: a regional non-aggression pact and a regional
protocol on good-neighbourliness. This option of
dialogue between States could lead to reliable regional
reconstruction projects.
When we talk about reconstruction, we are
talking about funding. Now that the Dar es-Salaam
Summit has declared the Great Lakes region a
reconstruction and development zone to be
accompanied by a specific fund, the countries
concerned are aware of their primary responsibility to
cooperate in assembling those funds. However, we
must not forget that most of these countries emerging
from sometimes latent conflicts, which harmed their
economic structures, are experiencing great difficulties
in recovering.
At the world summit held during the sixtieth
session of the General Assembly last autumn, His
Excellency General François Bozizé, President of the
Central African Republic, therefore launched an appeal
for solidarity. He said that “in the face of the
difficulties of every kind that may be encountered by
Member States, large or small, solidarity must remain
the key word” (A/60/PV.5, p. 7).
The reasons for engagement of the Central
African Republic in this geographic space relate to
security, geo-strategic, economic and humanitarian
criteria. We have a more than 1,400-kilometre border
with the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We have
welcomed more than 20,000 Rwandan, Burundian and
Congolese refugees during the crisis in the Great Lakes
region. We have commercial relations across the
Congo-Ubangui river with the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and with the Congo. These trade relations
were severely upset by the 1997 war, the second in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which affected
export products such as coffee and palm oil. The
Central African Republic’s fuel shortages in 1999
contributed to the breakdown of our economy, much of
which had been stricken by the destruction of industrial
infrastructure since 1996. In 1994, the Bangui-Mpoko
airport provided an airbase for the French Operation
Turquoise, which was mandated to restore peace to
Rwanda. The intervention in the Central African
Republic from 2001 to 2003 by troops from the former
rebellion of Jean-Pierre Bemba’s Movement for the
Liberation of the Congo is illustrative in many ways of
how conflicts in the Great Lakes region can spread to
the Central African Republic.
This brief analysis suffices to show that the
Central African Republic is affected by the crisis in the
Great Lakes region. Co-opted in 2004, the Central
African Republic will, like two other countries in the
region — Angola and the Congo — become a full
member of the process, with the same decision-making
power as the others.
The National Preparatory Committee of the
Central African Republic has taken a very active part
in all the work of the Great Lakes Conference process.
Twenty-eight projects inspired by or proposed by the
Central African Republic were among the 63 adopted
at the last Regional Preparatory Committee meeting,
held in Mombasa.
The Central African Republic will host in Bangui,
from 20 to 23 February 2006, the third Regional Inter-
Ministerial Committee meeting. This important
meeting will focus on adopting projects and protocols
considered by the regional preparatory committees.
The preparations have begun with the establishment of
an inter-ministerial committee under the chairmanship
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs.
The International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region has significant advantages for all countries
concerned, with regard to the projects to be
implemented at the end of this process. For this reason,
the Central African Republic appeals for additional
resources for the United Nations Office for the Great
39
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
Lakes Region. We would also like to thank the Group
of Friends of the Great Lakes Region for its major
ongoing contribution to the Conference process, with
the support of the United Nations and the African
Union.
The President: I would like to remind
delegations, in the interest of time, to try their best
possible to stick to the five minute time limit.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Nigeria.
Mr. Adekanye (Nigeria): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you for the invitation extended to Nigeria to
participate in this open debate under the Tanzanian
presidency. We consider this initiative by your country
as a reaffirmation of the positive role in activities on
the African continent. We warmly congratulate your
country on its initiative.
Let me also pay tribute to the United Kingdom
presidency of the Council last month.
I wish to express my delegation’s appreciation to
the Security Council for its continuing exertion on the
issue of preventing and resolving conflicts in Africa.
Since the year 2000 this interest has continued to
manifest itself in a number of resolutions, of which
resolution 1649 (2005) — adopted at the summit-level
meeting of the Security Council, at the margin of the
2005 World Summit — is noteworthy. This open
debate is, therefore, yet another indication of the
Council’s determination to find a lasting solution to the
problems that have bedeviled the Great Lakes region.
There is no gainsaying the importance of peace,
security and stability of the Great Lakes for the overall
development of Africa, as well as for the achievement
of noble goals encapsulated in the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development (NEPAD). I wish to recall, in
this connection, the holding of the first International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region in Dar es-
Salaam in November 2004, in which President
Olusegun Obasanjo participated, both in his capacity as
leader of Nigeria, and as Chairman of the African
Union (AU). The issues addressed at that summit —
such as transnational crime and terrorism, disarmament
and repatriation of armed groups, governance issues,
including the rational management of resources and
coordinated approaches towards humanitarian
problems — constitute some of the challenges the
countries in the Great Lakes region face in building
trust and confidence among their peoples.
A second summit, which is being arranged in
Nairobi later this year, would enable the leaders to
adopt protocols and a programme of action that would
impact favourably on the political, social and economic
situation of countries in the region. The international
community should lend its support to the holding of the
summit and provide resources to ensure its success.
There are undoubtedly positive signs of a turn-
around in the political fortunes of countries in the
region, and that bodes well for the cause of peace and
security therein. In particular, the approaching end to
the transition in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the consolidation of peace in Burundi, and the
indictment of the leadership of the Lord’s Resistance
Army, which has wreaked such havoc in parts of the
region, should encourage more active support for the
peace process. In the Democratic of Republic of the
Congo, for example, the support of the international
community for the electoral process and internal
reforms should be unambiguous. It should be given
expression through concrete assistance to the
Congolese Government, for without such substantial
assistance, the path that the Congolese Government is
courageously treading will be bumpy. On the other
hand, such assistance, when provided, will send a
positive message of support for the political process. It
will especially enable that Government confidently to
address governance issues, including the strengthening
of national institutions. Nigeria believes, however, that
national and regional ownership should remain
paramount in such efforts.
As regards the role of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, we believe it should be able, under its
current mandate, to deploy United Nations troops
strategically, especially in the border areas, so as to
prevent arms smuggling. That would also be a
confidence-building measure. Meanwhile, I wish to
join previous speakers in conveying to the Government
of Guatemala our condolences and heartfelt sympathies
for the deaths of eight members of its contingent.
The swearing-in on Friday, 26 August 2005 of
Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza as the new President of Burundi
rekindled hope for the future of the people of that
country. The power-sharing agreement signed in
40
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
Pretoria, South Africa, in 2003 set the stage for the
election that brought him to power. Burundi should be
encouraged and assisted to deepen the process of
constitutional reform and national integration and
development. The cooperation of the international
community with the regional and subregional
organizations would strengthen the capacity of Burundi
to follow through on its commitments under the new
constitution.
The impending completion of the United Nations
Operation in Burundi should not signal the end of the
United Nations presence in Burundi. On the contrary,
Nigeria views the next phase in that country’s
development — the-post conflict phase — as providing
an opportunity to activate and implement a programme
of reconstruction and development. We anticipate that
the newly established Peacebuilding Commission will
play a role in that regard. Nigeria has no doubt that the
country’s new leadership has the political will to
sustain the current positive changes in the country.
Nigeria considers the activities of non-State
actors to be a major threat to peace and security,
especially in the Great Lakes region. As the Council
recognized in resolution 1649 (2005), the combination
of the proliferation of and traffic in arms, the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, and the illicit trade in
those resources by those groups have continued to fuel
and exacerbate conflicts in the region. A firm and
unambiguous stand by the international community is
needed to rein in those groups and to hold them and
their collaborators, within and outside the region,
accountable for their misdeeds, including the violation
of international humanitarian law. Neighbouring
countries should not allow the use of their territories as
launching pads for attacks by those groups.
It is Nigeria’s expectation that there will emerge
from this debate a clear message signaling the resolve
of the Security Council to support regional and
subregional initiatives targeted at promoting peace,
security and development in the Great Lakes region.
Such support should encompass the identification of a
new and effective mechanism of cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union, whose
Peace and Security Council is also actively seized with
those issues within the context of Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter.
Secondly, the capacities of the countries in the
region to meet the various challenges before them
should be enhanced through a substantial infusion of
assistance from donor countries and international
financial institutions.
Thirdly, democracy, good governance, the rule of
law and the protection of human rights should remain
important principles in the pursuit of initiatives on
peace and security in the region. National and regional
institutions should be nurtured and, where they are
weak, strengthened so as to ensure that those principles
are entrenched.
Finally, the humanitarian problems created in the
wake of the conflicts and reflected in the high number
of refugees, internally displayed persons and returnees
in the region should be addressed in a global and
comprehensive manner. That should be done through
the coordination of assistance among providers,
including civil society groups. The focus of those
efforts should continue to be the rehabilitation of
victims and their integration into the mainstream of
national life once conflicts are over.
The President: I call on the representative of
Pakistan.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): It is a pleasure to
participate in this debate, especially at this propitious
time on Friday evening.
The Pakistan delegation welcomes your presence
in New York, Madam, to preside over this important
meeting. We congratulate Ambassador Mahiga and the
Tanzanian delegation on their skilful guidance of the
Council’s work this month and on their initiative in
holding this debate. Let me also express our
appreciation to Ambassador Emyr Jones Parry for the
United Kingdom’s successful presidency last month
and wish Tanzania’s successor, Ambassador John
Bolton of the United States, an equally successful
presidency next month.
The relevance of this debate has been illustrated
by the recent casualties suffered by Guatemala’s
United Nations peacekeepers in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We offer Guatemala our deep
condolences. Yet, that incident cannot mask the
considerable progress that has been made towards
peace and development in the Great Lakes region,
including the completion of the peace process leading
to the democratically elected Government in Burundi,
and the encouraging democratic transition in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Pakistan has
41
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
contributed and is contributing to the international
effort in both countries through our peacekeeping
contingents in the United Nations Operation in Burundi
and the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).
Earlier speakers, including African ministers
from the region, offered a clear perspective and
important proposals that deserve the Council’s close
consideration. Let me, on behalf of Pakistan, mention
five points which appear essential to building peace
and security and advancing development in that region.
First, it is important to consolidate the gains
made so far. That requires the sustained engagement of
the United Nations and the continued cooperation of
the countries of the region. This debate has affirmed
that the regional States and the United Nations are
committed to that course. In that context, the vital
importance of promoting good-neighbourly relations
based on mutual respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of all States of
the region cannot be overemphasized.
Your country, Madam, has played a leading role
in promoting such regional relations, especially at the
first International Conference on Peace, Security,
Democracy and Development in the Great Lakes
Region, held in Dar es-Salaam in November 2004, and
in the implementation of the Dar es-Salaam
Declaration and preparations for a second summit. An
effective regional mechanism for the peaceful
settlement and resolution of disputes could constitute
an important component in fostering a peaceful and
cooperative neighbourhood.
Secondly, the urgent challenges need to be
frontally addressed. Foremost among those challenges
is the effective and complete disarmament and
demobilization of armed groups and militias. They
pose a pervasive threat to peace and can sabotage the
achievements of the peace processes.
The tragic incident of 23 January, in which eight
Guatemalan peacekeepers were killed, and the incident
last February, in which nine Bangladeshi peacekeepers
were ambushed by outlawed militias in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, indicate the need
to fully evaluate the strategies that must be employed
to promote sustainable security in that and other parts
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region. We urge the Secretary-General to investigate
the circumstances of those incidents and identify any
possible shortcomings in the conception of the mandate
vis-à-vis force generation and deployment, intelligence
gathering, forced disarmament and other kinds of
robust action. We hope that after such an investigation,
the Secretary-General will be able to recommend steps
to address such shortcomings. MONUC has been
provided with a robust mandate, but robust operations
must be undertaken with adequate strength and
resources. Otherwise, the lives of peacekeepers are in
danger. Is MONUC adequately staffed, equipped and
resourced to carry out that mandate while operating in
what are called particularly hazardous conditions?
Thirdly, the United Nations should support the
endeavour of the African States to assume ownership
for securing solutions to African problems. Security
Council resolutions 1625 (2005) and 1631 (2005)
represent steps in the Organization’s evolving
relationship with the African Union, as will the
resolution that will be adopted following this debate.
The role of the United Nations remains central in the
maintenance of international peace and security, but it
should actively support capacity-building in the
African Union in various fields and should secure the
latter’s services where possible to complement the
work of the Organization.
Fourthly, sustainable peace in the Great Lakes
region cannot be realized without a sustained and
sufficient international commitment to support the
region’s economic and social development. In that
regard, we hope that the Peacebuilding Commission
will be a valuable mechanism to marshal the necessary
resources and cooperation to consolidate peace and
prevent the recurrence of conflict in the Great Lakes
region. We highly appreciate the role that Tanzania and
Ambassador Mahiga played in the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
Fifthly, sustainable peace and successful
economic growth in the region cannot be achieved
without addressing the complex root causes of the
threats to security. Foremost among them is the illegal
exploitation of the region’s natural resources. That
must be addressed from both the supply and the
demand sides. We must follow up and not forget the
Kassem report. Those involved in illegal exploitation
of natural resources, and the financiers and profiteers
of that illegal trade, must be equally held accountable.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
42
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I wish to start by
congratulating you, Madame President, and your
delegation, on behalf of Brazil for convening this open
debate on the important subject of the Great Lakes
region, which is now a major stage for initiatives not
only in the field of peace and security but also on
issues inextricably linked to that field, such as
democracy, human rights and development.
With regard to the positive side of the question, I
should mention the completion in 2005 of the Peer
Review Mechanism of the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development (NEPAD) in Rwanda, the
successful conduct of the constitutional referendum in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the end of
conflict and the holding of fair and transparent
elections in Burundi, the beginning of the return of
refugees who had been in Tanzania for decades, and
the likelihood of some economic recovery in the
subregion. It is also worth mentioning the
establishment of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region and its first Summit in 2004,
which set the ground for much-needed dialogue and
mutual understanding.
However, the overall situation in the region
remains very complex. Along with the encouraging
aspects I just highlighted, there continues to be an
outrageous number of casualties caused by war-related
diseases, reports of gross violations of human rights,
including acts of sexual violence against women, and,
in the political arena, the entanglement of warlords
with the economic interests of local and foreign
groups.
The Security Council and the international
community as a whole have been providing crucial
support for peacekeeping missions and humanitarian
efforts in the region. Likewise, the African Union,
regional organizations and African leaders have been
committed to the promotion of peace and stability in an
area often presented as the heart of Africa. But the
challenges continue to be tremendous.
Peacekeeping efforts in the region have exacted a
very heavy toll. The incidents that took place this
month, victimizing Guatemalan troops of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) — eight of them
lethally — are a stark reminder of the sacrifices being
made by peacekeepers and by troop-contributing
countries in the quest to promote peace. They also
point out the disproportionate burden borne by
developing countries in United Nations peacekeeping
operations.
It is necessary to continue to support strategies
for peace and development in the Great Lakes region.
In that connection, an important principle to be
observed is that of African ownership in solving
pending crises and problems in that region. This goes
beyond entrusting regional and subregional African
security mechanisms with responsibility over military
operations and providing financial backing and
capacity-building support, as it must also allow for the
increased involvement of African collective and
national structures in the decision-making processes
regarding the solution of the crises.
The United Nations structure itself, in particular
the composition of the Security Council, shows the
need for such adjustments, including an increased
African membership. Without a balanced and fair
composition at the decision-making level, there is little
hope of correcting the practices that have led to the
current almost paradoxical situation. Despite the fact
that African issues occupy the greater part of the
agenda of the Security Council, it is not uncommon to
see reports in the press about the indifference of the
international community to the situation in that
continent.
Open meetings such as this one should also
become common practice before the adoption of major
decisions, as a means to promote greater involvement
of the United Nations membership and to enhance not
only transparency, but also the quality of the decisions
reached by the Council.
It is in this spirit that my delegation expresses
hope for the new Peacebuilding Commission. With
increased participation and a multidisciplinary focus by
design, the Commission should be able to devise new
strategies to avoid the recurrence of conflict, ensure the
consolidation of peace and promote efforts leading to
sustainable development.
In keeping with the regional approach, the
Peacebuilding Commission could consider taking on
the challenge of addressing the complex situation of
the Great Lakes region, in close cooperation with the
International Conference. The Conference seems to
have made progress in proposing legal frameworks and
confidence-building measures. Its technical committees
are working on the major issues relating to the
43
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
promotion of peace, security and development in the
whole region, such as the illegal exploitation of
mineral resources, land issues and border controls.
Finally, my delegation believes that ownership,
inclusiveness and legitimacy are all essential elements
clearly identified in the International Conference and
that the process must be fully supported.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cameroon.
Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in
French): Allow me at the outset to congratulate you,
Madam, upon your presidency of the Security Council,
which you and your country are successfully
accomplishing during this month of January, and for
holding this public debate on peace, security and
development in the Great Lakes region.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to thank the Secretary-General for the quality, density
and exhaustive nature of his report.
Mr. Ibrahima Fall, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, has
just made his presentation with the eloquence and
brilliance with which we are familiar. We thank him for
being able, with commitment but also in a very tactful
and discreet way, to support the States of the region in
preparing for and following up the first International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region. We
congratulate and thank him for his support for the
emergence of a climate of confidence among States of
the region, a climate propitious for holding the Second
Summit.
Cameroon strongly condemns the attack of
23 January on a detachment of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), which caused the death of eight
soldiers of the Guatemalan contingent. Cameroon
sends its sincere condolences to Guatemala in this
painful hour.
The Great Lakes region is strongly committed to
seeking peace. Of course, serious efforts are still
needed to consolidate the peace and stability that are
the prerequisites for sustainable economic and social
development. The countries of the region, supported by
the international community, must redouble their
efforts to achieve the hopes for peace. My delegation
welcomes the fact that the Dar es-Salaam statement of
principle set out the road map to be followed. Since
then a process has been launched that allows us to
move towards that objective.
The challenges to be overcome at all costs
involve peace and security, democracy and good
governance, economic development and regional
integration, as well as humanitarian and social issues.
The interrelationship among those challenges and the
interdependence of the countries of the Great Lakes
region call for an integrated approach and for enhanced
cooperation in various forms. A framework is in place.
It must be strengthened, and we must continue the
negotiations within that framework.
The regional dynamic of peace, integration and
economic development depends on the stability of the
States in the region. My delegation would like to
welcome the generally positive political developments
taking place in those countries.
In Burundi we welcome all the efforts carried out
to achieve successful transition in line with the spirit of
Arusha, and we encourage the new authorities to
follow the process of reconstruction and to do so
through dialogue. The international community,
through the forum of partners of Burundi, must
continue to support them in their efforts. There is no
doubt whatsoever that the future Peacebuilding
Commission will also contribute with the means at its
disposal.
The return to peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will, we are sure,
allow a qualitative step towards the definitive
stabilization of the Great Lakes region. The recent
developments, with the success of the referendum on
the constitution and the good preparations for the
general elections on 30 June, are cause for real
optimism.
Here I wish to point out the symbolic value of the
date chosen for the elections. The thirtieth of June is
the day on which the Congolese people, as one man
and led by Patrice Emery Lumumba, made the solemn
promise to Africa and to the whole world to build a
Congo that was free, united and prosperous. Our wish
is that on that day that speech of 30 June will resonate
with the same force and energy in the hearts and minds
of all Congolese people.
Cameroon strongly favours a political process in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo that is
consensual, transparent and inclusive. However, there
44
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
are several pitfalls in the road ahead. There is still the
matter of armed groups. To end that problem the
countries of the region must, individually and
collectively, take resolute and concerted action. The
disbanding of armed groups and the disarmament,
repatriation and reintegration of former combatants,
including foreign combatants, is the other important
element of those needed efforts.
My country also welcomes in that connection the
fact that the Security Council adopted resolution 1649
(2005), which strengthens the action being taken
against those armed groups, who continue to threaten
civilians, especially women and children. They also
threaten the electoral process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and stability in the region.
Furthermore, the countries of the region and the
international community must increase their efforts in
the fight against the illegal exploitation of and illicit
trade in natural resources and the proliferation of and
trafficking in weapons that fuel the conflicts.
Finally — and this is our heartfelt conviction —
there can be no lasting peace in that region if women
and children continue to be marginalized and exploited
and subjected to violence of all forms, including sexual
violence. In that regard we welcome the quality of the
discussions in the Executive Board of the United
Nations Development Programme on 25 January.
It can never be said often enough that the success
of the upcoming International Conference on Peace,
Security, Stability and Development of the Great Lakes
Region will open new horizons for peace and
development. The international community must
support those countries in their efforts for the success
of that meeting. It should also support their efforts to
achieve peace and development.
Cameroon, for its part, is contributing to those
efforts in many ways. The Council will recall that in
1996, when it was holding the presidency of the pan-
African organization, President Paul Biya formally
proposed to the United Nations the idea of an
international conference on the Great Lakes. We
welcome the fact that that idea is now a reality.
By contributing a military observer and civilian
police personnel in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in Burundi, Cameroon is working towards
peace and stability in the Great Lakes region. As
Mr. Ibrahima Fall said earlier today, the region lies at
the heart of the geopolitical space of Central Africa,
Southern Africa and East Africa.
I conclude by paying tribute to the memory of all
peacekeepers who have lost their lives on the field of
honour as they strove to build a world of peace and
progress.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Skinner-Klée (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): I wish to begin by congratulating the United
Republic of Tanzania on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. It is
a privilege to see its Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation, Her Excellency the
Honourable Asha-Rose Mtengeti Migiro, presiding
over today’s meeting.
I wish also to express our gratitude for today’s
numerous statements of solidarity with my country in
connection with the tragic deaths of eight members of
the Guatemalan contingent of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC). The blood spilled by my
compatriots serves as a confirmation of my country’s
commitment to the regional stability and peace that is
so sorely needed by our brethren on the African
continent.
My country has followed very closely the armed
chaos endured by the peoples of the Great Lakes region
over the course of nearly four decades of internal
conflict. We understand and are convinced of the need
for efforts to ensure that the peoples of the region can
attain development. That requires an environment of
peace, security and political stability.
I wish to focus on two countries of the region:
Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
where Guatemalan military observers and special
forces are stationed. In 2000, the Economic and Social
Council added a new dimension to its work with the
establishment of Ad Hoc Advisory Groups on African
countries emerging from conflict. During its
presidency of the Economic and Social Council in
2003, Guatemala proposed the establishment of such a
group for Burundi. The Ad Hoc Advisory Groups have
proved to be a useful tool for bringing together
development partners, including within the United
Nations system, the Bretton Woods institutions and the
broader donor community, with a view to jointly
45
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
considering the needs of the countries in question. The
Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Burundi adopted a broad
approach to issues related to the transition and
recovery processes in that country, which averted a
renewal of conflict.
With the imminent operationalization of the
Peacebuilding Commission, we urge the Commission’s
Organizational Committee to consider countries such
as Burundi and hope that such consideration will be
possible through the anticipated machinery of
Commission meetings focusing on specific countries.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo we
have seen slow but positive progress. My country joins
the Secretary-General and the membership of the
General Assembly in congratulating the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on the successful constitutional
referendum held on 18 and 19 December 2005, and we
hope that free, impartial, transparent and democratic
elections will similarly be held by 30 June 2006, when
the transitional period ends.
At the same time, Guatemala notes with concern
that militias and foreign armed groups continue
hostilities in the region. These are exemplified by the
recent attacks against Guatemalan troops by the rebel
Lord’s Resistance Army. We need speedily to learn the
details of how that tragic incident occurred. In that
regard, my delegation echoes the words of the
representative of Pakistan.
We encourage the countries of the region to
enforce the arms embargo on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and to impose the strictest possible
controls on illegal cross-border transfers of natural
resources and weapons and on cross-border movements
of fighters.
Guatemala has benefited directly from a United
Nations peacebuilding mission, which is why we
understand the enormous importance of those who
work in the Organization’s peace operations. Without
the shadow of a doubt, this is a basic activity and
fundamental objective of the United Nations, the sole
international body with the credibility and legitimacy
and with the right tools to carry out these difficult but
necessary tasks. That is why, despite the recent tragic
deaths, my Government remains fully prepared to
continue to support United Nations peace operations. I
reiterate my country’s commitment to the
Organization’s peacekeeping operations and my
delegation’s readiness to continue to work to improve
the peacekeeping system. We are convinced that every
effort in that regard will further the high founding
ideals of the United Nations and will help it to carry
out one of its essential Charter functions.
Let me conclude by paying tribute to the memory
of all those who have lost their lives in the service of
understanding and peacebuilding under the United
Nations flag.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mr. Løvald (Norway): Permit me at the outset to
express my Government’s sincere condolences to the
representative of Guatemala, to his Government and to
the bereaved families of the eight Guatemalan
peacekeepers who were recently killed in the line of
duty as they worked on behalf of the United Nations.
Norway supports the encouraging developments
in several countries of the Great Lakes region,
including the positive election process in Burundi and
the ongoing transition process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Norway acknowledges the
importance of continued active United Nations
engagement and of the African commitment to
peacekeeping and mediation in the Great Lakes region.
Norway strongly supports regional initiatives to
enhance stability in the Great Lakes region, including
the forthcoming second Great Lakes Summit and the
adoption of the proposed Security, Stability and
Development Pact, as well as the Tripartite Plus One
Commission.
The recent history of the Great Lakes region has
shown very clearly that national borders are porous and
that loyalties transcend State frontiers. As a
consequence, the security of any one country cannot be
seen in isolation; it is part of the larger regional
picture. Internal war or conflict in one country
produces a spillover effect in other countries in the
region. That is particularly visible in terms of the
movement of refugees, weapons and rebel groups.
The recent killing of eight peacekeepers of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) by the
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) clearly illustrates that
regional security dimension. A positive outcome of the
transitional process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is essential for the stability of the entire region.
The Government of Norway is therefore very
46
S/PV.5359 (Resumption 1)
concerned about the negative impact of the LRA’s
activities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The conflict between the Government of Uganda and
the LRA not only has grave consequences for the
Ugandan civilians living in camps in appalling
conditions; it also affects the security of civilians in the
whole region. In addition, the conflict affects the
security and operational space of United Nations
peacekeeping missions: MONUC and the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) has taken
an important step by issuing its first arrest warrants for
five Lord’s Resistance Army commanders. Norway
will continue to support the ICC in its efforts to bring
an end to impunity for grave human rights violators.
The Government of Norway acknowledges the
fact that the responsibility to protect all Ugandan
citizens lies with the Government of Uganda. However,
it is also Norway’s view that the LRA represents a
threat to regional peace and security. Norway therefore
urges the Security Council to address, at the earliest
possible date, the grave impact of the actions of the
LRA.
The President: It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to vote on the draft resolution
(S/2006/51) before it. If I hear no objection, I shall put
the draft resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, China, the Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, France, Ghana, Greece, Japan, Peru,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Slovakia, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America
The President: There were 15 votes in
favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1653 (2006).
The hour is late, but it would be remiss on my
part and on the part of the delegation of the United
Republic of Tanzania if we were to conclude this
fruitful discussion without expressing our gratitude to
the Security Council for having agreed to hold this
open debate.
I thank all the members of the Security Council
for the spirit of cooperation with which they have
worked with my delegation to get this resolution
adopted and for having adopted it as a presidential text.
I pay tribute to all other members who, in one way or
another, made a valuable contribution to the elements
contained in the resolution.
The resolution that the Council has just adopted
is a demonstration of our renewed commitment to the
realization of durable peace and security for the
sustainable development of our region. We look
forward to its earnest implementation.
We are indebted to the Ministers and to all those
who have travelled from various capitals to participate
in the deliberations we have held.
Finally, I thank very warmly members of the
Secretariat for their hard work and for the
organizational support they have provided to make this
meeting a success.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 7.25 p.m.
