United Nations S/PV.5947
Security Council
Sixty-third year
5947thmeeting
Thursday, 31 July 2008, 9.40 p.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.
08-44474 (E)
*0844474*
President: Mr Le Luong Minh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Viet Nam)
Members: Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Grauls
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Kafando
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wang Guangya
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Urbina
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Skračić
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. De Rivière
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Kleib
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mantovani
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mubarak
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Suescum
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Churkin
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Qwabe
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . Sir John Sawers
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wolff
Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the deployment of the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2008/443)
S/PV.5947
08-444742
The meeting was called to order at 9.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2008/443)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Sudan in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mohamad
(Sudan) took the seat reserved for him at the
Council table.
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/506, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Members also have before them the report of the
Secretary-General on the deployment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur in
document S/2008/443.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Indonesia, Italy, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Panama, Russian Federation, South
Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Viet Nam
Against:
None
Abstaining:
United States of America
The President: The result of the voting is as
follows: 14 votes in favour, none against and
1 abstention. The draft resolution has been adopted as
resolution 1828 (2008).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): May I begin
by saying that the United Kingdom welcomes the
adoption of resolution 1828 (2008) by the Security
Council today and that, as the informal coordinator of
the resolution, I am very grateful to all Council
members for their help. We came very close to
achieving a consensus, and I regret that it was only
lack of time, really, that prevented us from being able
to address the outstanding concerns of one delegation.
I want to make two fundamental points about
today’s discussions. The first is that the entire Council,
we believe, is behind the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and
wants it to succeed. I think that will become clear in
the statements that we are making after this vote.
When in 2007 the Security Council first
mandated the African Union-United Nations force in
Darfur, we made a commitment to help bring security
to the people of Darfur. We have renewed that
commitment today. It is not a commitment that we take
lightly. The recent attack in which seven peacekeepers
were killed was a grim reminder of the difficulties and
dangers that UNAMID peacekeepers face daily. I pay
tribute once again to those who died. We owe it to
them and to their colleagues to renew our efforts for
peace and stability in Darfur, throughout Sudan and
throughout the region.
The second point I want to make about today’s
discussions is that no position has been taken by the
S/PV.5947
308-44474
Security Council on the question of whether to take
any action in the light of the proposal of the Chief
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC) to
indict President Al-Bashir. That issue is to be addressed
on another day.
Let me be clear about the United Kingdom’s
position. The United Kingdom did not believe that it
was right to consider such an important issue as part of
a resolution renewing UNAMID’s mandate. It was of
course the Security Council that decided in resolution
1593 (2005) that the situation in Darfur warranted
investigation by the ICC. We will not stand in the way
of a Security Council discussion of whether there is a
case for invoking article 16 of the Rome Statute in
relation to President Al-Bashir, but that discussion will
raise profound questions about the relationship
between peace and justice. It is not something that the
Security Council should rush into.
Building on the support for today’s resolution, the
Security Council and the Secretariat are facing three
tasks in the future. First, we should do all we can to
accelerate UNAMID’s deployment. This resolution
endorses the Secretary-General’s target of having
80 per cent of the force in place by the end of this year,
that is, in five months’ time. We all know the obstacles,
but much more needs to be done to overcome them.
Secondly, the Council has to give its unstinting
support to the political process. We very much
welcome the appointment of Mr. Bassolé as Chief
Mediator; he has our full backing.
Thirdly, the Council will need to continue
considering the important issues of justice and
impunity in Darfur. Article 16 of the ICC Statute will
be part of that discussion, but it will not be only the
part. Sudan’s lack of cooperation with the ICC will
also be directly relevant, as will other factors.
The Council’s discussions on Darfur have made
clear that, while there are different views on tackling
the issue of impunity, our support for UNAMID and
the efforts of the United Nations and the African Union
to bring security and stability to Darfur is unstinting.
Those efforts are central to the pursuit of peace in
Darfur, and the Security Council cannot give up on that
goal. It is still some way off. It will require patience,
determination and a willingness to grapple with
difficult decisions along the way, but peace is
attainable, and we must continue to strive for it.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation has consistently
supported the efforts of the international community to
resolve the situation in the Sudanese province of
Darfur. The activities of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) have
become an inseparable component of the Darfur peace
process, and their significance cannot be
overestimated. Moreover, UNAMID is a good example
of close, practical cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in the area of
peacekeeping in Africa. Accordingly, we deemed it
necessary not just to support but to insist on the timely
adoption of the draft resolution extending the mandate
of UNAMID.
However, we have serious concerns about the
possible negative development of events in the Sudan
following the application of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) to the judges of the
ICC requesting the issuance of a warrant to arrest the
President of the Sudan. We do not rule out the
possibility that hardline rebel groups hampering
progress in the Darfur political process will take
advantage of the situation in order to step up their
campaign against the Government of Sudan in this
region. Concern in that respect has been expressed by
senior Secretariat officials. The United Nations partner
in UNAMID, the African Union, stated that it was
advisable for the Council to exercise its authority under
article 16 of the Rome Statute of ICC to defer the
decision of the Court. A similar position is held by the
Non-Aligned Movement, the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and the League of Arab States.
States members of those authoritative organizations
represent quite simply the views of two thirds of the
international community.
Unfortunately, that concern was not fully
reflected in the resolution as a result of resistance by a
number of Security Council members. The position
taken by those delegations could have unforeseen and
negative consequences in the context of building
relations between the Government of the Sudan and the
international community to conduct a peacekeeping
operation and to resolve the conflict in Darfur. The
responsibility for those consequences fully rests on
their shoulders.
We fully agree with the need for justice to be
done in Darfur, including against persons indicted of
heinous crimes. It must be done, however, without
S/PV.5947
08-444744
neglecting other equally important factors that could
have an impact on the stability of an important region
of Africa. We hope that the Security Council will
continue its search for the best balance between peace
and justice in Darfur. That was precisely the appeal
made by the Secretary-General.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica views this meeting as an important
occasion. We have just adopted a resolution, the text of
which renews the mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and
the commitment of this Council to peace in that region.
We always took part in the negotiations with the
purpose of ensuring that the resolution include all the
elements necessary for UNAMID to meet its
objectives. In the course of the negotiations, we stated
our opposition to the inclusion of elements that had no
direct bearing on the Mission and that should have
been addressed on a different occasion and in different
circumstances.
We would have liked the resolution to spell out
the role that justice should play, in the Council’s view,
in resolving the conflict in the Sudan. That is why we
supported the original text, which referred to the
presidential statement of 16 June 2008. However, we
have voted in favour of a text that does not include that
reference but that, in the first preambular paragraph,
reaffirms all previous resolutions and presidential
statements adopted by the Council on the situation in
the Sudan. As far as Costa Rica is concerned, that
paragraph unconditionally reaffirms the presidential
statement of 16 June 2008, in which the Council
unanimously reaffirmed resolution 1593 (2005) and its
request to the Government of the Sudan to honour its
obligations stemming from that resolution, including
that of cooperating with the International Criminal
Court.
My delegation welcomes the fact that the
resolution we have just adopted maintains the
Council’s commitment to bring to justice those who
have violated the rights of the most vulnerable in that
conflict.
We also would have liked to include in the text a
reference to other peacekeeping missions performing
their tasks in countries bordering the Sudan. As on
other occasions, we have advocated a regional
approach that responds to the needs of the Sudan as a
whole and takes into account the problems of
neighbouring countries, the conflicts of which
influence and determine the course of those in the
Sudan.
In conclusion, we would like to make it very
clear that we agreed to omit explicit reference in the
resolution to elements that are important to us and vital
for resolving the situation in the Sudan for the sake of
unity in the Council and in order to ensure that
UNAMID can carry out its mandate.
Mr. Skračić (Croatia): The Security Council has
now adopted resolution 1828 (2008) authorizing the
extension of the mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) for
another year. That is an outcome reached through
extensive dialogue and consultations by members of
the Security Council and the result of Council
members’ wishes to seek common ground, which
unfortunately did not result in a much-desired
consensus.
Croatia wanted the resolution to provide a swift
and unambiguous extension to the mandate of
UNAMID with the goal of achieving its planned 80 per
cent deployment by year’s end. UNAMID is currently
the largest and most expensive United Nations
operation and, as such, should command the
unanimous support of the Council and requires clear
guidance in order to make its logistics and deployment
possible. Croatia strongly believes that that is crucial
for the safety, security and well-being of the people of
Darfur — the same people who have been suffering in
the most horrific ways for simply far too long. The
protection of those people is the main objective of the
deployment of UNAMID and that is the primary reason
that we voted for the adoption of the resolution,
notwithstanding its being burdened by some important
but unrelated additional elements.
That brings me to my main point, the cooperation
of the Government of the Sudan with the International
Criminal Court, which has been the source of some
controversy and contention, even more so as references
to it have been included in the resolution in question.
On behalf of my delegation, allow me to make
the following observation. Croatia itself was the victim
of brutal aggression in the early 1990s. If the recent
history of our region has taught us anything, we can
say with some certainty that impunity for war crimes
does not bring stability to any conflict, but rather
prolongs the realization of political settlements. If
S/PV.5947
508-44474
anything, we have learned that the best foundation for
real and sustainable peace based on reconciliation is
justice and justice alone.
Another lesson learned that should be reiterated
here is that war crimes are an individual responsibility
and that people, not nations or ethnic groups, commit
them. For that reason, Croatia has supported and
continues to offer its full support for the work of the
International Criminal Court and its Prosecutor. We see
the Court as an independent body and do not wish to
see any impediment to its free and independent work.
We also understand that resolution 1828 (2008)
reaffirms the text of the presidential statement of
16 June 2008, which clearly states that the Government
of the Sudan should cooperate fully with the
International Criminal Court in order to put an end to
impunity for the crimes committed in Darfur.
On a final note, when considering the complexity
of the problem in Darfur, in the Sudan and in the
subregion, Croatia has also advocated a regional
approach to the region’s problems. For that reason, we
have always welcomed and encouraged cooperation
between the United Nations and African Union-led
mission in the Sudan and neighbouring countries, and
we would have liked to have seen the final text of the
resolution make reference to those efforts.
Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Security Council has just adopted a resolution on
the extension of the mandate of the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). It is an important resolution. Its adoption
has provided the basic guarantee for the successful
implementation of the mandate of the largest
international peacekeeping operation in the history of
the United Nations. It is on those grounds that the
Chinese delegation voted in favour of the resolution.
The issue of the Sudan has attracted the enormous
attention of the international community in recent
years. All parties have come to understand that the
peace and stability of the Sudan, an important country
on the African continent, has an impact on the peace
and stability of the region and the continent as a whole
that cannot be ignored. The Sudan is a country with a
large territory, many neighbours and complicated
historical, religious, economic and social issues. It has
endured protracted wars and disputes.
However, in recent years, thanks to the concerted
efforts of the Sudanese Government and all political
forces in the country, and with the generous assistance
of the international community, the Sudan has achieved
notable progress in the peace process. The signing of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement signified the end
of the decades-long war between the North and the
South. People have every reason to expect that the
Sudan will finally embark on the right track of peace
and development.
The tremendous potential for development should
not only enable the Sudan to feed and clothe its people
and bring them a happy life, but also make it possible
to contribute to peace and development in Africa as a
whole, which is in the common interest of the
international community. So long as they are conducive
to the peace process in the Sudan, all efforts that help
improve North-South relations in the country, facilitate
the settlement of the Darfur issue and promote
harmony between the various political parties deserve
the generous support of the international community.
As part of the Sudan’s domestic problems, the
Darfur issue has been at the centre of the international
spotlight in recent years. The Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, jointly carried out by the United Nations and
the African Union, is a mission involving huge
investment and of unprecedented size. Its success not
only concerns the early stabilization of the security
situation in Darfur and the smooth delivery of
humanitarian assistance on the ground, but also has an
impact on the safety and security of the tens of
thousands of international peacekeepers in the country.
Moreover, the fundamental solution to the Darfur
issue lies in political negotiations. Without sincere
political consensus of all parties in Darfur on the
pursuit of peace, there can be no peace in the region,
no matter how many international peacekeepers the
United Nations sends to the region. The successes and
failures of international peacekeeping operations in
recent years have shown repeatedly that a basic
prerequisite for the success of any international
peacekeeping mission is to seek the appreciation and
cooperation of the Government and the people of the
country concerned. Without that prerequisite,
international peacekeeping operations, no matter how
meticulously designed, can experience setbacks and
even failure.
Through several years of exploration, the
international community has deepened its thinking on
the Darfur issue and has gradually formed consensus
S/PV.5947
08-444746
on basic approaches such as the dual-track strategy and
the tripartite mechanism. The core of that approach is
to give equal emphasis to the political process and the
deployment of peacekeepers in an effort to establish a
political mechanism of mutual trust and cooperation
among United Nations, the African Union and the
Sudanese Government, with particular emphasis on
promoting the Sudanese Government’s cooperation
initiative. Those successful mechanisms have been
important for the progress made so far and, thus,
should be fully respected and supported by all parties.
The Darfur issue is very complicated. The
international effort for its settlement involves various
elements. To achieve desirable results and win the
genuine support of the people of the Sudan and Africa,
it is necessary to manage the overall balance and
priorities of political negotiations, the deployment of
peacekeepers, humanitarian relief, economic
development and justice, and to move forward steadily
with good coordination among all parties. Only in that
way can the course of international peacekeeping
continue along the correct path with healthy progress.
Any imprudent and hasty action that disregards
the objective conditions, despite its good intentions,
cannot gain the approval and support of the
international community. At present, the parties
concerned are striving to find a political solution to the
Darfur issue, but no progress will be possible without
the full cooperation of the Sudanese Government. The
indictment of the Sudanese leader proposed by the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC) is
an inappropriate decision taken at an inappropriate
time. It will seriously undermine the atmosphere of
mutual political trust and cooperation between the
United Nations and the Sudanese Government, fuel the
arrogance of the rebel groups not willing in the
political process and harm the fragile and turbulent
security situation in Darfur.
The proposed indictment therefore inevitably
came under extensive criticism from many countries,
represented by important international organizations
such as the African Union, the League of Arab States,
the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the
Non-Aligned Movement. That deserves the Security
Council’s full attention and respect. China is of the
view that seeking to resolve the issue of impunity
through the indictment of the Sudanese leader by the
ICC will only derail the process of resolving the Darfur
issue, and even render useless all efforts made so far by
all parties for the proper settlement of the issue.
The Security Council bears the political
responsibility for the overall peace process in the
Sudan. It must approach the issue from the political
perspective to ensure that the overall interests of the
political process and the peacekeeping deployment in
Darfur are not compromised.
Recently, during the consultations on the text of
the draft resolution on the extension of the mandate of
UNAMID, many members of the Council expressed
insightful views that China fully endorses. China
supports the reasonable request by the African Union
and other organizations for the Council to take early
action to suspend the indictment of the Sudanese leader
by the ICC, in accordance with the relevant provisions.
The Chinese Government has done a great deal of
work to push for the settlement of the Darfur issue.
Chinese peacekeepers are already on the front line of
the international peacekeeping operation in Darfur. At
present, all the engineering contingents participating in
the mission in Darfur have been deployed. The Chinese
Government is duty-bound to create favourable
conditions for them to carry out the international
peacekeeping mission safely and smoothly. I solemnly
pledge that the Chinese Government will work with the
rest of the international community to push for an early
settlement of the Darfur issue and to contribute to the
peace, stability and development of Darfur.
Mr. Mubarak (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to commend the
delegation of the United Kingdom for its tremendous
effort in preparing today’s draft resolution on the
extension of the mandate of African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) for a
further 12 months, until 31 July 2009. We express our
deep gratitude for the United Kingdom delegation’s
sterling conduct of the consultations on the draft
resolution. My delegation participated in the
consultations based on the general understanding that
the basic purpose of the draft resolution was to extend
UNAMID’s mandate, taking into account the technical
aspects relevant to completing the effective
deployment of the mission, as expected and as
stipulated in resolution 1769 (2007), without going into
the new elements that are to be considered on their
own tracks.
S/PV.5947
708-44474
From the beginning of the consultations, the draft
resolution contained elements referring to the
principles of justice and combating impunity for the
crimes committed in Darfur — principles on which all
members of the Council agree. However, the content of
those elements were conflated with recent measures
taken by the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC). The implications of those measures and
the fears and concerns that they have aroused within
and outside the Sudan have been expressed by several
regional organizations, including the African Union,
the Organization’s main partner in UNAMID; the
League of Arab States; and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference. That is what led the delegations of
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, South Africa and Burkina
Faso, with the support of the delegations of other
Council members, to propose amendments to the draft
resolution based on the positions adopted by those
regional organizations regarding the possible
repercussions of those measures, which could
undermine current peace efforts in Darfur and further
complicate the situation in the Sudan and the entire
region.
We asked that language be included in the draft
resolution requesting the Security Council to call on
the ICC to defer its consideration of the application
made by the Prosecutor on the basis of the provisions
of article 16 of the Rome Statute, which gives the
Security Council the authority to request the ICC to
defer any investigation or prosecution for 12 months.
The proposal was drafted to reflect the language set out
in the communiqué of the 142nd meeting of the African
Union Peace and Security Council, issued on 21 July
2008, which stated that the search for justice should be
pursued in a way that does not impede or jeopardize
efforts aimed at promoting lasting peace and expressed
concern at the misuse of indictments against African
leaders, in conformity with its decision on the abuse of
the principle of universal jurisdiction, adopted at the
eleventh ordinary session of the Assembly of the
African Union, held at Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, on
30 June and 1 July 2008.
The African Union Peace and Security Council
expressed its conviction that, in view of the delicate
nature of the processes under way in the Sudan,
approval by the Pretrial Chamber of the application by
the ICC Prosecutor could seriously undermine the
ongoing efforts to facilitate the early resolution of the
conflict and the promotion of lasting peace and
reconciliation in the Sudan as a whole, which could
ease the suffering of the people of Darfur and promote
the destabilization of the country and the region.
Furthermore, the Peace and Security Council stressed
the need for international justice to be pursued in a
transparent and fair manner in order to avoid any
perception of double standards, in conformity with the
principles of international law, and expressed concern
at the threat that such a development could pose to
efforts aimed at promoting the rule of law and stability
and at building strong national institutions in Africa.
Despite all the reasons that we put forward to
justify our proposed amendments to the draft
resolution, we did not receive the hoped-for response
from certain Council members. In addition, because the
resolution concerns a very important and sensitive
issue — extending UNAMID’s mandate within the
required time frame — and because we were keen to
ensure the continuity and effectiveness of the mission,
we accepted the consensual language of the ninth
preambular paragraph, which gives the Council the
opportunity to further consider the issue of invoking
article 16 of the Rome Statute of the ICC regarding the
situation in Darfur. We hope that that will be done as
soon as possible, because the main objective remains to
ensure security and stability in the Sudan and the
region, as well as peace and security for the Mission, in
order to guarantee its success in Darfur.
We therefore voted in favour of the resolution.
We believe that we did not sacrifice our substantive
proposals in vain, because we garnered the support of
14 Council members, which was a victory for the entire
Council. However, I wonder if, at the request of more
than two thirds of the membership of the international
community, the Security Council does not invoke
article 16 of the Rome Statute, when will it do so?
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
should like to thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom for its tireless efforts in the context of the
negotiations on the resolution just adopted, which
renews the mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). I
must tell Ambassador Sawers and the delegation of the
United Kingdom that, on this occasion, we truly
appreciated British patience.
Burkina Faso supported the resolution, convinced
that UNAMID is the essential intermediary in the
efforts to achieve peace and stability in Darfur. It was
S/PV.5947
08-444748
with that in mind that we decided to deploy swiftly to
Darfur a battalion of nearly 800 troops to make our
contribution to the pacification of the Sudan. We
express our satisfaction that the Council managed to
retain its unity regarding the extension of UNAMID’s
mandate. We appeal to the troop contributors, the
donors and the entire international community to lend
all the necessary support to the Secretary-General so
that he can attain the objective of deploying 80 per cent
of UNAMID by 31 December 2008.
Burkina Faso voted in favour of the resolution
notwithstanding the fact that not all of our concerns
were taken into account, in particular those expressed
by the African Union in the communiqué issued by the
Peace and Security Council on 21 July 2008. As my
delegation stressed during our last round of
consultations, the United Nations has invested
significant resources and made considerable efforts in
the quest for a political solution to the Darfur crisis.
When we consider, in addition to UNAMID’s
expected deployment, the current involvement of the
Sudanese authorities and the fact that the new Joint
African Union-United Nations Chief Mediator is soon
to take office, it seems clear to us that the international
community has never been closer to a political
resolution of the crisis. It is therefore desirable that the
process be given every chance of success if we are to
put an end to one of Africa’s deadliest conflicts. That is
why it is absolutely crucial that the Security Council
return to the issue at a later date, in accordance with
the ninth preambular paragraph of resolution 1828
(2008).
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): The
United States welcomes and strongly supports the
extension of the mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
Today’s decision demonstrates the Security Council’s
sustained support for the UNAMID peacekeeping
operation and for its mission to protect the vulnerable
civilians of Darfur.
The United States abstained in the voting because
the language added to the resolution would send the
wrong signal to Sudanese President Al-Bashir and
undermine efforts to bring him and others to justice.
This Council cannot ignore the terrible crimes
that have occurred throughout the conflict in Darfur
and the massive human suffering that the world has
witnessed. The Council addressed that tragic situation
when it adopted resolution 1593 (2005), and the United
States at that time noted the importance that we have
attached and that we continue to attach to the Council’s
role in connection with investigations and prosecutions
of the International Criminal Court (ICC). As is well
known, the United States abstained in the voting on
that resolution in the light of our concerns about the
ICC, but, as we said when resolution 1593 (2005) was
adopted,
“We strongly support bringing to justice
those responsible for the crimes and atrocities
that have occurred in Darfur and ending the
climate of impunity there. Violators of
international humanitarian law and human rights
law must be held accountable.” (S/PV.5158, p. 3)
Having said that, I would like to make four points
concerning our continued strong support for UNAMID.
First, the United States is increasingly concerned
about the situation on the ground and will remain
vigilant to the situation in Darfur. We are prepared to
take additional measures as necessary to ensure that
UNAMID deploys rapidly and completely and is
empowered to fulfil its mandate.
Secondly, we deeply regret that, one year after
the adoption of resolution 1769 (2007), UNAMID has
barely begun to complete its vital mission. Deployment
now stands at just over 9,000 troops and police
officers — not even half of authorized levels.
UNAMID’s slow deployment is seriously interfering
with its ability to protect itself and to fulfil its mandate
in Darfur. The Security Council has sought to end the
suffering of the people of Darfur, but we have fallen
far short of our responsibility to protect them. We
appreciate the efforts of the Secretary-General, the
troop contributors and the donors that are assisting
them, but we must do better and we must do more. The
lives of United Nations peacekeepers and of millions
of innocent civilians depend on it. We urge all parties
to redouble their efforts to ensure UNAMID’s prompt,
complete and effective deployment.
The United States is cooperating wholeheartedly
in that endeavour through our work to train and equip
peacekeepers to UNAMID’s standards. We will
continue to seek new avenues for providing concrete
assistance to UNAMID’s full and rapid deployment.
We urge the United Nations to redouble its efforts to
construct suitable infrastructure for rapid UNAMID
expansion and to ship contingent-owned equipment to
S/PV.5947
908-44474
Darfur as quickly as possible. We urge the United
Nations to consider all options at its disposal to
improve performance on those key points, the slow
progress of which continues to hinder UNAMID
deployment and operations.
Thirdly, we call on the Government of the Sudan
to make every effort to facilitate UNAMID’s
deployment. We demand that the Government of the
Sudan accept all troop contributions without
reservations and in the order in which UNAMID
commanders deem it feasible to deploy them. We
demand that the Government of the Sudan comply
fully with all Security Council resolutions, with the
terms of the status-of-forces agreement and with all
agreements pertaining to UNAMID. The Government
of the Sudan must ensure UNAMID’s free and secure
movement in fulfilment of its mandate. All attacks on
UNAMID personnel are unacceptable and will not be
tolerated. We must hold the Government of the Sudan
responsible for the safety and security of UNAMID
and its personnel.
Fourthly, the United States will continue to keep
a constant eye on the peace process and take all
measures necessary to support it. We urge all of the
parties to the conflict in Darfur to reach a lasting
settlement. UNAMID must fulfil its mission in tandem
with a viable peace process if there is to be an end to
the terrible suffering in Darfur.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the adoption of resolution 1828
(2008) and warmly thanks the United Kingdom for its
efforts to bring the negotiations to completion. France
fully supports the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and hopes that
its deployment will progress rapidly and unimpeded.
We stress that the issue of support for UNAMID enjoys
unanimity in the Council, which we welcome. The
situation in Darfur, like that in the border areas of
neighbouring countries affected by the crisis there,
continues to merit the resolute involvement of the
Council. We should spare no effort to ensure that
UNAMID is able to complete its mission.
We take note of the request made, inter alia, by
the African Union to defer the process initiated by the
International Criminal Court. France, for its part, is
deeply committed to the fight against impunity and to
the work of the Court, which should follow its own
course. We continue to appeal for the cooperation of
the Sudanese authorities with the Court, including with
respect to the outstanding arrest warrants against
Mr. Harun and Mr. Kushayb. France also appeals to the
Sudanese authorities and all parties to cease hostilities,
facilitate the work of humanitarian workers, cooperate
with UNAMID and resolutely commit themselves to a
political process under the auspices of the United
Nations and the African Union.
Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me first express my
delegation’s appreciation to the United Kingdom for
preparing the resolution, taking the leading role in the
negotiations and providing ample time for our
deliberations. It is indeed very unfortunate that the
resolution did not enjoy consensus.
My delegation fully supports the deployment and
work of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), and therefore fully
endorses the extension of its mandate. As a United
Nations Member State and a police contributor to
UNAMID, and in remembrance of the very regrettable
tragedy visited upon UNAMID personnel recently,
Indonesia welcomes the resolution’s appropriate
recognition of the issue of the safety and security of
UNAMID personnel, including in relation to the urgent
contribution to and prompt deployment of critical force
enablers.
As stated in paragraph 9 of resolution 1828
(2008),
“there can be no military solution to the conflict
in Darfur, and … an inclusive political settlement
and the successful deployment of UNAMID are
essential to re-establishing peace”.
The resolution expresses the Council’s insistence on a
political solution and its readiness to take action
against those impeding the peace process.
I wish also to reiterate Indonesia’s position on the
need to strike a balance between the promotion of
justice and the pursuit of peace. In that regard, we fully
support the views of the African Union, the League of
Arab States and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference as expressed in their respective letters to
the Council, as well as those of the Non-Aligned
Movement on the need for the Security Council to
assume its responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security and to ensure that the ongoing peace
process in Darfur is not jeopardized.
S/PV.5947
08-4447410
My delegation therefore supports the call for the
Council to consider requesting the ICC to defer the
investigation in relation to the situation in Darfur, in
line with article 16 of the Rome Statute. Indeed,
resolution 1593 (2005), which referred the situation in
Darfur to the Prosecutor of the ICC, envisaged, in its
second preambular paragraph, the possible deferral of
the case. The Rome Statute itself recognizes the role of
political and security considerations in the pursuit of
justice, as reflected in its article 16.
Now, the Security Council needs to find ways to
respond to any possible obstruction of the peace
process and of the maintenance of international peace
and security. We are hopeful that the Council will
consider positively the request made by those
organizations, in particular the African Union, which is
the partner of the United Nations in the political and
peacekeeping endeavour in Darfur. The Security
Council became involved in Darfur because of the
urgent need of the people of Darfur to be protected.
The persistence of the conflict would definitely not
serve that purpose.
Finally, it is our wish that the resolution we have
just adopted not only will support continuously the
work of UNAMID but will also contribute to the
promotion of the Peace Agreement and to the easing of
the humanitarian situation in Darfur.
Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): We are
pleased that today the Council has renewed the
mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), which sends a clear
message regarding the future deployment of the
Mission, which is working in very difficult
circumstances to promote the well-being of the
population of Darfur. That is why Belgium voted in
favour of resolution 1828 (2008).
The resolution firmly calls upon the Sudanese
Government to cooperate fully with UNAMID and to
fulfil its commitments. A year after our initial decision
to deploy the mission, it is more than time for the
Sudan to halt all obstruction of that deployment. The
resolution also demands once again that all sides put an
end to violence, and refers in particular to aerial
bombing, which kills innocent civilians.
No less important are the provisions calling for
unhindered humanitarian access and demands an end to
violence against peacekeepers and humanitarian
personnel. We also value the paragraphs of the
resolution calling for a revival of the political process
and calling on all parties to fully commit themselves to
the process, in particular those rebels who have
remained reluctant or have refused to commit
themselves.
Another aspect of the text relates to fighting
impunity and the need to bring to justice those
responsible for crimes in Darfur. We would have
preferred to see agreement on even firmer language in
that regard. From the outset of this debate, Belgium has
taken an unambiguous position of principle. The fight
against impunity in Darfur is of the highest priority and
should go hand in hand with the political process, so
that a lasting settlement can be attained.
We strongly support the International Criminal
Court and the pursuit of international justice. We look
forward to the decision to be taken by the Pretrial
Chamber in a matter of months regarding the
Prosecutor’s application for an indictment by the
Court. We refute the arguments of those who are
calling upon the Council to react in advance to
developments that we cannot foresee at this stage, by
invoking article 16 of the Rome Statute; some wished
in fact to include that element in this resolution on
UNAMID, where such a debate is entirely out of place.
That is why resolution notes that some delegations may
come back to the Council with regard to the process
under way in the International Criminal Court.
It was the Security Council that, by resolution
1593 (2005), asked the International Criminal Court to
take up the situation in Darfur. Given the systematic
refusal of the Government of the Sudan to cooperate,
we called again on that Government to cooperate with
the Court, through the presidential statement of 16 June
(S/PRST/2008/21). In particular, that Government must
hand over to the Court the two persons for whom the
Court has issued arrest warrants, Ahmed Haroun and
Ali Kushayb, who continue openly to enjoy impunity
in the Sudan.
The Sudan’s obligations and responsibilities in
Darfur are clear. They have been set out in all previous
resolutions, as well as in this one. Belgium will
continue to work in the Security Council to ensure
respect by the Sudan for all Council resolutions. We
owe it to the population of Darfur, but we also owe it
to the cause of international justice.
S/PV.5947
1108-44474
Finally, I wish to thank the delegation of the
United Kingdom for its efforts leading to the adoption
of resolution 1828 (2008).
Mr. Mantovani (Italy): I too wish to commend
the United Kingdom delegation for its endeavours
during the negotiations leading to today’s outcome.
Italy welcomes the adoption of resolution 1828
(2008), on the renewal of the mandate of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). I wish to take this opportunity to express
our strongest support for the force. In that connection,
we also believe it to be absolutely essential that full
deployment of UNAMID be accomplished and that the
force become fully effective in fulfilling its tasks,
especially considering the dire humanitarian situation
and the terrible security conditions of the civilian
population. At the same time, we reaffirm the crucial
importance of the search for a political solution in
Darfur, calling on all parties to engage fully and
constructively in the peace process. To that end, we
welcome the appointment of the joint African Union-
United Nations Chief Mediator, Mr. Djibril Yipènè
Bassolé.
Italy, as a founding member of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), fully supports the inviolability
of the independence of the Court and its role in
promoting international justice and fighting impunity.
Finally, Italy fully subscribes to the content of the
15 July declaration of the European Union presidency.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Viet Nam.
Viet Nam voted in favour of the draft resolution
contained in document S/2008/506 in accordance with
our policy supporting the full and expeditious
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and, hence, the
renewal of UNAMID’s mandate for another 12 months,
until 31 July 2009.
We would like to thank the delegation of the
United Kingdom for having submitted the draft
resolution on which we have just voted. We note with
appreciation that our contributions have been reflected
in the text of the resolution. Viet Nam holds that the
Council must take a comprehensive approach to the
Darfur conflict, which requires that attention be
devoted equally to peace and justice; to the peace and
political processes; to UNAMID’s deployment and the
safety of its staff, with a view to ensuring its effective
operation; and to reconciliation in Darfur and in the
Sudan at large.
We share the concerns of the African Union, the
League of Arab States and the Non-Aligned
Movement, as well as those of many United Nations
Member States and Council members, about the
possible negative impact of a potential indictment
requested by the International Criminal Court
Prosecutor against the President of the Sudan on the
peace process in that country and on the very operation
of UNAMID. We take note of the fact that those
concerns are reflected in the ninth preambular
paragraph of the resolution.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.
Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Today,
Sir, was the last day of the mandate of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), and it is the last day of your presidency of
the Security Council for the month of July. I wish on
this occasion to extend to you my gratitude, Mr.
President, for the wise and excellent manner in which
you have guided the work of the Security Council
throughout this extremely busy month, during which
we have witnessed many developments. It is a manner,
Sir, that reflects your diplomatic wisdom and high
professionalism, as well as the greatness of your
country and its historical contributions, which inspire
all our peoples.
I would also like to extend my thanks and
gratitude for the valuable efforts undertaken by
Ambassador Sawers, Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
which sponsored the resolution. We commend the
delegation of the United Kingdom for its strenuous
efforts in that respect.
My country is very gratified that the Security
Council has adopted the special resolution on the
renewal of the mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). The
Mission’s mandate, as defined in resolution 1769
(2007), opened the way towards cooperation and
partnership among the Sudan, the African Union and
the United Nations. Since our adoption of that
S/PV.5947
08-4447412
resolution on this day last year, many positive
developments have occurred with respect to the hybrid
operation, which we hope will attain 80 per cent
deployment by the end of this year, as indicated by the
Secretary-General.
I would like to emphasize before this Council that
the Sudan continues to be fully committed to its
pledges concerning the hybrid operation and will
continue to be so. The Security Council should provide
similar cooperation; give highest priority to the peace
process; and allay all threats to the process, such as the
measure undertaken by the Chief Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC); take decisive
measures against the rebel movements that are trying
to impede the peace process, to the point that some
have even invaded our capital, Khartoum; and stop
sending conflicting messages to those rebel groups.
The resolution that has been adopted today
clearly emphasizes the fact that we should support the
Chief Mediator, Mr. Djibril Bassolé. The Council
should also match those words with deeds, and the
efforts of Mr. Bassolé should be supported in a manner
that would allow us to maintain lasting peace in Darfur
and to bolster our country’s national efforts to promote
the peace process; as clearly demonstrated by the
historic visit of the President of the Republic of the
Sudan to the three Darfur provinces over the past few
days.
In emphasizing our interest in supporting the
paths of peace, the maintenance of peace and
humanitarian assistance, and the rehabilitation of
Darfur, we offer our respect and gratitude for the great
and historic role undertaken by the African Union. The
African Union is a principal partner, even before the
United Nations, in the maintenance of peace in Darfur
and in the ongoing peace process there. The African
Union is not a foreign element; in fact, it is an inherent
partner in all matters related to Darfur.
In commending the role of the African Union, the
principal partner in all issues concerning peace and
stability of Darfur, we also commend the very
important adoption by the African Union, at the
emergency ministerial meeting of its Peace and
Security Council at Addis Ababa, of a resolution that
seeks to rise above the impediments and complexities
created by the unfortunate and tragic action taken by
the Chief Prosecutor of the ICC against one of the
greatest leaders of the African continent, who has put
an end to the longest-running conflict there and
brought about peace between the South and the North
of the Sudan.
At a time when the use of double standards is rife
used and real crimes are being covered up in many
parts of the world, Africa, which is burdened by its
own problems, hopes that its efforts and initiatives will
be respected by this Organization, as its principal
partner. We should move beyond the measure taken by
the Chief Prosecutor, which is a recipe for destruction
and ruin and poses a catastrophic danger to the
stability, security and unity of the Sudan, the region as
a whole and even the entire African continent.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize once
more our appreciation to you, Sir, and to the members
of the Council for your wonderful efforts. I reiterate
our welcome to the renewal of the mandate of the
UNAMID. We also wish to stress that no one is more
impacted by and concerned with the problems of
Darfur than the Government and the people of the
Sudan. We are pleased to see the international
community’s respect for the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of the Sudan bolstered by the
tangible measure of the resolution adopted by this
Council.
The President: I thank Ambassador Mohamad
for his kind words to the presidency.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
As this is the last Council meeting under the
presidency of Viet Nam, I wish to take this opportunity
to express our sincere thanks to all my colleagues in
the Council who have extended their most valuable
cooperation to my delegation. I also wish to thank the
Security Council secretariat team for its continued
support throughout the month and to all of the other
Secretariat staff members who have worked behind the
scenes in supporting the work of the presidency.
The meeting rose at 10.50 p.m.
