United Nations S/PV.6045
Security Council
Sixty-third year
6045thmeeting
Tuesday, 16 December 2008, 11 a.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.
08-65213 (E)
*0865213*
President: Mr. Sanader . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Croatia)
Members: Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Grauls
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Kafando
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. He Yafei
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Urbina
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ripert
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Natalegawa
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mantovani
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ettalhi
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Arias
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Kumalo
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . Mr. Miliband
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Rice
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Hoang Chi Trung
Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
S/PV.6045
08-652132
The meeting was called to order at 11.20 a.m.
Expression of welcome to ministers
The President: At the outset of the meeting, I
should like to acknowledge and welcome the presence in
the Council Chamber of the Secretary of State of the
United States of America, Her Excellency
Ms. Condoleezza Rice; the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Russian Federation, His Excellency Mr. Sergey
Lavrov; the Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, His Excellency the Right
Honourable Mr. David Miliband, MP; and the Vice
Minister for Foreign Affairs of China, His Excellency
Mr. He Yafei.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/787, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by the Russian Federation
and the United States of America.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
This meeting comes at the end of an eventful
year, marked by a number of encouraging
developments in the Middle East. Since the beginning
of 2008, we have witnessed the evolution of a
comprehensive, direct and result-oriented Israeli-
Palestinian negotiation process within the framework
set out last year in Annapolis.
We have to recognize that there is a political
momentum to this process, which gives us reason to be
hopeful. Today, the Security Council has the
opportunity to acknowledge these achievements and
express its appreciation and encouragement for the
determined efforts of the parties and its support for the
continuation of the process and the fulfilment of the
Annapolis goals. I am confident that the draft
resolution that the Council is about to adopt conveys
that message.
I would also like to reiterate the belief that the
ongoing process provides our best chance for peace.
The parties have set in motion a momentum we cannot
afford to lose; they deserve the full support of the
Security Council on that journey. We have a shared and
a clear goal: to turn into reality the vision of two
States, a democratic and peaceful Palestine, living side
by side with a democratic and secure Israel, and to
advance the momentum towards a just, lasting,
comprehensive peace for the Middle East.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: This is a very important
meeting for the cause of peace in the Middle East and
for the central role of the Security Council in achieving
it. For the 13 months since Annapolis, Israelis and
Palestinians have been negotiating continuously on all
the core issues between them.
The Palestinian Authority has been pursuing
genuine measures of self-empowerment in the West
Bank, improving security and economic life for its
citizens in the framework of increased Israeli-
Palestinian partnership. The international community
has been devoting new efforts with the parties to secure
the implementation of Road Map commitments on the
ground.
We had hoped by now to be marking the
conclusion of a peace agreement and turning our sights
towards its implementation. We all regret that this is
not the case and we know we still face many hurdles,
but a serious process is under way. We must ensure that
what has been started is seen all the way through to its
conclusion. We know what that conclusion must be.
The occupation that began in 1967 must end. All
people in the Middle East should be able to enjoy
peace and full security. Palestinians must see the
establishment of a State of Palestine, alongside Israel,
to coexist with it in peace and security, and Israel and
the Arab world must come to live together in a
comprehensive regional peace.
As we enter 2009, we must stabilize the situation
on the ground in the West Bank and Gaza and ensure
that all tracks of the process are intensified. All of us —
Israelis and Palestinians, the regional countries and the
Arab League as whole, the Quartet, including the
incoming United States Administration, and this
S/PV.6045
308-65213
Council — must maintain our unity and redouble our
efforts.
As Secretary-General of the United Nations, I am
deeply and firmly committed to the goal of a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the region, based
on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002), 1402 (2002) and 1515 (2003), the
principle of land for peace, the Madrid terms of
reference and the Arab Peace Initiative, and I hope the
Council acts today to help set us firmly, finally and
irreversibly on the path to peace in the Middle East.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): The
situation today in the Middle East is very different than
when President Bush came to office in 2001. At that
time, the Camp David effort had collapsed. Israelis and
Palestinians were in a vicious cycle of violence.
Suicide bombers were murdering innocent Israelis in
cafes and restaurants and at Passover seders, leaving
the rest of the population living in constant fear. Israeli
military incursions left scores of Palestinians dead and
wounded, neighbourhoods destroyed and the economy
in shambles. No image better captures that desperate
time than the siege of the Church of the Nativity in
Bethlehem.
Yet, in spite of those tragedies, the cycle of
violence continued. Each time a ray of hope penetrated
the darkness, it was snuffed out by intolerance.
Reforms within the Palestinian Authority in 2003
inspired hope that the Palestinians would finally have
the leadership they deserved, and yet these reforms
proved to be superficial and the hope proved to be
deceptive. Palestinian elections in January 2005 and
Israel’s disengagement from Gaza later that year
offered yet another opportunity for progress. But the
victory of Hamas, the terrorist group committed to the
destruction of Israel, in the 2006 elections that
summer, and then the war in Lebanon ended that hope.
Finally, in 2007, after Hamas had usurped power
in Gaza, it was clear to all that there was no alternative
to President Bush’s vision of a State of Palestine and a
State of Israel living side by side in peace and security.
Building on this new dynamic, President Bush
convened the Annapolis conference in November 2007,
the first major Middle East peace conference in 16
years and the only one of its kind to be held on United
States soil. Representatives of over 50 countries,
including 14 Arab States, sat with the Israeli Prime
Minister, Foreign Minister and Defence Minister to
pursue a different future for the region. Since that day,
Israeli and Palestinian negotiators have bravely
demonstrated their commitment to peace through
continuous bilateral and substantial negotiations on all
the core issues. They made the strategic choice to, as
President Bush has said, defeat an ideology of hatred
with an ideology of hope.
The support of the United States and the
international community for the parties’ efforts has not
been sustained by false hope or ignorance of the
challenges, but by a genuine belief in the sincerity of
the parties’ commitment, in the progress they have
made and continue to make and in the prospects for
success if they continue down this path. The United
States has a national interest in the conclusion of a
final treaty, and it is in the long-term interest of Israel
to provide a more hopeful society for Palestinians. The
establishment of the State of Palestine is long overdue,
and there should be an end to the occupation that began
in 1967.
Above all, as our Egyptian friends reminded the
Quartet yesterday, this is a bilateral process, and the
two parties will have to conclude a final agreement.
But it is incumbent upon the international community
to provide support to their efforts and to create the
political context within which their negotiations can
prosper.
It is for that reason that we are gathered here
today, to consider a draft resolution sponsored by the
United States and the Russian Federation to chart the
way forward. It builds upon the work of the
international community through the Quartet, and I
commend my colleagues from the United Nations, the
European Union and the Russian Federation for their
service in the pursuit of peace.
This draft resolution describes the contours of the
negotiations and defines the role of the international
community, which will prevent a return to violence and
the hopelessness of a second intifada, when peace was
a distant dream. It has several elements.
First, it confirms the irreversibility of the
bilateral negotiations and endorses the parties’ brave
efforts. Brinksmanship and dramatic last-minute
S/PV.6045
08-652134
attempts to forge a lasting peace have not succeeded in
the past. There is no substitute for the Annapolis
process, and stagnation is not an option.
In their historic briefing for the Quartet on
9 November, President Abbas and Foreign Minister
Livni described their shared vision of a Palestinian
State living side by side in peace and security with
Israel, and pledged to continue their negotiation, even
in times of political transition. They also described the
understanding that governs their negotiation and
confirmed the comprehensive nature of their effort,
which is to build peace, both from the top down and
from the bottom up.
The Annapolis process has advanced under the
leadership of President Abbas, Prime Minister Olmert
and Foreign Minister Livni, and these advances must
be preserved and built upon. The commitment to
negotiations is not a matter of lip service. It is about
genuine commitment to the two-State solution and the
necessary foundations of trust between the parties to
turn that solution into reality.
As the Quartet affirmed yesterday, lasting peace
will result from mutually reinforcing efforts on the
political track, on building the institutions of a
Palestinian State and on improving conditions on the
ground. None of those tracks can succeed in isolation.
As negotiations proceed, Israel and the Palestinians
must ensure that life improves for millions of
Palestinians. The international conferences in Paris,
Bethlehem and Berlin were critical in supporting those
efforts.
The United States has become the largest bilateral
donor to the Palestinians. We continue to support the
Palestinian Authority with direct budget assistance,
funding for high-impact projects and the promotion of
efforts to link security, governance and economic
development.
Secondly, the draft resolution reiterates the
importance of fulfilling obligations under the Road
Map. Neither party should undertake any activity that
contravenes Road Map obligations or prejudices the
final status negotiations. The views of the United
States have been made very clear in that regard,
especially in connection with settlement activity. At the
same time, the Palestinian Authority has an absolute
obligation to dismantle the infrastructure of terror in its
territories, reform its security services and end
incitement.
Progress is being made, but it is incomplete.
Sustained political will, as well as international
support, is required. The peace and economic growth
that resulted from Israeli and Palestinian security
cooperation in Jenin and from international support is
in stark contrast to the suffering that blighted that city
in 2003. In recent weeks, Palestinian security forces
have deployed to Hebron and have performed well in a
volatile environment.
Thirdly, the draft resolution underscores that
peace will be built upon mutual recognition, freedom
from violence and terror, the two-State solution and
previous agreements and obligations. It highlights the
enduring importance of the Quartet principles and
codifies the Security Council’s backing of those
fundamental principles. The threat of extremism and
terrorism posed by Hamas is a threat to the Annapolis
process and to the fulfilment of legitimate Palestinian
aspirations. That is important to note.
Fourthly, the draft resolution underlines that the
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict should be
aligned with efforts towards broader regional peace.
The Arab Peace Initiative is a historic proposal in that
regard. As Arab States should reach out to Israel, so
should Israel reach out to Arab States.
The negotiations born at Annapolis and described
in the draft resolution give me confidence that the goal
of two independent and democratic States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security is
not just a vision but a commitment of the parties and of
the international community. There can be no turning
back the clock. We should only go forward from here.
We have to continue on the chosen path. That chosen
path will finally bring for the Israelis the peace and
security that can only come from living side by side in
reconciliation with a democratic neighbour of
Palestine. That path forward will finally give to the
people of Palestine the dignity and the humanity that
can only come from living in their independent and
sovereign State.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today we are adding an intermediate element
to an important stage in the very detailed work that has
been done in the Israeli-Palestinian negotiations since
last year’s meeting at Annapolis. The process has not
been easy, and many factors have significantly
complicated it. But the fact that the parties have begun
in earnest to address the major issues for them is in fact
S/PV.6045
508-65213
a real step forward. We must secure and continue that
momentum towards peace. It is also essential to ensure
continuity and to continue the negotiations while
building on what has been achieved. The Quartet of
Middle East mediators participating at yesterday’s
meeting all expressed those same views, as did
representatives of the League of Arab States during
contact, in New York.
We have a serious task before us today, namely,
to strengthen the continuity and irreversibility of the
political process through a resolution of the Security
Council and give that approach the strength of
international law. The adoption of the draft resolution
before us will, of course, not guarantee that the
situation will evolve only in the right direction. Much
will depend on whether it is possible for Israelis and
Palestinians themselves to develop and foster the
necessary preconditions to move ahead successfully.
Of particular importance are the draft resolution’s
provisions calling for the full implementation by both
parties of their obligations under the Road Map. In that
regard we have in mind, of course, primarily the
security situation, not allowing any terrorist acts,
ending settlement activity and lifting the blockade and
restrictions on movement.
The draft resolution also underscores the crucial
need to allow the Arab Peace Initiative to work
effectively. It is especially important in the present
circumstances to restore the territorial and political
unity of Palestinian national administration as quickly
as possible. That is essential for strengthening the
Israeli-Palestinian dialogue and for ensuring the
viability of future final arrangements in the framework
of that dialogue.
The Israeli and Palestinian parties face a very
complex problem. It requires political will and
certainly courage. Members of the Quartet, meeting at
Sharm el-Sheikh with President Mahmoud Abbas and
Israeli Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni, became convinced
that the negotiators have shown those qualities. We
expect that those who will continue the negotiations in
the future will also demonstrate those important
qualities.
Of course, progress is impossible without the
active support on the part of the international
community. Today’s meeting demonstrates that such
support will in fact continue to be extended to the
parties as they aspire to peace. Russia will make its
contribution to the collective efforts to ensure peaceful
and sustainable development in the region. Only by
working together and by respecting the internationally
recognized legal basis can we achieve a just, lasting
and comprehensive peaceful resolution.
Along with our partners, we will take every step
necessary to ensure that the international meeting on
the Middle East that has been scheduled for 2009 in
Moscow marks as an important step forward. We shall
also work to ensure that it serves to accelerate the
process to reach an agreement, which is the goal of the
draft resolution before the Security Council today.
Mr. Miliband (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes this debate and the prospect of a
new Security Council resolution on this matter, the first
since 2004. The violence, intensity and grievances of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict have global
ramifications. Their resolution is the proper business of
the Council.
The Security Council does not lack consistent
policy on the Middle East. Although our resolutions
have been sporadic, they have gained significance and
status from their scarcity. Resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003) ring out as the
rallying points for peace. It is right that, after a year of
intensive activity, we take stock, add a new number to
the line of previous resolutions and, most important,
resolve to use 2009 with determination to make
progress within the framework of the draft resolution
now before the Council.
The starting point for the United Kingdom is the
concerns of the people of Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territories. They are tired and fearful —
tired of conflict but also of false promises; fearful of
each other but more fearful of the future. One year
after Annapolis, the bilateral discussions have been
detailed and serious, and the Syrian track has been
launched. But cynicism and pessimism have grown.
Rockets from Gaza land further into Israel. The Israeli
restrictions, in particular on food and medicine, cause
acute suffering in Gaza.
There are plenty of people ready to say that there
can be no two-State solution. I applaud the
determination of Secretary Rice not to join them. The
Annapolis process has not delivered a Palestinian State
but the absence of an Annapolis process would have
left us much worse off. Secretary Rice has spoken
plainly and powerfully of the stakes, the vision and the
S/PV.6045
08-652136
necessary steps. Now we have to follow her and help
the parties to take these steps.
The draft resolution before us is significant for its
espousal of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace. It
emphasizes the importance of the Arab Peace
Initiative. The United Kingdom welcomes this
emphasis. The responsibility for a resolution of the
Middle East conflict does not fall just to Israel and the
Palestinians, though they must lead the process. It falls
to every State in the region, for the only sustainable
peace must be a 23-State solution, not just a two-State
solution: 22 Arab States and Israel living side by side
in security. We welcome the recent reiteration by the
Arab League on behalf of its member States that the
Arab world wants formally to end the conflict and
establish normal relations with Israel. We believe that
the outlines of that peace are clear and can command
consensus: recognition and respect from Arab States
for Israel and a Palestinian State based on 1967 borders
with a just settlement for refugees and Jerusalem the
capital of both States, Israel and Palestine.
There will need to be brave decisions on all sides,
above all by the bilateral partners in the negotiations.
For Israel, this means fulfilling its Road Map
commitments, notably on illegal settlement, and
improving conditions for Palestinians on the West
Bank and in Gaza. For Palestinians, this means finding
a way to reunite around negotiations and non-violence.
And those who would torpedo the process must know
that we are determined not to allow them to succeed.
Hamas must end its rocket attacks on Israeli civilians,
abandon violence and demonstrate their commitment to
the political process by moving towards the Quartet
principles.
The United Kingdom welcomes operative
paragraph 4 of the draft resolution on the development
of Palestinian capacity and the development of the
institutions of a Palestinian State. We believe this is
vital. The political process and the situation on the
ground are inseparable. They need to be mutually
reinforcing. Better security forces for the Palestinians
does not just mean better lives for them — it means
more security for Israel. We applaud the efforts of
President Abbas and Prime Minister Fayad to make this
a reality and we are determined to play our part in
supporting them.
Our role here today is not just to adopt a
resolution; it is to challenge all those with an interest in
the region to join us in 2009. The perils of inertia are
clear; inactivity and confrontation are the recruiting
sergeants for extremism from Mogadishu to
Manchester. The gains of effective action are the
opposite: the reversal of four decades in which the
Middle East has been destabilized and the world made
less safe. That is why the United Kingdom pledges to
do all in its power not just to support this draft
resolution, but to progress its implementation.
Mr. He Yafei (China) (spoke in Chinese): At a
time when the Middle East question is at an important
juncture, the holding of this meeting of the Security
Council is of paramount importance. Since the
Annapolis process was launched in November last
year, difficult political negotiations started between
Palestine and Israel. The international community has
made tireless efforts to promote and push forward the
peace process. However, regrettably, the negotiations
have failed to achieve major breakthroughs in line with
the set timetable. At the present moment, the Middle
East situation is not only blessed with opportunities for
further improvement, but also confronts a variety of
uncertainties and risks. It is the common challenge
facing the international community to ensure that that
negotiating process forges ahead and achieves
substantive progress. We believe that today’s Security
Council meeting will play a positive role in taking up
this common challenge.
China has consistently maintained that the
Security Council should play its due role in handling
the Middle East question. Under the current
circumstances, which support the adoption of a
resolution by the Security Council on the question of
the Middle East, we welcome the draft resolution
submitted by the United States and Russia, which calls
for support to Palestine and Israel in pushing forward
their political negotiations. It is our consistent view
that political negotiations represent the sole viable and
correct path towards enduring peace in the Middle
East. In these new circumstances, we expect both
parties to rapidly build momentum for negotiations. We
expect both parties to work on the basis of the relevant
United Nations resolutions as well as the principle of
land for peace in order to realize at an early date,
through negotiation, the prospect of two countries
living side by side in peace.
As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon recently
expressed, China, too, expects 2009 to be a harvest
year for the Middle East peace process. We are full of
S/PV.6045
708-65213
expectations. However, we have also come to realize
that the road ahead promises to be tortuous. The most
urgent task facing us is to make sure that both parties
implement in earnest their respective obligations and
refrain from taking any action that might undermine
mutual trust or prejudge the outcome of the
negotiations. The construction of settlements by Israel
in the West Bank and its imposition of embargoes and
blockades in Gaza are not conducive to creating an
enabling environment for negotiations.
China expresses its deep concern over the
humanitarian crisis facing the Palestinian people in the
West Bank and Gaza. We call upon the international
community to continue to provide a variety of
assistance and to actively support Palestine in its
capacity-building and in accelerating its economic
development.
A lasting peace in the Middle East is by necessity
a comprehensive peace. Realizing peace between Syria
and Israel as well as between Lebanon and Israel
represents an integral part of the Middle East peace
process. We expect Syria and Israel as well as Lebanon
and Israel to improve their bilateral relations through
peace talks while we call upon the international
community to beef up its diplomatic efforts in a
practical way. The 2002 Arab Peace Initiative has great
potential indeed and should be built upon.
The Quartet mechanism plays an important role
in promoting a comprehensive settlement of the Middle
East question. At the same time, we expect the
mechanism to exert greater efforts. We support the
Secretary-General’s active engagement in the activities
of the Quartet. At the same time, we expect the
mechanism to strengthen its regular communication
and coordination with the Security Council. China is
ready and willing to work with the international
community in playing a constructive role in seeking a
proper settlement of the Middle East question at an
early date and realizing a comprehensive, lasting and
just peace in the region.
Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to extend my thanks to the
President of the Security Council for his initiative to
convene this meeting, and I welcome his presence. We
would also like to recognize the presence of the
ministers and the Secretary-General at this important
meeting.
This meeting is being held to consider a draft
resolution on the question of Palestine, and we hope
that it will represent a reversal of the behaviour of the
Council over the past few years. Libya believes that the
Security Council should consider and, according to the
letter of the Charter, decide this question, which has
represented a continuous threat to peace and security
for more than six decades.
This problem has been accompanied by
tremendous suffering of the Palestinian people and all
other peoples of the region. Violations of human rights,
unprecedented breaches of international law,
remarkable for both their breadth and duration,
continue. It was the cause of many wars and has led to
a continuous cycle of violence.
Despite all of this, the Council has for years
refrained from taking explicit and decisive action on
this question. Even in cases in which the Security
Council has taken decisions and adopted resolutions,
these resolutions have never been implemented due to
the lack of genuine political will by some for a just
solution that respects international law, rejects
aggression and occupation and condemns the
oppression of people.
Libya welcomes, on principle, the attempt to
adopt a Security Council resolution on the question of
Palestine. At the same time, it believes that
generalization of the question, deliberate ambiguity
and disregard for confronting breaches of international
law do not serve peace as much as they hinder it.
The aggressor and occupier could interpret the
text as a form of acceptance of its behaviour and
policy, which, in turn, reinforces such behaviour. The
victims could see this as proof that the international
community is not serious, is biased and has double
standards, which pushes them to further frustration and
despair, with all of the repercussions.
This year, the situation in the region has plumbed
unprecedented depths of deterioration on the ground.
Since 27 November 2007, the date of the launch of the
Annapolis conference, the practices of the Israeli
occupiers have continued to escalate. The killing and
the detentions have continued, settlement construction
has intensified, the siege of the Gaza Strip has
worsened and the number of checkpoints and barriers
in the West Bank, which make daily life unbearable
and normal human activity very difficult, has
increased.
S/PV.6045
08-652138
Furthermore, the demolition of houses has
continued as has the building of the separation wall,
most of it on Palestinian territory. In fact, the whole
world has witnessed aggression by terrorist and
extremist settlers against the Palestinians. This
violence has even extended to Arabs within the Green
Line.
We have recently heard some statements by
Israeli officials that provide us with further proof that
behind the settlers’ violence, lies, in fact, an official
acceptance and encouragement both inside or outside
the Green Line. All of these acts constitute explicit
breaches and violations of international law, the Road
Map requirements and the Annapolis joint
understandings.
Does not the statement by the Human Rights
Council’s rapporteur to the Security Council state that
we should move quickly to apply specific criteria
protecting the Palestinians who are facing collective
punishment by policies that are basically crimes
against humanity? Is it not logical and clear that the
minimum for reaching a just solution would be to
condemn these practices as well as to put an end to
them?
Libya is very eager to bring about peace and has
worked, and continues to work, for peace and believes
that these Israeli practices cannot represent a way to
reach peace. We also believe that ignoring and
disregarding such practices is an unintended invitation
to continue such behaviour.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his introductory
statement.
Our meeting today is, indeed, an event, as we are
preparing to adopt a draft resolution on the Israeli-
Palestinian question, something which has not
happened since May 2004. Throughout these past four-
and-a-half years of silence, France has continued to
urge the Security Council to play a more active role in
the Middle East.
For this reason, we welcome the fact that the
Council, which has the mandate to guarantee the
maintenance of peace and security, will be able to
express itself today. We would like to thank the
sponsors of the draft resolution, the last paragraph of
which reminds us that the Council will remain seized
of the matter, thus opening the way towards its playing
a stronger role.
The European Union (EU), of which France holds
the Presidency, has just outlined its vision of the peace
process in a declaration adopted by the European
Council meeting of 11 to 12 December. I quote:
“The Middle East peace process will remain a top
priority for the European Union in 2009. A just,
lasting and comprehensive peace is urgently
needed. The EU will do all it can both practically
and politically to drive the peace process forward
next year, working closely with our international
partners and in particular in the Quartet, to
promote a solution to the Israel/Palestine conflict
on the basis of two States, living in peace and
security. The EU will also support talks between
Israel and Syria and, if possible Lebanon. The
European Council welcomes efforts to
reinvigorate the Arab Peace Initiative, including
the Arab Foreign Ministers’ letter to President-
elect Barak Obama, as part of a comprehensive
approach for a peace between Israel and the
whole region. We urge the United States, under
its new Administration, to join us in making the
Middle East Peace Process an immediate and
central priority.”
In my national capacity, I would like to
underscore a number of points.
First of all, concerning our belief, as reflected in
the draft resolution, that the Israeli-Palestinian
negotiating process, launched since the Annapolis
conference, must be forcefully supported in order to
reach a comprehensive peace agreement as soon as
possible. This agreement should provide for the
establishment of a State of Palestine, including the
West Bank and Gaza which is viable, independent,
democratic and sovereign, living in peace and security,
side by side with Israel, with secure and recognized
borders, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States, as
the President of the French Republic stated in his
address to the Knesset on 23 June 2008.
In this regard, France urgently calls for
inter-Palestinian reconciliation. To this end, we support
the Egyptian mediation efforts and will support every
Government that respects the commitments made by
the Palestine Liberation Organization, resolutely
supports peace negotiations with Israel and whose
S/PV.6045
908-65213
policies and actions reflect the principles of the
Quartet.
The second key element is that France, like its
partners in the European Union, subscribes to a
comprehensive approach towards resolving the Israeli-
Arab conflict, as reflected in the draft resolution before
us. In this regard, we welcome the Arab Peace
Initiative, which we feel provides a solid and relevant
basis for peace in the Middle East. It will also make it
possible to include the Syrian and Lebanese tracks in
our consideration, which strikes us as being essential.
We must now translate into action the opportunity
which that Initiative represents by making it
operational. To do so, we are ready to work with all
concerned actors on a phased approach in order to
attain the great objectives of the Initiative. One might
thus envisage the implementation by all parties of
confidence-building measures, which would make it
possible to launch a positive dynamic.
Trust is actually an essential element in this
process. Indeed, it has to do with the third element I
wish to underscore, which is that rapid and meaningful
change on the ground is necessary. The draft resolution
thus highlights the importance of respecting the
commitments made in the context of the Road Map. In
that regard, and while a great deal remains to be done
in order for terrorism and violence to cease, one can
only recognize and welcome the significant efforts
undertaken by the Palestinian Authority in the areas of
security, governance and the rule of law, especially in
Jenin and Nablus.
We believe that this progress calls for reciprocal
gestures from Israel, starting with the issue of land —
land for security, peace in exchange for land. As the
Council knows, that is one of the foundations of the
peace process. As the European Union has done on
numerous occasions, France wishes to remind Israel
that it is necessary and urgent to put an end to
settlement activities, including natural growth and
including in East Jerusalem. Any other policy would
tarnish the credibility of the negotiators and would
adversely affect the outcome of the negotiations, which
the draft resolution urges the parties not to do.
Of course, the parties are not alone in bearing
responsibilities. It is equally desirable for the
international community as a whole to mobilize in
support of the Palestinian Authority, as the draft
resolution invites it to. France will keep its
commitments on this point. It will closely monitor the
follow-up to the donors conference for the Palestinian
State held in Paris last December in order to enable the
Palestinian Authority to strengthen its institutional
capacities.
If ultimately there is a message that France
wishes to convey on every occasion — even if it is not
reflected in the draft resolution submitted to the
Council — it is the absolute need for respect for
humanitarian law. This unreservedly prohibits terrorist
acts that blindly strike civilian populations, such as the
attacks and the firing of rockets against Israel. As the
Council knows, it also prohibits any form of collective
punishment and calls on the parties to a conflict to
allow free access to humanitarian aid. These rules must
provide guidance in addressing the situation in Gaza.
Let us not forget that.
France will support the draft resolution being
considered today. We hope that it will allow us to make
progress on the difficult road towards peace. In this
perspective, we hope that the European Union will
stand alongside the parties, in particular through its
contribution to the Quartet. Finally, when the time has
come, France and the European Union will be ready to
contribute, along with the whole of the international
community, to the international arrangements from
which Israelis and Palestinians hope to benefit in order
to guarantee peace.
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): On behalf of
the Vietnamese delegation, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting on
the situation in the Middle East. This meeting once
again demonstrates our joint commitment to addressing
a very important issue of international peace and
security, namely the question of Palestine. I also wish
to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
statement.
The Middle East peace process began 17 years
ago in Madrid on the basis of United Nations
resolutions and the principle of land for peace. It was
launched officially between the Palestinian and Israeli
parties 15 years ago in Washington, with the signing of
the Oslo Accords, and was revitalized once again with
so much hope and so many expectations last November
in Annapolis.
Over the last two decades or so, we have seen so
much hope and so many expectations, but also so much
frustration and despair. In the meantime, the
S/PV.6045
08-6521310
Palestinians continue to live with so much suffering
under the illegal occupation of Israel.
The Middle East peace process now again faces
renewed opportunities and challenges. At this critical
juncture, my delegation is particularly heartened by the
current surge in diplomacy for a peaceful settlement of
the question of Palestine. It is amply demonstrated by
the continued commitments of both Israel and Palestine
to negotiations on final status issues guided by the
Annapolis Joint Understanding and the Road Map. We
are also witness to the strong support of the
international community at a series of international
conferences in Paris, Bethlehem, London and Berlin
for the development of a viable Palestinian State.
It is also worth noting the tangible progress
reached between Israel and relevant parties on matters
of mutual concerns, the homegrown efforts undertaken
by the Palestinian Authority to proceed with
preparations for its statehood, and the proactive
mediation efforts of the Quartet, the Leagues of Arab
States and regional countries.
There are various favourable developments in the
region as well, such as the indirect talks between Syria
and Israel, promising steps in the Lebanese-Israeli
dialogue and the normalization of relations between
Lebanon and Syria, as well as growing stability in
Lebanon since the signing of the Doha Agreement.
There are, therefore, enough reasons to be
hopeful that these positive developments could
eventually crystallize into an enabling environment of
mutual trust and peaceful coexistence, in which all
nations in the region could share the peace dividends.
It would also enable the vision of an independent and
viable State of Palestine side by side in harmony with
its neighbours to be materialized.
My delegation remains cognizant of the fact that
such progress, although doubly prized in light of the
difficult situation in the past two years, may have little
effect unless it is further consolidated into concrete
determination and the commitment of Israel and
Palestine to satisfactorily and peacefully address issues
of common interests across various political, security,
socio-economic, human rights and humanitarian
domains. We are fully convinced that all the parties
concerned must combine efforts and exert genuine
political will to keep the peace process on track and
avoid repeating past scenarios where attempts would
boost optimism only to lead to another crushing
letdown.
At this defining moment when the prospects for a
regional peace are growing and hopes for a peaceful
settlement of the Israel-Palestine conflict have
re-emerged, we urge all parties to exercise utmost
restraint and refrain from any step or statement which
may undermine the peace process and prejudice the
final status negotiations.
Further concerted efforts should be made to
achieve more tangible improvements on the ground on
the basis of the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, including resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
425 (1978), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), the principle
of land for peace, the Madrid terms of reference
adopted at the Peace Conference on the Middle East,
the Arab Peace Initiative, the Road Map to Mideast
Peace and the Annapolis outcome.
We support the efforts of the United Nations, the
Quartet, the League of Arab States, regional countries
and the international community to help realize the
two-State vision and to reach a just and comprehensive
solution in the Middle East. In this connection, we
welcome the meeting of the Quartet and the League of
Arab States held yesterday on the compound of the
United Nations. We hope that the coming meeting of
the Quartet in Moscow will provide greater impetus to
move the Middle East peace process further ahead on
all tracks.
In conclusion, my country wishes to reaffirm its
unwavering support for a just and comprehensive
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and for the
realization by the Palestinian people of their
inalienable rights, including their right to self-
determination and sovereignty in an independent and
sovereign State, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We too thank you,
Sir, for organizing this ministerial meeting on the
situation in the Middle East. We warmly welcome the
Secretary of State of the United States, the Foreign
Minister of the Russian Federation, the Foreign
Secretary of the United Kingdom and the Vice Minister
of Foreign Affairs of China who have joined us today.
We also wish to express our thanks to the United
States of America and the Russian Federation for
presenting the draft resolution before us today. It is
worth noting that, if the draft resolution is adopted, it
S/PV.6045
1108-65213
will be the first time in nearly five years that the
Council has substantively pronounced itself on the
Middle East.
The draft resolution recalls two important
decisions. The first dates back to 7 May 2003, when
former Secretary-General Kofi Annan sent a letter to
the Security Council transmitting a text of the Quartet
entitled “A performance-based road map to a
permanent two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict”. The Road Map stated:
“A settlement, negotiated between the
parties, will result in the emergence of an
independent, democratic, and viable Palestinian
State living side by side in peace and security
with Israel and its other neighbours. The
settlement will resolve the Israel-Palestinian
conflict, and end the occupation that began in
1967, based on the foundations of the Madrid
Conference [and] the principle of land for peace”
(S/2003/529, annex, p. 2).
The Road Map continued:
“This initiative is a vital element of international
efforts to promote a comprehensive peace on all
tracks, including the Syrian-Israeli and Lebanese-
Israeli tracks.” (Ibid.)
The second decision before us today was taken at
a meeting held on 27 November 2007 in Annapolis,
Maryland. United States President George W. Bush
summed up the outcome in a joint understanding
between the parties that stated:
“We express our determination to bring an
end to bloodshed, suffering and decades of
conflict between our peoples; to usher in a new
era of peace, based on freedom, security, justice,
dignity, respect and mutual recognition; to
propagate a culture of peace and non-violence; to
confront terrorism and incitement, whether
committed by Palestinians or Israelis. In
furtherance of the goal of two States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and
security, we agree to immediately launch good-
faith bilateral negotiations in order to conclude a
peace treaty, resolving all outstanding issues,
including all core issues without exception, as
specified in previous agreements.”
Our concern is that, since the Quartet declaration
five years ago, the situation in the Middle East,
particularly in Palestine, has not improved. Instead, the
illegal occupation of Palestine that began in 1967 has
intensified. Palestinians continue to face hardships
compounded by the financial embargo, the expansion
of Israeli settlements and the building of the illegal
separation wall, as well as by restrictions on movement
and access, which are interrupted by more than 600
roadblocks. Twelve months after the Annapolis
meeting, political negotiations have not produced any
tangible results.
The draft resolution before us is not perfect,
because it ignores many significant issues that the
Council must address. These include the continuing
illegal settlement activity in the Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem. In Hebron, Israeli settlers have
attacked Palestinian homes and farms. Violence against
Palestinian and Israeli civilians has not ended. Yet, my
delegation will support this draft resolution, because it
recommits the parties to the obligations to which they
have previously agreed. We continue to encourage both
Israelis and Palestinians to persist with negotiations to
achieve the goal of a viable Palestinian State with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
If adopted, this draft resolution will face two
crucial tests. The first will be whether the parties will
implement its provisions, and the second will be
whether the Council will ensure that its resolutions are
implemented. If this draft resolution were to be
ignored, that would further erode the credibility of the
Council.
We also hope that the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative,
whose importance is noted in the draft resolution, will
be taken as a serious contribution to bringing about
peace in the Middle East. The Arab Initiative spells out
even clearer and more specific affirmations expected of
both Israel and the Arab countries.
The Arab Initiative calls upon Israel to affirm the
following: a full Israeli withdrawal from all the
territories occupied since 1967, including the Syrian
Golan Heights, to the lines of 4 June 1967, as well as
from the remaining occupied Lebanese territories in the
South of Lebanon; the achievement of a just solution to
the Palestinian refugee problem, to be agreed upon in
accordance with General Assembly resolution
194 (III); and acceptance of the establishment of a
sovereign independent Palestinian State on the
Palestinian territories occupied since 4 June 1967 in
the West Bank and Gaza Strip, with East Jerusalem as
S/PV.6045
08-6521312
its capital. Consequently, the Arab countries affirm that
they will consider the Arab-Israeli conflict ended, enter
into a peace agreement with Israel and provide security
for all States in the region, and establish normal
relations with Israel in the context of a comprehensive
peace.
The Palestinian people have now been homeless
for 60 years. Generation upon generation of Palestinian
children have never had a home other than the ghettos
and camps that they have occupied throughout the
world. Those Palestinians who stayed behind have had
to endure 40 years of illegal occupation with its untold
miseries. In the Gaza Strip, hundreds of thousands of
Palestinians live under a complete blockade, with bare
essentials that keep them alive for yet another day.
For the past few months, my delegation has
recommended that the Council invite Mr. Tony Blair,
Quartet Representative and former Prime Minister of
the United Kingdom, to brief the Security Council
about his efforts in the occupied areas. Although we
will soon leave the Council, we hope that Mr. Blair
will still accept its invitation and come early in the new
year. It is important that the Council hear first-hand
about the suffering of the Palestinian people. Perhaps
that will inspire the Council to adopt a comprehensive
draft resolution next time. For now, the draft resolution
before us will have to suffice.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes your presence, Sir, here in New
York to preside over this important meeting. My
delegation also thanks the Secretary-General for his
statement and welcomes the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the United States, the Russian Federation
and the United Kingdom, as well as the Vice Minister
for Foreign Affairs of China and the Deputy Secretary-
General.
Costa Rica welcomes any initiative to promote
peace in the Middle East. However, we are equally
convinced that the proliferation of efforts to that end
does not absolve the Security Council of its
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. While we value the work of the
Quartet, it is also certain that most Members of the
Organization have received little information on its
work. Along with other delegations, in particular that
of South Africa, we have repeatedly asked the Quartet
to inform the Council of its actions with the aim of
complementing efforts, as we have supported more
robust action on the part of the Security Council
instead of the marginal role it has played in recent
years.
A draft resolution has been submitted to us for
adoption at the outcome of this meeting. We shall
support the draft resolution, in spite of the fact that we
would have preferred it to include, in particular, a
reference to the tragic humanitarian situation in Gaza
caused by a response that, in our opinion, has been
disproportionate to the terrorist attacks carried out
against Israeli territory. We would also have preferred
to have held a thorough discussion of the text and
regret that it was not possible. However, we believe
that the Council’s action on the Middle East, which we
have urged throughout the year, is highly positive.
My delegation is convinced that there is a close
relationship between the political prospects for peace
and the socio-economic and humanitarian situation on
the ground. The Council cannot ignore that
relationship. The many actions contravening the
Council’s resolutions and the Road Map hinder
progress, as do calls for the elimination of the State of
Israel. My delegation considers it absolutely
unacceptable that Members of this Organization should
refer to others by denying their existence as a State and
threatening their right to exist.
Costa Rica is concerned by what we hear almost
every day from such entities of the United Nations
system as the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of
the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, the International Committee of the Red Cross
and the World Bank.
Since April 2008, the number of obstacles
impeding the movement of Palestinians in the West
Bank has grown. The number of illegal settlements has
also increased significantly since the Annapolis
conference. The efforts of Prime Minister Salam
Fayyad and of the Special Envoy of the Quartet to
promote economic prosperity in the Palestinian
territory and to improve the standard of living of the
population will not succeed unless the downward trend
is reversed.
For all of those reasons, Costa Rica would have
preferred a draft resolution that identified the core
issues of the conflict by name. We hope that, at some
point in the future, the Council will analyse and
S/PV.6045
1308-65213
pronounce itself on the parties’ compliance with their
obligations under the Road Map, Security Council
resolutions and international law, in particular
international humanitarian and human rights law.
My delegation supports today’s initiative in the
hope that it will provide a new impetus to the peace
process in order to achieve the definitive, specific,
verifiable and sustainable agreements by 2009 that
eluded us in 2008 and which will lead to the peace that
has eluded the Palestinians and Israelis for six decades.
For my delegation, the comments made by the
President of the Council of 5 December represents a
step forward in the Council’s actions with regard to the
specific issues of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that
undermine the credibility of the parties in the peace
process. However, we believe it necessary for the
Council to take further action in the form of a decision,
which is more than an oral statement, to lend new
momentum to the peace process and to address the
hurdles that have prevented the bilateral negotiating
processes from bearing fruit.
Finally, we welcome the two initiatives taken this
month and we foster the hope that they herald a change
in the prevailing practice that will enable the Council
to pronounce itself in a timely manner with respect to
events on the ground, as is the case for the other
situations of which the Council is seized.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
My delegation would like to thank you, Sir, for
organizing and presiding over today’s meeting. The
presence of ministers and the Secretary-General, whom
we respectfully welcome, attests to its importance.
It has been said that the situation in the Middle
East, in particular the Israeli-Palestinian question, is
certainly one of the most complex and one of the most
paradoxical items on the agenda. It is a paradox
because, despite the unanimous view that a lasting
solution must be found, the parties and the
international community are finding it difficult to
identify a political solution that is acceptable to
everyone.
As has been recalled in the Council, several
initiatives have been taken to that end, including the
2002 Arab Peace Initiative which is still awaiting full
implementation. Much hope was therefore placed in
the Annapolis conference, and the agreements reached
there laid a solid foundation for a timely and
satisfactory solution to the conflict. In assessing the
outcome, it must be acknowledged once again that we
are far from having reached the goals set at Annapolis,
although there has been no lack of follow-up action in
support of the process. The December 2007 Paris donor
conference and the initiatives of Egypt and Yemen can
be cited in that regard.
Regrettably, real obstacles still block the road to
peace, including the ongoing Israeli settlement policies
in occupied Palestinian territories, an embargo on Gaza
that has led to a disturbing humanitarian tragedy and
the firing of rockets by Hamas into Israel, among
others. For all those reasons, my delegation supports
the Security Council’s initiative to send a message of
encouragement and support to the parties that calls on
them to keep alive and well the spirit of the Annapolis
peace process by working to establish a State of
Palestine side by side and at peace with Israel.
To that end, we urge the parties to continue their
frank dialogue and to make bold concessions in order
to settle pending issues. They must also strengthen
confidence-building measures and continue to respect
the truce between Hamas and Israel. All initiatives,
including those of the Quartet, to help the parties to
overcome their differences, should be encouraged, in
particular those aimed at strengthening Palestinian
unity and providing assistance to Palestinian refugees.
The Security Council itself has an important part to
play, and it must play it fully. First of all, it must take
all the steps that it can under the Charter in order to
ensure that its resolutions on the matter are
implemented.
The vision of a State of Palestine living side by
side with Israel in complete peace and security is not
utopian, nor is it a negation of Israeli security. Rather,
it would ensure a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East. Burkina Faso believes in this idea quite sincerely
and would urge the parties and all the actors concerned
to work to achieve this legitimate goal.
In Annapolis, great hope was born on the road to
settling the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, because we and
the parties are aware that the Annapolis process is one
of the best opportunities to date to resolve the dispute.
Given the purpose of the present debate, which is to
press negotiations begun in Annapolis in order to make
them irreversible, we support the draft resolution that
has been put to us to that end.
S/PV.6045
08-6521314
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): There is perhaps no
international issue more important to my country,
Indonesia, and closer to our hearts than the effort to
find a peaceful, just, lasting and comprehensive
settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and to
bring to an end the occupation that began in 1967.
We have therefore consistently supported efforts
to achieve such a settlement based on all relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), the
Madrid terms of reference and the principle of land for
peace. Thus, we have lauded the commitment of the
parties under the Annapolis peace process. We have
recognized the vital role that the Quartet has been
playing in the promotion of solutions to the conflict in
the Middle East acceptable to all parties. And not least,
we have been persistent in recognizing the
contributions of countries in the region and of the
League of Arab States to the Middle East peace efforts,
including through the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative.
Unfortunately, the Security Council’s recent
record on the issue has been less than sterling.
Notwithstanding the regular monthly meetings on the
issue when the situation on the ground demands it,
time and again, the Council has been unable to
pronounce itself collectively and with a single voice.
The Council’s silence on the situation in the Middle
East, including Palestine, has been deafening.
Today provides a welcome change. Our meeting
today provides positive encouragement to all the
parties to continue and redouble their efforts to engage
in vigorous, ongoing and continuous negotiations and
to make every effort to achieve a meaningful and
result-oriented outcome. In this connection, the draft
resolution before the Council today makes clear the
need for the parties to refrain from any steps that could
undermine confidence or prejudice the outcome of
those negotiations. Thus, it is imperative that the
Egyptian-brokered cessation of hostilities in the Gaza
Strip and southern Israel be maintained.
Above all, it is essential that Israel immediately
lift the closure of the Gaza crossings. The civilian
population in the Gaza Strip is enduring hardships and
difficulties that are unacceptable. Their plight must be
urgently addressed. Not least, Israel must immediately
end its illegal settlement activities in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. Indeed, the challenge is to
find a way to ensure that there is no gap between the
peace efforts and the situation on the ground. As the
peace efforts consolidate and gather pace, there must
be commensurate positive developments on the ground.
The dividends of peace must be felt.
This perspective is the right one, not only
because there has been too much suffering and
sacrifice, but also because improvements in the
situation on the ground will, in turn, reinforce the
momentum in the negotiations. We need to transform
the all-too-familiar cycle of escalating violence into a
virtuous cycle of dialogue, reconciliation and
cooperation. In this regard, we attach great importance
to international efforts to develop and strengthen
Palestine’s national institutions, as is recognized in the
draft resolution before the Council today.
A truly comprehensive and lasting peace in the
Middle East requires a solution not only to the conflict
between Israel and Palestine, but also on the Israel-
Lebanon and Israel-Syria tracks. On the Israel-Lebanon
track, much remains to be done to realize the goals of a
permanent ceasefire and a long-term solution as
envisioned by Security Council resolution 1701 (2006).
Negotiations on the Israel-Syria track have long been
inactive. However, signs of reinvigoration through
indirect talks are discernible. Indonesia wishes to
underscore that a comprehensive peace in the Middle
East requires progress on those tracks based on the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
The Council’s coming together today could not
be more timely. We believe that this meeting and its
outcome offer the potential to consolidate the peace
process and indeed provide a platform for further
progress. Not least, it signals that the Council, once
again, is shouldering its Charter-mandated
responsibilities. The Security Council must and indeed
can exert a positive influence on the Middle East peace
process.
Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, first and foremost, I would like to thank
you for your presence today in the Security Council
and, in turn, would like to thank the Deputy Secretary-
General and the Secretary of State of the United States,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation, the Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom, and
the Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs of China.
Panama welcomes the convening of this meeting
to consider the joint United States-Russian Federation
S/PV.6045
1508-65213
initiative of submitting for the consideration of this
Council a draft resolution on the situation in the
Middle East. Two days from now, the Security Council
will hold an open debate on this same subject.
Therefore, on this occasion, we shall limit ourselves to
commenting on the draft resolution before the Council.
At first glance, the text under consideration
appears lacking in substance. However, a closer
reading of the text shows that it sets forth with
sufficient accuracy the various issues that are part of
this conflict. The references to previous Security
Council resolutions on the subject, to the obligation of
the parties to comply with the provisions of the Road
Map, to the importance of the Arab Peace Initiative and
to the ongoing bilateral negotiations process between
Israelis and Palestinians that began in Annapolis are a
reflection of this Council’s support for the peace
process in the Middle East, as well as for the objectives
of the Council that must be met, namely an end to
Israeli occupation of all Arab territories held since
1967, including the Syrian Golan, and the
establishment of a sovereign, independent and viable
Palestinian State, living in peace and security with its
neighbours, and in particular with Israel.
For Panama, the principal objective of this draft
resolution is to provide an impetus for the peace
process in the Middle East. Our delegation is of the
view that the text under consideration meets that
objective. Therefore, we shall be voting in favour of
this text.
Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would
begin by expressing our appreciation to Secretary of
State Rice and Foreign Minister Lavrov for this
welcome American-Russian initiative that will enable
us to end this meeting by adopting a resolution on the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Speaking up once again after a long silence and,
we hope, in one voice, the Security Council is
reminding the peoples concerned that the international
community as a whole remains concerned about their
fate. In recalling in its draft resolution the guidelines
for the bilateral negotiations under way, the Council is
reconfirming its responsibility to support the process
until the goal shared by all — the end of the conflict
and the establishment of an independent, democratic
and viable Palestinian State in East Jerusalem, the West
Bank and Gaza, living side by side with Israel in peace
and security within secure and recognized borders — is
reached.
Today, 13 months after the Annapolis conference,
for the first time in eight years there is sufficient
momentum to reach the peace agreement awaited for
more than 60 years. Maintaining that momentum and
the future of the two-State solution continues to require
our attention and commitment on several levels.
First, the intensified bilateral negotiations
pursued by the Israelis and Palestinians bear witness to
considerable political investment on the part of the
parties, particularly in their resistance of the repeated
attempts of extremists on both sides to derail the
negotiations. We can only welcome the confirmation
by the parties themselves that that this political
dynamic is now irreversible. More than ever before, the
negotiations need full domestic and international
support, regardless of the outcome of the period of
political transition now under way.
At the domestic level, support for the negotiation
process will require above all concrete and visible
improvements in the situation on the ground. In the
West Bank, recent progress in the economic and, above
all, security fields demonstrates the benefits of the
political programme of Prime Minister Salam Fayyad,
as well as the mutual benefits of increased cooperation
on the part of the Israeli authorities. Alongside the
release of Palestinian prisoners, these results
strengthen mutual confidence and point to the road to
be followed; they should encourage Palestinians and
Israelis alike to step up their efforts to meet their
obligations.
Recent events have made such progress all the
more urgent. In the West Bank and East Jerusalem,
ongoing Israeli settlement activity is alarming.
Belgium notes that the continued settlement activity
has been unanimously condemned because it is clearly
and completely contraindicated by the stated desire to
establish the mutual confidence necessary to the peace
process. Above all, however, it is illegal and
jeopardizes the establishment of a viable Palestinian
State. The violence deliberately committed by
extremist settlers against Israeli law enforcement
agencies and, above all, against Palestinian civilians
strengthens our concerns even furthers. We therefore
call on the Israeli authorities to freeze settlement
activity forthwith and to ensure that the violence does
not go unpunished.
S/PV.6045
08-6521316
After five months of calm and hope in the Gaza
Strip, the humanitarian situation of its population
continues to deteriorate and is now catastrophic.
Rockets are again being fired into southern Israel, and
there is a real danger that the violent downward spiral
may resume, with civilians, as always, the primary
victims. Belgium therefore calls on all actors, and
Hamas in particular, to work urgently to prolong the
truce in order to ensure the critical normalization of the
security, humanitarian, economic and political
situations to which the populations involved
legitimately aspire. In that context, we join the Quartet
in supporting the efforts of Egypt to achieve inter-
Palestinian reconciliation and the release of Corporal
Shalit.
At the international level, the past year has seen a
remarkable intensification of the international and
regional support that was already manifest in the
largely positive response to the Annapolis meeting.
Belgium and its European partners contributed their
political and economic support for the Palestinian
Authority at the meetings in Paris, London, Berlin and
Bethlehem. Through the European Union, we also
participated in the Quartet, whose five summit
meetings in one year reflect greater political
commitment. Belgium supports a broader role for the
Quartet in following up the parties’ implementation of
their commitments. We also welcome the regular
involvement in its meetings of members of the Follow-
up Committee on the Arab Peace Initiative.
Desirous of greater international involvement in
that promising yet fragile process, Belgium will vote in
favour of the draft resolution prepared by the United
States and Russia.
Mr. Mantovani (Italy): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this ministerial meeting of the Security
Council. I also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his introductory remarks and to
acknowledge the presence of the Deputy Secretary-
General.
At the outset, I wish to express my Government’s
support for the draft resolution prepared by the United
States of America and the Russian Federation.
The Israeli-Palestinian negotiations are now
entering a delicate phase. We respect the will of both
sides to keep them confidential, and we support their
resolve, as shown during their meeting with the Quartet
in Sharm el-Sheikh, to continue responsibly, despite
the existing difficulties. It is absolutely essential that a
comprehensive agreement be reached in the form of a
peace treaty to be implemented without further
negotiation.
We are aware that there are still considerable
gaps between the parties’ positions on a number of core
issues, but we believe that, now more than ever, the
Israelis and the Palestinians need clear and specific
solutions, not vague principles that can lead to future
disputes. The Road Map and the Annapolis conference
have given us the means to continue along the path we
have taken, and we are convinced that the ongoing
political process must become irreversible. It is
essential for the Quartet to play a more incisive role in
monitoring the implementation of the parties’
commitments on the ground.
Against that backdrop, Italy remains convinced
that the European Union, in reiterating the need to
leave the primary responsibility for the conduct of the
negotiations to the parties, will not hesitate to offer its
support for the implementation of a final peace
agreement at the appropriate time. At the same time,
we believe it fundamental to continue to contribute to
strengthening the Palestinian institutions and to
building their capacities through the promotion of
economic development and institutional and security
sector reform. Israel’s security and a just conclusion of
the peace process based on the two-State solution can
be assured only by a future Palestinian State with
sound institutions that operate in accordance with the
rule of law and good governance.
We believe that the solution of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict remains a high priority in the
fragile regional framework, but it is equally important
to support and promote a constructive approach by all
the States of the region to every track of the peace
process. We welcome and encourage the involvement
of the League of Arab States and its members in
support of the Palestinian Authority and of President
Abbas, both economically and politically. In that
context, the Arab League’s Peace Initiative has great
potential, which should be exploited and developed in
coordination with all the stakeholders.
We are concerned by the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip and the
ongoing violence in the areas bordering Israel. It is
urgent that calm be restored and maintained and that
the border crossings be reopened to allow the people to
S/PV.6045
1708-65213
have access to goods and services. The acceleration in
the building of settlements and the episodes of settler
violence against Israeli officers and Palestinian
civilians in recent days are a cause of further concern.
We welcome the courageous decision of the
Israeli authorities to prevent further violence and to
evacuate the illegal settlements. We encourage Israel to
continue along that path in the shared awareness that
the expansion of settlements, particularly in East
Jerusalem, does not facilitate dialogue, but instead
undermines the credibility of Palestinian negotiators in
the eyes of public opinion.
The President: It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft
resolution before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall
put the draft resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Indonesia, Italy, Panama,
Russian Federation, South Africa, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Viet Nam
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
The President: There were 14 votes in favour,
none against and 1 abstention. The draft resolution has
been adopted as resolution 1850 (2008).
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.
