United Nations S/PV.5868
Security Council
Sixty-third year
5868thmeeting
Wednesday, 16 April 2008, 10 a.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.
08-30672 (E)
*0830672*
President: Mr. Mbeki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (South Africa)
Members: Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Chevalier
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Bassole
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wang Yi
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Urbina
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Jurica
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Yade
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wirajuda
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Prodi
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ettalhi
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Arias
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Churkin
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . Mr. Brown
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Khalilzad
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Pham Binh Minh
Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Letter dated 8 April 2008 from the Permanent Representative of South Africa
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2008/229)
Report of the Secretary-General on the relationship between the United
Nations and regional organizations, in particular the African Union, in the
maintenance of international peace and security (S/2008/186)
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1625 (2005) on conflict prevention, particularly in Africa
(S/2008/18)
S/PV.5868
08-306722
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Letter dated 8 April 2008 from the Permanent
Representative of South Africa to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2008/229)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
relationship between the United Nations and
regional organizations, in particular the African
Union, in the maintenance of international
peace and security (S/2008/186)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolution
1625 (2005) on conflict prevention, particularly
in Africa (S/2008/18)
The President: The Security Council has agreed
in prior consultations to extend invitations, under
rule 37 of its provisional rules of procedure, to the
representatives of Algeria, Angola, Botswana, Burundi,
Central African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, Egypt,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Japan, Liberia, Nigeria,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovenia,
Somalia, Sudan, Swaziland, Uganda, United Republic
of Tanzania and Zambia, and, under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure, to the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, the Chairperson of the
Commission of the African Union and the Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. Members of
the Council have before them the following documents:
a letter dated 8 April 2008 from South Africa
transmitting a concept paper for this meeting
(S/2008/229); a report of the Secretary-General on the
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations, in particular the African Union, in the
maintenance of international peace and security
(S/2008/186), and the report of the Secretary-General
on conflict prevention, particularly in Africa
(S/2008/18).
I shall now make some opening remarks and a
statement in my national capacity.
When we assumed the presidency of the Security
Council last year, we initiated discussions on the need
to examine the best possible ways of strengthening the
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security. We especially focused on the African
Union, given that most of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations are in Africa.
We have therefore convened this debate of the
Security Council to discuss this matter once more and
to give a further opportunity, especially to African
countries, to share their experiences in regard to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Your high-level
attendance of this meeting confirms our shared view of
the timeliness of this engagement. We do hope that at
the end of this debate we will be able to adopt concrete
measures to strengthen the relationship between the
United Nations and regional organizations, in
particular, the African Union.
The African Union has shown its commitment to
resolving African conflicts. The operationalization of
the African Union Peace and Security Council and the
continental early warning systems, post-conflict
reconstruction and development, the Panel of the Wise
and the African Standby Force are clear indications of
this commitment and the basic architecture for
addressing peace and security issues on the continent.
However, the availability of the necessary and
predictable resources remains the most important
constraint that limits Africa’s capacity to give effect to
these commitments and help resolve its own conflicts.
The issue of the funding of regional peacekeeping
operations is central to defining and streamlining the
relationship between the United Nations and African
Union. We therefore welcome the proposal of the
Secretary-General to establish an African Union/United
Nations panel of distinguished persons to consider in
depth the modalities of financing and supporting in
other ways the peacekeeping operations undertaken by
regional organizations.
After all, when the African Union addresses
peace and security matters, it does so on behalf of the
wider international community. Therefore, today’s
debate should give a clear indication as to the kind of
mechanisms and processes that should be put in place
to achieve this objective.
S/PV.5868
308-30672
Similar attention has to be paid to establishing an
effective partnership between the United Nations,
especially the Security Council, and the African Union
Peace and Security Council. In fact, the presence in
this Chamber of the ambassadors of the African Union
Peace and Security Council, who will have a joint
meeting with their United Nations counterparts, is a
significant step towards strengthening the relationship
between the African Union and the United Nations.
At the same time, we need a comprehensive
review of the experience of both the United Nations
and the host countries with respect to United Nations
peacekeeping missions. Clearly, this is necessary if we
are to improve the effectiveness of these missions. The
surge in peacekeeping operations over the years and
the increasing role of regional organizations in both
conflict resolution and managing post-conflict
situations has necessitated such a dialogue.
The challenges of Africa are multidimensional
and cannot be addressed in isolation, one from the
other. Matters of conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and peacekeeping are inextricably linked to
the achievement of sustainable social and economic
development.
Over the past decade, there has been discernible
progress with respect to peace, security, democracy and
development in Africa. To consolidate these
achievements, it is critical that we make an additional
effort, effectively and urgently, to address the conflict
or post-conflict situations already on the shared agenda
of the United Nations and the African Union.
Our peacemaking efforts on the African continent
have shown us that the resolution of conflicts requires
an approach that places the views and efforts of the
affected country and its people at the centre of the
search for a peaceful solution, thus obliging the
international community to intervene as a partner in
support of the national effort.
I sincerely hope that our deliberations will assist
us to achieve the objectives of this debate.
I shall now resume my duties as President of the
Council. I now give the floor to Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, who will
introduce the two reports before the Council.
Mr. Pascoe: As you know, the Secretary-General
will be here to make a broader statement in a few
minutes. At this point, I would only like to very briefly
introduce two important, recent reports of the
Secretary-General that go to the heart of the issues
being discussed today at this high-level meeting on
peace and security in Africa.
First, there is the report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of Security Council resolution
1625 (2005) on conflict prevention, particularly in
Africa (S/2008/18), which reviews the recent efforts to
develop more multifaceted approaches to dealing with
conflicts, particularly in Africa. It emphasizes the need
for a broad strategy that helps to build national and
regional capacities for preventive action. Although
conflict prevention is not always highly visible, it
remains the most cost-effective and efficient way to
promote international peace and security.
In order to enhance United Nations capacity for
early warning, conflict prevention and mediation in
Africa — and elsewhere — the Secretary-General has
proposed the strengthening of the Department of
Political Affairs to work in this area. Successfully
preventing conflict in the field will require additional
resources that can be provided only by Member States.
The Secretary-General’s report makes a number
of suggestions on how the Security Council can
implement resolution 1625 (2005) and therefore
improve and sustain the ability of the United Nations to
avert negative developments and prevent crises from
escalating into armed conflict. The Council is called
upon, for example, to dispatch missions to the field on
a timely basis to assess situations on the ground and to
increase its use of the Arria Formula, or similar
arrangements, for broad informal discussions. It is
urged to use reports of groups of experts to carry out
lessons-learned exercises to motivate parties to resolve
conflicts. The Council is also called upon to develop a
stronger and more structured relationship with the
African Union Peace and Security Council.
The report calls for continued efforts to combat
cross-border and transnational threats to stability,
including efforts to control the arms trade. It urges
continued efforts against gender-based violence. The
report also calls for full cooperation in developing the
capacities of African regional organizations to deploy
both civil and military assets quickly when needed,
including for developing an African standby force.
The Secretary-General has instructed the United
Nations system to strengthen current levels of
collaboration, to maintain efforts to deploy expertise
S/PV.5868
08-306724
on prevention and to ensure that it continues to work
closely with and support the African Peace and
Security Architecture, including the Panel of the Wise.
This will help build the long-term capacity of the
African Union. It is thus in support of the Framework
for the Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme for the
African Union.
Secondly, there is the report of the Secretary-
General on the relationship between the United Nations
and regional organizations, in particular the African
Union, in the maintenance of international peace and
security (S/2008/186). The report describes the many
facets of United Nations cooperation with regional
organizations in peace and security activities under
Chapter VIII. It identifies the challenges facing these
partnerships, particularly in Africa, and focuses on the
opportunities that could be seized to ensure more
functional and effective cooperation and coordination.
This would be based on a clear division of labour that
would recognize the comparative advantage that each
organization may have in dealing with a particular
conflict.
The Secretary-General proposes better support
arrangements for further cooperation with regional
organizations. He recommends specific actions in the
areas of conflict prevention, mediation, disarmament,
non-proliferation, peacebuilding, human rights and
humanitarian action. He suggests setting up a panel of
distinguished persons from the United Nations and the
African Union within the next three months to make
concrete recommendations on how to help finance
peacekeeping operations undertaken by regional
organizations.
I hope that this open debate will help forge a
consensus on these vital questions, while reaffirming
the centrality of early warning, conflict prevention and
mediation among the main responsibilities of Member
States and the Security Council.
The President: I thank Mr. Pascoe for his
briefing.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I now invite His Excellency Mr. Jakaya Kikwete,
President of the United Republic of Tanzania and
current Chairperson of the African Union, to take the
floor.
President Kikwete: At the beginning,
Mr. President, you promised that we would have seven
minutes to speak; now you have reduced the time limit
to five.
Let me thank you, Mr. President, for considering
the idea of holding this meeting to discuss the relations
between the African Union (AU) and the United
Nations. As rightly stated, African peace and security
issues are on the current agenda of the United Nations
Security Council. As members are aware, we in the
African Union have developed a comprehensive,
action-oriented peace architecture for addressing
conflicts on our continent. Conflict prevention and
mediation, post-conflict peacebuilding, counter-
terrorism, humanitarian emergency response and the
non-proliferation of nuclear and conventional weapons,
particularly small arms and illicit weapons, are the
major issues that preoccupy us in that regard.
In the African Union, our constitutive partnership
with the United Nations has been underlined as
essential for the effective implementation of our
Union’s peace and security agenda. It is for that reason
that we in the African Union consider this meeting to
be critical for the strengthening of our partnership.
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
defines the basis for cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in the maintenance
of international peace and security. While the ultimate
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security rests with the Security Council,
regional organizations and peace initiatives serve as
important building blocks for global collective
security.
Today’s meeting is a welcome endeavour in our
joint quest to advance cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union. Our experience in
various conflict situations, during which we have
worked together in Africa, has demonstrated that we
have been able to achieve notable successes. But much
more needs to be done, and there are challenges that
need to be overcome through joint efforts. This
meeting, therefore, is a perfect setting for identifying
and discussing those challenges and agreeing on a way
forward to overcome them.
S/PV.5868
508-30672
Let me remind this important organ of the United
Nations that Africa has come of age. We have become
aware of our responsibility to take action with regard
to conflicts on our continent and elsewhere on this
planet. Indeed, through the African Union and the
regional economic communities, African nations have
increasingly been seen to be proactive in taking
decisions and actions to deal with conflicts that befall
African nations and peoples.
The AU and the regional economic communities
need partnership with the United Nations for many
reasons. First, they need to build their capacities to
prevent, manage and resolve conflicts. There is a
serious demand for assistance in building the requisite
institutional capacities. Substantial human and
financial resources are required to enable us to carry
out these critical functions, and such resources are not
readily available. The United Nations can be of great
help in assisting us; with such help, we can overcome
these constraints. The Ten-Year Capacity-Building
Programme for the African Union is an appropriate
mechanism. The AU will continue to work with the
regional consultative mechanism of the United Nations
in Addis Ababa in implementing the Programme. But
Africa’s demand for resources is enormous. We appeal
to the international community to do more.
There is also the question of speed in taking
action when threats to peace arise, particularly on the
African continent. Experience has shown that the
United Nations is not as fast as one would like in
taking decisions and action. We wish that the processes
within this institution could be expedited. I am sure
that I am not the first one to have said that; neither is
this the first time that such an appeal has been made to
the Security Council.
There are two other things that require the
attention of those participating in this meeting. The
first relates to mandates for regional organizations,
especially where military intervention and sanctions
are involved. The United Nations holds the overall
mandate for those two types of action. We in the AU
and the regional economic communities have
intervened from time to time, and our intervention has
proved effective. My concern is about the danger of
conflict arising between the AU and the United
Nations, especially if the latter were to take a different
position where such decisions have been made and
actions taken. I believe that this matter needs to be
given serious thought and that ways to prevent such a
thing from happening must be considered.
The second thing requiring our attention is an
appeal that the United Nations establish mechanisms
for helping the African Union and the regional
economic communities to build the capacities to
implement their decisions regarding conflict resolution
as expeditiously as possible. As members know,
conflict prevention and resolution require swift
reactions. Indeed, the AU and the regional economic
communities have demonstrated the capacity to be fast
in many instances. Unfortunately, as I said earlier, we
are constrained in terms of resources.
In some ways, this matter is very much related to
the current funding regulations of the United Nations,
which do not allow the funding of peacekeeping
missions and operations led by other groups, even
when authorized by the Security Council. That impedes
peacekeeping and peace support missions undertaken
by the African Union and the regional economic
communities in Africa. That in turn affects the
predictability and sustainability of such missions and
may jeopardize entire peace initiatives undertaken by
the AU and the regional economic communities in
Africa.
In that regard, we welcome the proposal by the
Secretary-General that an African Union-United
Nations panel be set up within the next three months to
consider the modalities of how to support regional
organizations in terms of financing such operations. We
hope that the panel will look at the possibility of
amending regulations to enable the United Nations to
finance regional operations authorized by the United
Nations Security Council. But we also hope that
modalities will be explored for assisting acceptable
initiatives of regional organizations that do not have
the authorization of the Security Council. After all, the
goal is the same: the maintenance of international
peace.
Experience has shown that such interventions
have been very useful, at least in the case of Africa.
Where regional, economic communities and our
continental organization, formerly the Organization of
African Unity and now the AU, have taken action — in
Sierra Leone, Liberia, Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, southern Sudan, Somalia,
Darfur, Zimbabwe and the Comoros — it has helped so
much in mitigating the crises before the United Nations
S/PV.5868
08-306726
arrived on the scene. Indeed, I believe that if in the
future such mechanisms are strengthened and working
relations with the United Nations are better defined and
streamlined, there would be fewer instances where
direct intervention of the United Nations as an
institution would be involved.
Take as an example Zimbabwe, the subject of so
much discussion these days. The Southern African
Development Community (SADC), as an organization,
has done a tremendous job. It is SADC’s work that has
enabled the people of Zimbabwe to hold the recent
round of peaceful elections. SADC remains seized with
the situation in Zimbabwe to ensure that the will of the
people of Zimbabwe is respected. This is the spirit of
the meeting last week, and it will be the spirit of future
meetings to be held soon. SADC needs to be supported
in this regard.
Before I conclude, I wish to thank the Secretary-
General for his tireless efforts in mobilizing additional
resources and logistical support for the international
community in support of African peacekeeping
missions in places like Darfur and Somalia. I also
thank the countries and organizations, such as the
European Union, that have responded positively. But
much more needs to be done, urgently.
The peacekeeping operations in Darfur and
Somalia, both of which are authorized by the Security
Council, are still seriously constrained owing to a lack
of adequate financial resources, logistics and
equipment. Within the broader issue of cooperation
between the United Nations and the AU, I reaffirm and
urge continuing implementation of the declaration on
Enhancing UN-AU Cooperation, agreed upon by our
two organizations in 2006.
In conclusion, let me once again thank you,
Mr. President, for giving the AU an opportunity to
share its thoughts during this important debate. We
need and encourage cooperation between our two
organizations, and our two Councils need each other.
We in the African Union support the idea that these
meetings should be held annually with as much
technical consultation as may be required to be
conducted in between. We look forward with great
anticipation to the outcomes of this debate today and
tomorrow. As usual, we expect the resolutions and
decisions to advance and consolidate the working
relations between the United Nations and the AU, and
between the United Nations Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council.
The President: I welcome the Secretary-General
and invite him to take the floor.
The Secretary-General: It is a great honour for
me to participate in this very important high-level
meeting of the Security Council.
First of all, I apologize for being late because of
my unavoidable meeting with the Head of State of the
Republic of Korea, my home country. I hope the
Council will understand the situation.
It is an honour to join this Council and to
welcome members to the United Nations. Allow me to
pay tribute to South Africa for convening this debate
on peace and security in Africa, and for giving us the
opportunity to discuss the important relationship
between the United Nations and the African Union
(AU).
President Mbeki, I am especially happy to
welcome you to the United Nations. Let me commend
your personal engagement in strengthening our
partnership.
Let me also congratulate President Kikwete of
Tanzania on assuming the chairmanship of the African
Union. I look forward to working with you, Sir, in the
months ahead.
In the 15 months that I have served as Secretary-
General, I have devoted more time to African issues
than to those on any other continent — from peace and
security to the Millennium Development Goals. I have
visited 11 African countries thus far, and I will leave
on Friday this week to visit four more.
Preventing and resolving conflict peacefully must
remain high on the shared agenda of the AU and the
United Nations. In this context, I welcome the
announcement of a new Government in Kenya. Now
that the immediate power-sharing issues have been
addressed, I urge all sides to stay committed to
resolving the longer-term causes of the recent unrest.
I am deeply concerned at the uncertainty created
by the prolonged non-release of the election results in
Zimbabwe. Absent a transparent solution to this
impasse, the situation could deteriorate further, with
serious implications for the people of Zimbabwe. The
Zimbabwean authorities and the countries of the region
have insisted that these matters are for the region to
S/PV.5868
708-30672
resolve, and the international community continues to
watch and wait for decisive action. The credibility of
the democratic process in Africa could be at stake here.
If there is a second round of elections, they must be
conducted in a fair and transparent manner, with
international observers. I urge the leaders of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC) to
continue their efforts. The United Nations stands ready
to provide assistance in this regard.
Meanwhile, we must step up the work for
desperately needed progress in bringing peace and
stability to Darfur and Somalia. The partnership
between the AU and the United Nations will remain
crucial to these efforts.
The Council has heard Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs Lynn Pascoe introduce my two
reports. As these show, the relationship between the
United Nations and the AU is strong and broad.
The declaration on Enhancing UN-AU
Cooperation, signed in 2006 between Chairperson
Konaré and my predecessor, Secretary-General Kofi
Annan, provides a vehicle for the United Nations to
assist in building the capacity of the African Union. We
have already made significant progress in giving life to
the vision behind the declaration.
As provided for in the Ten-Year Capacity-
Building Programme, we are taking concrete steps to
help develop the African Peace and Security
Architecture. This work covers a broad range of
activities, from good offices and mediation on border
issues, to early warning, conflict prevention and
building operational capacity.
We have established a dedicated team to help
operationalize the concept of an African standby force,
which would build on the valiant and pioneering efforts
of the African Union’s missions in Burundi, Somalia
and the Sudan. Today, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations team develops training, operational
capacity and technical advice, in collaboration with the
African Union Commission, the subregional
organizations and donors.
Our two Organizations are now far better
equipped for the critical task of mediation, thanks to
the establishment of the secretariat of the AU Panel of
the Wise, and the launch of the United Nations
mediation standby team of experts. Our cooperation
during the crisis in Kenya is an example of how we can
achieve more by working together.
Overall, we should be proud of the progress we
have made. But, above all, we should be energized to
do even more as we move ahead.
I am heartened at the deepening cooperation
between this Council and the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union. I warmly welcome
tomorrow’s joint meeting of the two Councils — the
second of its kind, and the first to be held at United
Nations Headquarters.
This debate also gives me an opportunity to pay
tribute to the outgoing Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, His Excellency Mr. Alpha Oumar
Konaré. Chairman Konaré, under your leadership, the
AU has transformed its relationship with the rest of the
world. I look forward to working closely with your
successor, Mr. Jean Ping.
As we consolidate the partnership between our
institutions, I will spare no effort in making it
complementary, effective and inclusive. In the two
reports (S/2008/18, S/2008/186) that the Council will
examine today, I have made a number of specific
proposals for its consideration. I am resolved to
enhance cooperation with all regional organizations, so
as to create in the future effective mechanisms for
conflict prevention and resolution, as well as a
predictable, interlinked and reliable system for global
peacekeeping under the Charter. I am confident that the
Council’s meeting today will contribute to that goal.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement. I am quite certain that all of us
understand why he had to delay his joining us here this
morning in the Council. Thank you very much,
Mr. Secretary-General.
I now invite The Right Honourable Gordon
Brown, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, to take the floor.
Mr. Brown (United Kingdom): I want to start by
thanking President Mbeki for convening this event and
for his important and pivotal role in the creation of the
African Union (AU) and the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development, both of which are essential to
ensuring African solutions to the challenges that Africa
faces.
S/PV.5868
08-306728
Six decades ago, the United Nations declared its
ambition to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war and recognized that peace and
prosperity are indivisible. Today’s discussion is an
opportunity to forge a new consensus on the support
that is now needed to prevent conflict, to resolve
conflict and to rebuild from conflict afterwards. Work
by the African Union, which I applaud, has laid the
foundations for a political solution in Kenya in recent
weeks, and it has helped create the conditions for
recovery in Sierra Leone, Liberia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and other areas of the continent.
But we recognize that the African Union needs more
support, which, as President Mbeki has said, must be
part of a wider endeavour.
Today there is still a gaping hole in our ability to
address the illegitimate threats and use of force against
innocent people. It is to our shame that the
international community did not act in Rwanda. Darfur
shows the urgent needs that yet have to be met. Today
there are 28,000 African peacekeepers. But if we are to
honour our responsibility to protect behind borders
where there are atrocities, we need to ensure more
systematic support for peacekeepers, and we need to
build the capacity of vulnerable nations to prevent
conflict. Therefore, in addition to training 12,000
African peacekeepers, Britain will step up its
contribution to the joint European Union-African
Union training exercises in support of the African
Union’s Peace and Security Directorate. But I believe
we also need agreement on more predictable and
sustainable sources of funding, as has already been
mentioned around this table.
I welcome the Secretary-General’s proposals for a
senior panel, which should, among other things,
examine the creation of an international trust fund with
United Nations oversight.
History tells us that fragile and conflict States
need not only humanitarian aid and peacekeeping, they
need to combine that with help for stabilization and
reconstruction. For countries where breakdown has
occurred, it is now right to agree major changes in the
way the international order responds, so that we can
systematically combine humanitarian aid and
peacekeeping with help for reconstruction and
development.
Therefore, during our presidency of the Security
Council next month in May, Britain will propose that
when Security Council resolutions authorize
peacekeeping missions, the whole United Nations
system also is able to authorize action on stabilization
and reconstruction. A single envoy is given authority
for coordinating international efforts on peacekeeping
and recovery in post-conflict zones, and a United
Nations fund is created to provide immediate support
for reconstruction, to which Britain will contribute. In
the same way that we have military forces ready to
respond to conflicts, we should agree to have civilian
experts ready on standby to deploy quickly to help
rebuild countries emerging from instability. For that
purpose, Britain will lead the way by making available
a thousand-strong United Kingdom standby civilian
force including police, emergency services,
professionals, judges and trainers.
I have alluded to the work done in Kenya, Darfur,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and other parts
of Africa. Three weeks ago, the people of Zimbabwe
sent a strong message of their commitment to
democracy. In line with President Kikwete’s comments
today, Britain supports those in the African Union and
the Southern African Development Community
(SADC) who are working to ensure that the will of the
Zimbabwean people is upheld. We will do everything
to encourage those efforts. I am pleased that SADC is
to meet again this weekend.
We should also respond to the Secretary-
General’s suggestion that the United Nations can do a
great deal to help in support of the African Union and
SADC. I welcome the Secretary-General’s statement
today. Having seen the results at polling stations, no
one thinks that President Mugabe has won this
election. A stolen election would not be a democratic
election at all. As the Secretary-General has said, the
credibility of the democratic process depends on there
being a legitimate Government. Therefore, let a single
clear message go out from here in New York that we
are and will be vigilant for democratic rights, that we
stand solidly behind democracy and human rights for
Zimbabwe and that we stand ready to support
Zimbabweans in building a better future.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Romano Prodi, Prime Minister of Italy, to take the
floor.
Mr. Prodi (Italy) (spoke in Italian; English text
provided by the delegation): I wish to begin by
thanking President Mbeki for this initiative.
S/PV.5868
908-30672
Strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations, particularly the African
Union (AU), is a critical issue that I care about deeply.
This initiative therefore has our full support.
We have already travelled a long way down the
road of cooperation between international and regional
organizations. There are positive examples throughout
the world. In Europe, the United Nations, the European
Union (EU) and NATO have played, and continue to
play, a vital role in stabilizing the Balkans. In the
Mediterranean, we have a successful joint United
Nations-EU mission in Lebanon. In Africa there are
numerous partnerships between the United Nations and
the African Union, such as in Darfur. In Asia, the
comprehensive approach to Afghanistan is grounded in
the need for complementarity between the United
Nations and other regional organizations.
We have all come to agree on one basic principle,
namely, that the closer the cooperation between the
international and the regional levels, the more effective
the actions of the international community in crisis
situations.
I would now like to consider the African Union,
which is the most interesting political reality of the
African continent. As I said last year in my addresses
to the Addis Ababa Summit in January and to the
Security Council meeting on Africa in September, we
have to keep working and to step up our efforts. As I
see it, the African Union can make ever-greater
progress if its follows the best practices of comparable
political and institutional realities. I should like now to
refer to a few working points.
I believe that the African Union, with the
assistance of all of us, should continue down the path
on which it has embarked to create permanent
structures that will enable it to manage crises in
political, military and civil terms. I repeat, in political,
military and civil terms.
Of course, there is a problem of resources not
unlike the one we face in Europe, where we have
increased the European Union budget for civilian
missions, strengthened our missions’ command
capacity and set up a mobilization and rapid reaction
system for crisis situations. More is still needed, but
10 years ago that would all have been unthinkable.
That represents important progress which deserves to
be studied carefully by Africa.
Simply averring the will to handle one’s own
continental crises is not enough. The African Union has
to follow through on that will resolutely. That is the
only way for asserted ownership to become actual
ownership. A continent that rightly aspires to play a
global role should aspire to equip itself with the
instruments needed to set its house in order. I am
greatly encouraged by what I see — an Africa that is
not just seeking assistance, but is, rather, playing a
front-line role in international efforts to bring peace to
the continent.
We see this also in the great efforts, which we
fully support, of all the African subregional
organizations. Together with the African Union, they
have helped to identify a political solution in Kenya
and are working to find a rapid solution to the
profound crisis in Zimbabwe, which we are following
with great concern and which I hope will be resolved
as soon as possible, because that country needs a
working democracy.
In building a more solid African institutional
framework, the structures for coordinating all the
regional organizations must also be strengthened. The
European Union and the African Union launched a
joint strategy in Lisbon last December. It was a historic
outcome in which I believe, and I worked on it both in
Brussels and in Rome. Now we must make it
operational and concrete because it is a new and
essential instrument.
I fully endorse the statement that the Slovenian
presidency will deliver shortly on behalf of the
European Union. Allow me to offer a few closing
remarks about what Italy can do to continue lending a
hand.
When I was the President of the European
Commission, it was my responsibility to launch the
European Peace Facility for Africa. As Italy’s Prime
Minister, I decided last year to introduce an Italian
instrument to support the African Union and its
peacekeeping efforts, particularly in the Horn of
Africa. I signed the agreement with the President of the
Commission, Mr. Konaré, which promotes African
ownership in full complementarity with its European
counterpart facility. The Facility has already enabled
the achievement of significant results, such as in
Somalia, where we are using it to train the Somali
security forces and to rebuild the public administration.
S/PV.5868
08-3067210
The United Nations centres in Italy — such as the
Staff College in Turin and the Logistics Base in
Brindisi — will remain available to Africa as tools for
education, training and capacity-building, in the spirit
of the suggestions made by the Secretary-General in
his report.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
readiness to strengthen cooperation — in ways to be
jointly identified — between the United Nations and
the African Union, including in the area of financing. I
am fully aware that this is a key point to which African
leaders attach great importance, as we have heard in
earlier statements. The Secretary-General’s report
makes a number of proposals that we endorse. We will
not fail to offer our ideas and resources in the pursuit
of that process.
The President: I call on His Excellency
Mr. Laurent Gbagbo, President of Côte d’Ivoire.
President Gbagbo (spoke in French): Like
previous speakers, I should like to thank President
Thabo Mbeki for this initiative, as well as Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, who, immediately upon
assuming his official functions, began to take the steps
necessary to assist Côte d’Ivoire to emerge from its
crisis.
I also commend President Blaise Compaoré of
Burkina Faso, who helped us in his capacity as head of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). I wish to point out here that on Monday,
before I boarded the plane, Côte d’Ivoire, having
assembled all the actors to participate in the elections,
set the date of 30 November for the first round of
presidential balloting. It represents a victory for us all,
and especially for Côte d’Ivoire, which has grown
weary of this erratic crisis. The first round of
presidential elections will be held on 30 November,
and everyone should support us morally and assist us
to convene the elections and to put an era that does us
no honour behind us.
Today’s meeting is an important one. I wish to
make just a few points. The United Nations was
established at the end of the Second World War. It is
the same age as me and older than many current heads
of State. It was created to resolve conflicts among
States, but our conflicts in Africa generally take place
within a State and are aimed at destroying it. That has
been the case in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Somalia
and wherever conflict has erupted. Darfur is a
somewhat unique case because it contains both an
internal Sudanese conflict and a border conflict
between the Sudan, Chad and the Central African
Republic. It is perhaps the only case in which two or
three States have faced off against one another in
Africa. The others, even that in Kenya, are domestic
conflicts, which were not exactly foreseen or
contemplated as a reason for the establishment of the
United Nations.
I greatly admire the initiatives that Africans
themselves have launched. We have done a great deal
in ending our own conflicts. I commend all those who
have led the African Union and the Organization of
African Unity before it, as well as our colleague and
brother President Konaré, who is present among us,
and his successor, who is striving methodically.
We need, however, to institutionalize all our
progress, and the United Nations must support us. In
Côte d’Ivoire, for instance, we have a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Abidjan, but
his work needs to reach out to our institutions and the
United Nations must work to decentralize power. This
is a question not merely of resources, but of
responsibility as well. It is a structural issue. The
African Union and subregional organizations, such as
the Southern African Development Community,
ECOWAS and the Arab organizations, must be
provided with the structural responsibility to resolve
the new types of conflict we are seeing today.
That is what I wanted to suggest. Of course it is
necessary to support the African Union and its
membership. My expectation from the United Nations
is that such reforms will take place. Reform of the
United Nations does not mean only reform in terms of
who is on the Security Council and who is not: it is a
question of who does what in the world. The world has
become too big: I believe that the world population
was not even 2 billion when the United Nations was
founded, and there were far fewer independent States.
With every passing month and year, new countries
have emerged. We must ensure that regional
organizations play a larger role, and that they enjoy the
support of the United Nations.
That is my proposal, and that is why I came here
today. Whenever Côte d’Ivoire has made significant
progress, Africans have been on the front line. In 2005
we made significant progress through South Africa’s
S/PV.5868
1108-30672
mediation; and we are making significant progress
today through Burkina Faso’s facilitation. We have
established an inter-Ivorian dialogue with Burkina Faso
facilitation. I believe that Africans have a great deal to
offer Africa in terms of peace. They have a great deal
to offer, and I want them to give a great deal — and to
give more. I want the United Nations to support them
so that they can give even more to peace in Africa.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Wang Yi, Special Envoy of the President of China,
to take the floor.
Mr. Wang Yi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to congratulate South Africa on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
The Charter of the United Nations assigns
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security to the Security
Council. In Chapter VIII of the Charter, the founding
Members of the United Nations, with great vision, also
encouraged the development of pacific settlement of
local disputes through regional arrangements. World
peace and development are now faced with many
difficulties and challenges, and it is imperative to
respond to them forcefully and collectively at the
national, regional and international levels. In a rapidly
changing world, strengthening cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations will both
promote multilateralism and boost the international
collective security mechanism.
Without stability and development in Africa,
global peace and prosperity are out of the question.
The African Union is Africa’s largest and most
representative regional organization, and it has gained
widespread international recognition for the
increasingly important role it plays in maintaining
peace and stability and resolving conflicts in Africa.
The good cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union over the past few years has become
a model for observing the United Nations Charter.
China salutes the determination, courage and
dedication of African countries and of the African
Union.
The twenty-first century should witness the end
of disturbances and poverty in Africa. It should be a
century in which Africa fully controls its own destiny
and attains peace, stability and development.
Achieving that goal requires a common effort by the
international community and Africa and a closer
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union.
China supports the forging of a stable partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union.
The Security Council bears a responsibility it cannot
shirk regarding the maintenance of peace and security
in Africa, while the African Union has a deep grasp of
African issues. The two should strengthen their
coordination and form synergies on the basis of
equality, mutual respect, complementarity and mutual
benefit, drawing on each other’s strengths. In our view,
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union should be based on a predictable,
sustainable and flexible framework. While maintaining
its authority, the Security Council should give priority
to supporting the key role of the African Union in
resolving regional conflicts and should give full
consideration to the views of the African Union.
We hope that the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur will complete its
deployment at an early date and will begin operations.
We also support the United Nations taking over the
African Union peacekeeping operation in Somalia.
China holds the view that the United Nations
should engage in multifaceted cooperation with the
African Union in wide-ranging areas. Such cooperation
should encompass the three pillars of security,
development and human rights. It should be pursued
throughout the process of confidence-building, conflict
prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
sustainable development. Promoting a culture of
reconciliation and attaining the Millennium
Development Goals will not only help eradicate the
root causes of conflict, but also provide a solid basis
for ensuring peace in Africa. We support the United
Nations and its Security Council, Peacebuilding
Commission, Secretariat and other organs in building
and strengthening coordination and consultation
mechanisms with the African Union at various levels.
China calls for high priority to be given to
capacity-building in pursuing cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union. The African
Union’s efforts to make peace are constrained by a lack
of human resources, material supplies and funding. The
United Nations and the international community should
respond positively to the African Union’s legitimate
requests and should work creatively to deliver on their
promises and translate their pledges into action. We
S/PV.5868
08-3067212
hope that the United Nations will strengthen its
cooperation with the African Union in personnel
training, institution-building, the sharing of
information and experience, resource management and
logistical assistance; these are fields in which the
United Nations has rich experience.
The Declaration on Enhancing UN-AU
Cooperation: Framework for the Ten-Year Capacity-
Building Programme for the African Union (A/61/630,
annex) should be fully implemented, and the United
Nations should play a key role in pooling other
international assistance.
Finally, I wish to thank South Africa for
preparing a draft Security Council resolution on the
issue we are discussing today. China fully supports the
draft resolution.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Hassan Wirajuda, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Indonesia, to take the floor.
Mr. Wirajuda (Indonesia): Allow me at the
outset to express my appreciation to you, President
Thabo Mbeki, for your initiative to convene this
thematic debate on an issue of tremendous importance
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
Before I proceed, I wish to reiterate Indonesia’s
long-standing and irrevocable commitment to Africa.
The then-newly-independent Indonesia, though still in
its infancy, had little hesitation in promoting the cause
of Africa’s independence struggle through the seminal
Africa-Asia Conference held at Bandung in 1955.
Since then we have contributed actively to United
Nations peacekeeping operations on the continent: in
the Congo in the 1960s, and then in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Liberia, Mozambique,
Namibia, Sierra Leone, Somalia and the Sudan.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security, as well as in conflict
prevention, is long-standing and is recognized in the
Charter. It is a subject that has been gaining
momentum and relevance, and rightly so: our
increasingly complex and interconnected world,
marked by a proliferation of actors and variables,
requires us to look at issues in an ever more holistic
and integrated manner. We simply do not have the
luxury of remaining insulated or indifferent, as the
destinies of all are intertwined and as conflicts in one
region of the globe will sooner or later affect other
regions.
Indonesia is an avid supporter of regional
cooperation. We are convinced of the transformational
potential of regional cooperation in preventing and
settling conflict and bringing regional peace and
stability in its place. Such conditions are prerequisites
for economic development. Our own region’s
experience attests to that fact. Ensuring peace and
security in South-East Asia for more than four decades,
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
has contributed immensely in shouldering burdens that
would otherwise have fallen on the United Nations.
Indonesia is also a strong advocate for
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. Of course, such cooperation is
invaluable in strengthening and empowering regional
organizations. It is not, however, a one-way process.
Indonesia believes that the United Nations also benefits
from such cooperation. After all, it would seem only
natural that in dealing with particular conflict
situations the United Nations should benefit from
regional knowledge, perspectives and experiences.
There is no need to reinvent the wheel. Synergy and
partnership should be promoted.
Most recently the United Nations and the African
Union (AU), as well as subregional organizations in
Africa, have shown us that such cooperation can
deliver tangible results. Challenges certainly remain.
More support is obviously needed to enable the AU to
respond to and deal more effectively with conflicts on
the continent on behalf of the international community.
The United Nations and the African Union must
therefore enhance their capacity for confidence-
building, friendly diplomacy and peacemaking and
realize their full potential. The need for such an
undertaking is self evident, for it is the undeniable
reality of our time that conflict situations in Africa
constitute significant portions of the Security Council’s
agenda. The reward for such an undertaking is
therefore greater still.
Collaboration between the AU and the United
Nations has the potential to transform conflict
situations, bringing peace, stability and prosperity to
the continent. We commend the AU for taking the lead
in Somalia through the deployment of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), thus
contributing to peace and security in that country. We
S/PV.5868
1308-30672
call for more support for AMISOM by the international
community. We also commend the AU for contributing
to peace efforts in the Darfur region of the Sudan,
where, with the consent of the parties, it deployed the
African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS). The
transformation of AMIS into a hybrid operation
provides us with important lessons that help us to
strengthen cooperation between the United Nations and
the AU and are also valuable for other regional
organizations. We have also drawn on the experience
of the AU and the United Nations in conflict
prevention and peacemaking to supplement our own
experience in those fields.
Consistent with the statement of the President of
the Security Council last November (S/PRST/2007/42),
under Indonesia’s presidency, we recognize that
regional organizations need to strengthen and increase
cooperation among themselves. In that regard the
United Nations can provide its political support and
technical expertise. Indeed, with you presiding over the
Council today, Mr. President, I am particularly pleased
to highlight the close cooperation that Indonesia and
South Africa have forged in promoting interregional
cooperation. I am referring to our joint efforts in
promoting Asia-Africa strategic partnerships launched
at Bandung in 2005 during the 50-year commemoration
of the historic 1955 Asia-Africa Bandung Conference.
I would like to highlight in particular the Asian-
African Subregional Organizations Conference
(AASROC) meetings in Durban and Bandung, which
preceded the second Asia-Africa Summit in 2005.
AASROC is significant in its approach of promoting
cooperation among regional and subregional
organizations in Asia and Africa. Cooperation between
regional organizations or arrangements is an essential
feature of contemporary international architecture.
Indonesia has benefited from interregional
collaboration. The European Union and ASEAN have
contributed significantly to our successful efforts to
restore peace and security in the province of Aceh
during the period from 2005 to 2007, especially by
participating in a joint monitoring mission to supervise
the implementation of the Aceh peace agreement.
With regard to the current hub-and-spokes
relationship between the United Nations and the
regional organizations, we are in favour of its
expansion into a one consisting of a hub and a network
of spokes, a network of regional organizations working
together to maintain peace and security, connected to
each other and with the United Nations at the centre.
With regard to my own region of South-East Asia
and its regional organizations, since the Security
Council thematic debate last November (5776th
meeting), the ten members of ASEAN have moved
forward by signing the ASEAN Charter. The Charter
represents not only our shared values and shared
visions but also our commitment to progress in unison
and to contribute to international peace and security.
That is our contribution as the ASEAN community.
Our region can learn from the experiences and
best practices of other regions, including Africa.
However, to us the notion of receiving is tantamount to
the notion of giving — to provide, to confer. In a world
of plenty, giving is a feature to be embraced by all.
Indonesia believes that ASEAN can also offer its
experiences and best practices to other regions. To
strengthen our outward-looking strategy we have
cultivated dialogue-partner relationships with some ten
countries and organizations. ASEAN’s reach extends
far beyond its immediate subregion. Above all, we are
strengthening our links with the United Nations. We
signed a memorandum of understanding on United
Nations-ASEAN cooperation last September.
Our participation reflects not only our wish to
share our views and experiences on the issues but also
our desire to learn the views, lessons and best practices
of other countries and other regions, which we can take
home to our region. We also hope our experience can
be useful to other regions in the interest of a more
peaceful world for all.
The President: I now invite the President of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, His Excellency
Mr. Joseph Kabila, to take the floor.
President Kabila (spoke in French): May I
begin, Mr. President, by stating my warm
congratulations to you and my wishes for a fruitful
mandate for the Republic of South Africa’s presidency
of the Security Council during the month of April. May
I also say how much my country appreciates your
initiative in organizing this special Council meeting
devoted to relations between the United Nations and
regional organizations, in particular the African Union
(AU), on the subject of peacekeeping and international
security.
S/PV.5868
08-3067214
I take this opportunity to pay tribute to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and all his team, those at
Headquarters and those on mission throughout the
world, for their laudable and tireless efforts to promote
and defend the objectives and principles of the United
Nations Charter.
My country is currently in a phase of
peacebuilding, renewal and reconstruction. I myself am
Chairman-in-Office of the Economic Community of
Central African States, and I warmly welcome the
invitation to take part in this meeting. My being here
today is meaningful in two ways. It is a sign of the
value that my country attributes to international peace
and security. It also expresses our recognition of the
valuable support the United Nations has ceaselessly
given to my country and other countries in our
subregion in the resolution of recurring conflicts that
jeopardize our stability and undermine our possibilities
of achieving development.
My most ardent desire is that with regard to the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
solutions we come to at the end of this day of
discussion make a substantial contribution to rendering
more extensive, sound and efficient the cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
in particular the African Union. Indeed, I believe that if
these solutions, despite their imperfections, manage
separately to contain the damage caused by human
folly, together and working in concert they would
obtain even better results towards a safer, more human
world.
The Security Council should therefore do more
than just encourage; it should support regional efforts
to maintain peace and security. It should integrate them
into its global vision and should consider them in light
of what they really are: regional components of its
universal mission.
Peace is so precious that the quest for it, however
frustrating it may be at times, cannot afford to put up
with discouragement or, even less, neglect. It cannot be
left to chance; it must rather be built, managed and
maintained. To achieve that, the factors that often
jeopardize peace must be identified, and we must learn
from the experience of societies and peoples who have
succeeded in taming it and who over the years have
been able to enjoy the rewards that peace brings.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
have experienced years of war with our share of
misery, misfortune and grief. Today, that regrettable
interruption is fortunately finished. Certainly,
pacification of the country is by no means complete.
And even though our institutions have once again
become legitimate, thanks to the fruition of political
will following the constitutional referendum and
general elections, they still need to be strengthened.
We have boundless determination to consolidate
democracy; enhance the rule of law; complete the
process of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration; finalize the establishment of a
professional, national and republican army and police
force; operationalize an accountable judicial system
that guarantees social peace; and create within the
Great Lakes region, and more widely in Central Africa,
a political environment stripped of all factors hindering
peaceful coexistence among countries and peoples. It is
in this context that the recent progress made, both
internally and externally, including the signing of
several agreements marking out the path towards peace
in the east of our country, must be placed.
The persistence of conflict in the world in general
and in Africa in particular has given rise to serious and
complex problems. Among them are the large flows of
refugees and internally displaced persons, the spread of
infectious disease, the proliferation of increasingly
harmful weapons and drugs, and the destruction of the
environment and of biodiversity.
Fortunately, these issues, which form the daily lot
of African societies, are at the heart of United Nations
concerns. They therefore deserve joint attention and
support of the United Nations and the African Union
by virtue of the principles of the United Nations
Charter and of the Constitutive Act of the African
Union and of the powers of the two organizations,
which in this case are complementary.
The United Nations is, in fact, the only
organization that can lay down rules and standards that
are imposed on all humankind and that can oblige the
whole world to respect them, including by weapons.
That is essential, given that the indirect and direct
actors and protagonists in conflicts are sometimes not
on the continents where the events are taking place. On
the other hand, regional and subregional organizations
are knowledgeable with regard to the sociological
situation on the ground and are therefore the only ones
that can even propose the most operational solutions to
specific conflicts.
S/PV.5868
1508-30672
Recognizing this complementarity, we need to
include among the special areas for cooperation
between the United Nations and the AU the struggle
against the illegal exploitation of natural resources in
Africa; strengthening cooperation in conflict
prevention and resolution, including the management
of crises and peacebuilding and peacekeeping in post-
conflict periods on the continent; supporting the
14 December 2006 decision by the AU Peace and
Security Council regarding the Coordination and
Consultation Mechanism between the African Union
Peace and Security Council and the United Nations
Security Council; and implementing the agreement on
the organization of joint meetings between the AU
Peace and Security Council and the Security Council at
least once a year. Moreover, by virtue of the
cooperation thus strengthened, the Secretary-General
should be invited to appeal to the relevant United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes to intensify
their efforts to support cooperation with the African
Union.
More broadly speaking, the United Nations
system, whose primary responsibility is to promote and
maintain international peace and security, should
increase its assistance to the AU with a view to
reinforcing the institutional and operational capacity of
its Peace and Security Council, inter alia, in early
warning, through the regular, continuous and
coordinated exchange of information, training of
military and civilian personnel, and jointly carrying out
certain mediation missions.
United Nations support should therefore extend to
AU peacekeeping missions in its various member
States, particularly in the sphere of communication and
logistics; to strengthening peacebuilding capacities
before and after the cessation of hostilities; and to
supporting humanitarian actions undertaken by the
Peace and Security Council, in conformity with the
Charter and the protocol establishing the Peace and
Security Council. The United Nations should support
the establishment of the standby force and the African
Military Commission, as well as greater
professionalization and better operating of the brigades
existing within subregional organizations such as the
Economic Community for Central African States and
the Southern African Development Community; and
strengthening the institutional capacities of the
regional centre for training and peacekeeping for AU
member States.
To ensure the implementation and follow-up on
the prevention and resolution of conflicts, it is
important to strengthen the good offices missions and
mediation capacities of the Secretary-General.
Moreover, the Peacebuilding Support Office should be
strengthened, the Peacebuilding Fund should expand
its activities and, if necessary, a special fund for
peacekeeping should be established. Such a fund would
have the mission and the merit of ensuring that
regional organizations have lasting and predictable
funding for the peacekeeping operations that they
undertake.
On another front, the widely recognized inability
of preventive diplomacy to put an end to the new forms
of armed violence in Africa cannot be ignored. If we
are to preserve peace and prevent or manage conflicts,
there is certainly a need for dialogue, diplomacy and
negotiation. But also, and in particular, there is a need
for order, respect for national and international law,
strong and effective institutions and, above all, justice.
And, regardless of how noble and useful those
institutions may be, it must be not only transitional
justice, but also, and in particular, justice that promotes
and unapologetically enforces the law.
Indeed, prosecuting those responsible for serious
crimes, without neglecting the aspect of compensation
for the victims of such crimes, is essential if we wish
to create the conditions for true reconciliation, to
prevent recidivism and to re-establish respect for the
sanctity of life and the inviolability of human dignity.
The world is becoming more globalized every
day, together with the challenges facing us. Yet,
regional specificities remain as important as ever, and
the effectiveness of solutions depends on them. The
right balance between the global and the regional is
therefore the answer. With regard to Africa, it is up to
us who are meeting here today to find that happy
medium.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Djibrill Yipènè Bassole, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Regional Cooperation of Burkina Faso, to
take the floor.
Mr. Bassole (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
should like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
today’s initiative and to convey to you the fraternal
support and gratitude of the President of Burkina Faso
for your dedication and personal involvement on behalf
of peace and stability in Africa.
S/PV.5868
08-3067216
With regard to strengthening the relations
between the United Nations and African regional
organizations in the area of international peace and
security, I should like to express our gratitude and
support for the relevant recommendations made by the
Secretary-General. In order to shorten my statement,
Mr. President, I should like to associate myself with
what you proposed and with what Mr. Kikwete, current
Chairperson of the African Union, just said in his
statement.
West Africa continues to be a theatre of conflicts,
some of which are on the Security Council’s agenda.
As a subregional organization, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) has
equipped itself with a mechanism for conflict
prevention and settlement, the Mediation and Security
Council, and with a Council of the Wise, which seeks
to prevent or effectively manage the conflicts in the
subregion. ECOWAS has always believed that it had
the responsibility for resolving crises, within the well-
known framework of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Thanks to the actions of ECOWAS, the situation
in most countries in crisis is certainly encouraging,
although, at the regional level, we are still concerned
by the situations in northern Mali and northern Niger
and by threats such as drug trafficking and the illicit
circulation of weapons of war. Together with the
Security Council and the Secretary-General, we are
following in particular the situation in Côte d’Ivoire. In
his capacities as current Chairman of ECOWAS and
Facilitator of the inter-Ivorian dialogue, President
Blaise Compaoré has been able, thanks to the vision
and statesmanship of President Laurent Gbagbo, who
took the courageous political initiative of a direct
dialogue, Prime Minister Guillaume Soro and the
Ivorian political class, to achieve the signing, on
4 March 2007, of the Ouagadougou Agreement and,
subsequently, of its supplementary agreements.
Those agreements are, in our view, a successful
example of good collaboration among the United
Nations, the African Union (AU) and ECOWAS. While
they emphasize national ownership of the peace
process, they were concluded as a result of regional
facilitation and benefited from international assistance.
One year after its signing, the Ouagadougou
Agreement is recognized as having paved the way for a
genuine way out of the crisis in Côte d’Ivoire. But,
above all, it is the support of the principal actors for
the process that has been the main driving force. Here,
as elsewhere, that support was possible only because
they were fully involved in defining dispute resolution
mechanisms, assumed ownership of those mechanisms
and participated in their implementation. Moreover,
placing the negotiation process within a subregional
framework certainly provided for a better definition of
parameters and the establishment of the best possible
conditions for success.
In order to illustrate the originality of the peace
process, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Côte d’Ivoire has described it in these
terms: national ownership, subregional leadership and
international assistance. We also note with satisfaction
the engagement of Mr. Choi Young-Jin alongside us
with humility and pragmatism. A good complementary
sharing of responsibilities with the Representative of
the Facilitator, Mr. Boureima Badini, has enabled us to
have harmonious assistance in emerging from the
crisis. However, we hope that, as with peacekeeping
operations, mediations of this type also benefit from
predictable, available and sufficient resources, since
they have often been carried out in difficult contexts.
Those are, we believe, some of the lessons that
could be drawn from this process. We earnestly hope
that it will be successfully concluded with the adoption
of an electoral timetable that sets the date for the first
round of presidential elections on 30 November 2008.
Our wish is that peace and stability will return very
soon to Côte d’Ivoire and that the country can benefit
as swiftly as possible from the support of the
Peacebuilding Commission to ensure stability and
economic progress there. Speaking of the Commission,
we should like to take this opportunity to commend its
work and to express our hope for greater involvement
by the African Union in its activities.
I cannot conclude my statement without drawing
the attention of the Security Council to the current
international economic context, characterized by a
general rise in the prices of foodstuffs, which has
caused scattered riots likely to destabilize a good many
countries, particularly in Africa, where the
phenomenon of poverty could be further exacerbated.
It would thus be desirable, from the perspective of
strengthening the relations between the United Nations
and the African Union in the area of maintaining
international peace and security, to place particular
emphasis on socio-economic factors, such as price
S/PV.5868
1708-30672
increases, which are likely to cause new crises in some
of our States.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Pham Binh Minh, Special Envoy of the President
of Viet Nam, to take the floor.
Mr. Pham Binh Minh (Viet Nam): On behalf of
the Vietnamese delegation, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and the delegation of South Africa
on your effective leadership of the work of the Council
this month. We highly appreciate your initiative to hold
a debate on this important topic, and I am confident
that, under your skilful leadership, this meeting will
arrive at a successful conclusion.
We are facing fast and complex changes in the
world, in which peace and cooperation for
development remain the dominant trend, though
challenges arising from both traditional and
non-traditional security issues have increased at the
regional level. More than ever before, the international
community recognizes the pressing need for a stronger
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations in responding to challenges to regional
and international peace and security.
The Charter of the United Nations places on the
Security Council the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Despite the fact that the Security Council has yet to
find a lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, notwithstanding tremendous efforts, the initial
positive steps in the transition from conflict to peace in
countries like Sierra Leone, Liberia, Burundi and
recently the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
testimony to what the Security Council can do to bring
peace and security to the people of Africa.
As the Secretary-General noted in his 2007 report
on the work of the Organization (A/62/1), there has
been a dramatic increase in the range of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
Heads of State and Government at the 2005 World
Summit agreed to expand consultation and cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
through formalized agreements and, as appropriate, the
involvement of regional organizations in the work of
the Security Council. Various resolutions adopted by
the General Assembly and the Security Council on
cooperation between the United Nations and specific
regional organizations help further promote such
cooperation.
On the implementation front, we are convinced
that cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations should be based on their
complementary capacities and comparative advantages,
making full use of their experience, in accordance with
the United Nations Charter and the relevant statutes of
regional organizations. Regional organizations, owing
to their most immediate connection to regional
particularities, are well positioned to understand the
root causes of armed conflicts and have unique
advantages to detect potential threats early and find
peaceful solutions to those problems. Better
coordination and the development of a more effective
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations will strengthen the capacity of the
Security Council to fulfil its task of maintaining
international peace and security. At the same time, the
United Nations and the Security Council should pay
greater attention to the issue of providing political,
physical and financial assistance to peacekeeping
efforts of regional organizations that lack resources.
Equally important, possible modalities of
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations must be further explored and expanded
for mutual reinforcement, taking into account the
differing characteristics of regional organizations in
terms of membership, resource availability and
institutional capacity, as well as the uniqueness of each
conflict situation.
Africa, the second largest and second most
populous continent, is where most regional conflicts
are taking place. Together with United Nations
peacekeeping operations, the African Union (AU) has
proactively contributed to the mediation, reconciliation
and reconstruction processes in many countries such as
Angola, Burundi, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Guinea-
Bissau, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Somalia, the Sudan,
Uganda and Western Sahara. The Governments and the
peoples of Africa and the African Union must be
commended for their determined efforts in this
connection.
We welcome the adoption of the Declaration
signed by the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of
the AU Commission in November 2006 on enhancing
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union in the area of capacity-building over the
next 10 years (A/61/630, annex), as well as the
ongoing close coordination between the two
S/PV.5868
08-3067218
secretariats. Given the many existing challenges ahead,
Viet Nam is of the view that the AU should be
supported in playing a greater role and should therefore
enjoy greater cooperation from the United Nations in
term of financial and logistical assistance for building
the capacity of its peacekeeping forces, so as to
consolidate peace in fragile post-conflict countries and
help prevent a relapse into violence. The difficulties
facing the African Union Mission in Somalia and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur are vivid examples demonstrating how
necessary this is.
In our region of South-East Asia, the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) has become an
important mechanism for strengthening peace,
friendship and cooperation in the region. ASEAN has
also attached great importance to fostering
consultations and exchanging experiences and best
practices with other regional organizations in Asia,
Africa, Europe and Latin America to promote
multilateral endeavours for peace, stability and
development.
As a brother and friend of Africa and as a
member of ASEAN, Viet Nam has always been at the
forefront of any efforts aimed at strengthening the
partnership for peace and development between the
two organizations. We look forward to further
promoting these efforts in the interest of peace,
security and development in Asia, Africa and
throughout the world.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed, the President of Somalia,
to take the floor.
President Ahmed: It is my pleasure to be here at
this special meeting of the Security Council. I am
grateful to those who brought about our gathering here
today to debate the important issue of strengthening the
relationship between the United Nations Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council.
Let me take this opportunity to reaffirm
Somalia’s appreciation and its approval of the Security
Council, which has taken a consistent and laudable role
at each juncture of Somalia’s civil strife and State
failure. The Security Council, as all may remember,
had the resolve and the political will to invoke the
morally compelling doctrine of humanitarian
intervention, thereby successfully reversing a
disastrous famine that could have potentially wiped out
millions of Somalis.
It is my considered judgement that Somalia once
again needs courageous intervention of this body to
intervene in the situation in Somalia by urgently
sending an international force to assist the Transitional
Federal Government in implementing its peace and
stabilization plan.
The conflict in Somalia, which was once among
clans, is today about extreme ideology and predatory
economic and commercial interests. The conflict is in
fact between those who want to live free in peace and
harmony under democratic governance and those who
espouse violence and want to keep Somalia in the
status quo of lawlessness and anarchy.
The solution to the problem in Somalia therefore
has three basic but important ingredients, namely,
re-establishing the collapsed Somali State, furthering
the reconciliation process and stabilizing the situation
and providing security.
On reconciliation, we conducted the largest
reconciliation congress in the history of Somalia. The
National Reconciliation Congress, which was held in
Mogadishu, was attended by close to 3,000 delegates
and attracted many more peace-loving Somalis to the
city. The National Reconciliation Congress produced
corrective solutions in government affairs and a road
map to a fair and free election that would lead Somalia
to a democratic transition in 2009. In addition, the
Transitional Federal Government has time and again
shown a willingness to talk to those who oppose our
Government.
Furthermore, I would like to formally restate at
this meeting of the Security Council that I am for peace
and reconciliation in Somalia. My only purpose in
leading Somalia during this critical period of our
history is to bring peace and lawfulness back to my
country. I would like to state categorically that I want
to witness the renaissance of Somalia as a progressive
democratic State at peace with itself, with its
neighbours and with the rest of the world. I am willing
to do whatever it takes to promote peace and stability
in my country.
The third basic and important ingredient of
providing security is where we have not performed
well, and it is where we cannot make progress without
significant support from the international community.
S/PV.5868
1908-30672
Security is of paramount importance to any country of
the world, and it is a prerequisite for the rest of the
priorities to which I have referred. The lack of security
in Somalia is compounded by the continuation of the
United Nations embargo.
The Security Council must assist the efforts of
the Transitional Federal Government in the
stabilization of the country by, first, reviewing the
merits of the arms embargo on Somalia and promptly
lifting it; secondly, authorizing the deployment of a
United Nations peacekeeping force with a mandate to
help Somalia to achieve fuller reconciliation,
stabilization, disarmament and durable peace; and,
thirdly, helping Somalia in the formation of the
security organs of the Government, such as the police,
military and other security forces.
Finally, the prevalence of pirates off the Somali
coast is hampering international trade and international
marine safety and navigation. As Somalia cannot at the
moment guard its long coastline, we would want to
authorize the international community to take action to
combat piracy on Somalia’s high seas until we can
effectively undertake the security of our territorial
waters.
The President: I now invite Her Excellency
Mrs. Rama Yade, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs
and Human Rights of France, to take the floor.
Mrs. Yade (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank South Africa and President Thabo
Mbeki for having organized this meeting on a subject
that is at the heart of the Security Council’s mandate
and work.
In an age when the destinies of peoples and
nations are linked, peace and security on the African
continent are challenges we all share. The future of
Africa is also our future. Its successes or failures today
will be ours tomorrow. It is by working together that
we will meet the challenges of development, peace and
security.
Motivated by that powerful conviction, last
September President Sarkozy took the initiative to hold
a high-level Security Council meeting on the issue of
peace and security in Africa. Africa must find its
rightful place in globalization. Global affairs cannot be
addressed without Africa. There will be no successful
globalization without a strong Africa that is sure of
itself. But its efforts and successes must be supported
and backed up by the international community. France
therefore believes in a strengthened partnership
between the United Nations and African Union.
Africa is a continent on the move. It is part of the
momentum in the world. Africa’s youthful population,
vibrant and impatient, is sweeping it along and opening
it to the winds of modernity and democracy. Sustained
economic growth is encouraging remarkable successes
in many countries. Its active and growing role in
international bodies is bearing fruit in the settlement of
many conflicts.
Africa is a continent that is organizing itself. The
African Union, whose institutions and role continue to
develop in parallel to subregional organizations,
reflects its desire to take its future into its own hands.
The African Union is already taking on a substantial
role in international responses to crises.
But Africa is also a continent that continues to
face considerable challenges, beginning with those
related to poverty, health, climate change and access to
natural resources, especially water. Africa is
endeavouring to meet those challenges.
We are determined to help it through concrete
actions — with regard to food security, for example.
The riots caused by hunger are triggering a new
emergency, with catastrophic results. How can we
accept that people are dying of hunger in the twenty-
first century? We have seen in recent days the tragic
consequences of the sharp rise and volatility of prices
for basic foodstuffs, which have been hurting the most
vulnerable African populations for many months. Yet
food security is one of the conditions for peace,
stability and development in Africa.
The international community must mobilize
immediately to find solutions with the World Food
Programme as a matter of urgency and over the long
term, by placing agricultural development and land
management at the top of the international agenda.
Peace and development are not built with empty
stomachs. France and the European Union are
preparing proposals in that connection. The United
Nations must act to meet this new global challenge.
Like the African Union, the Organization should help
African countries to meet those challenges and should
do so in four areas.
First, the United Nations should take preventive
action in order to avert open crises. France supports the
S/PV.5868
08-3067220
Secretary-General’s efforts to strengthen United
Nations efforts at preventive diplomacy. The early
warning system established by the African Union is an
important development for the continent in that regard.
The African Union is setting up its peace and
security architecture so as to be able to prevent and
address by itself the continent’s crises. For its part, the
United Nations continues to improve its conflict-
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding capacities
through reform of the Secretariat and the establishment
of the Peacebuilding Commission. The relations
developing between the Security Council, on which the
United Nations Charter confers the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, and the African Union Peace and
Security Council are a good illustration of cooperation
between the two organizations.
The second objective is to respond to crises. To
meet those challenges, the United Nations Charter
confers on the Security Council the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Chapter VIII of the Charter also
provides for the role of regional organizations in that
respect. Institutional development is not an end in
itself, however. It is on the basis of results that
cooperation between our two organizations has to be
judged. In Darfur, for instance, acting in an original
way, the two organizations are deploying a hybrid
operation and conducting joint mediation. It is not
always an easy situation to manage. The deployment of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur is blocked at this time. It is imperative that the
Operation be able to discharge its mandate to help the
people of Darfur, who are the primary victims, and the
humanitarian operators who come to their aid.
Indeed, we are increasingly concerned by the rise
in the number of serious human rights violations
against women, through increased sexual violence, and
children in situations of armed conflict in particular.
The fight against impunity must be an essential
element of our action. States must cooperate with the
International Criminal Court. Without resolute action
against impunity, there can be no peace or lasting
reconciliation.
Peace and national reconciliation processes must
also be supported until free elections, transparent and
open to all, can be held, as in Côte d’Ivoire. Such
security, humanitarian and political aspects go hand in
hand. They cannot advance without all the others, as
we are also seeing in the case of Somalia, where we
cannot hope to improve living conditions for a greatly
suffering population over the long term without
progress in the political process. That is the thrust of
our common efforts.
The third objective is to assist democratic change
and further respect for human rights. We must heed the
call of peoples and civil societies for the rule of law,
honest and transparent elections and the protection of
fundamental freedoms. We see the consequences for
stability and civil peace when overtures to democracy
come late. Such was the case in Kenya. It is the case
today in Zimbabwe. The Zimbabwean people must not
be deprived of its victory, which is the victory of
democracy.
The final objective is to build peace in countries
that have successfully completed a transition process. I
am thinking of the current efforts in Sierra Leone,
Liberia, Guinea-Bissau, the Central African Republic
and the Great Lakes region — Burundi and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo — with
Governments democratically elected after a transition
process.
I would like to conclude by speaking of Europe’s
commitment. France fully aligns itself with the
statement that will be made by Slovenia on behalf of
the European Union (EU). There will be no strong
Europe without a strong Africa. That is the full
meaning of the partnership reached between the
European Union and Africa in Lisbon in December.
The European Union is deeply committed to
strengthening African peacekeeping capacities, support
for African Union operations and the conduct of United
Nations-mandated operations in Africa, such as the
current EU-led peacekeeping operation in Chad and the
Central African Republic, which seeks to protect
people and facilitate humanitarian assistance in regions
neighbouring Darfur affected by that crisis. France,
during its upcoming presidency of the European Union,
will emphasize cooperative action in support of the
African peace and security architecture, and support
for the processes of stabilization and reconciliation.
France resolutely supports the ambition of Africa
and its peoples to build a continent of stability and
prosperity that takes a full part in the workings of the
world. We are fully involved in that effort under the
S/PV.5868
2108-30672
auspices of the United Nations, alongside the African
Union and with all Africa’s partners.
The President: I call on His Excellency
Mr. Pierre Chevalier, Special Envoy of the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs of Belgium.
Mr. Chevalier (Belgium) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I wish to commend and, above all, to thank
you, Sir, for organizing today’s very important debate.
We welcome the resolve of Africa and its leadership to
bring peace, security and development to their
continent. I can assure you that we share your
conviction that those objectives can be achieved only if
mutual cooperation is genuinely strengthened.
Belgium fully endorses the statement to be made
by the representative of Slovenia on behalf of the
European Union (EU), setting out the results of and
prospects for partnership between Africa and the EU.
Belgium also welcomes the impressive progress made
over the past few years in cooperation between the
United Nations and the EU and the United Nations and
the African Union (AU), as well as in their trilateral
relationship, in the area of conflict management.
Belgium firmly believes in the added value of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. We believe that such cooperation should
be based on a solid mutual understanding of what it
can yield and of what can legitimately be expected of
it. If a regional organization decides to establish a
peacekeeping operation authorized by the Security
Council under Chapter VIII of the Charter, the Council
is validating the international legality of the operation.
Such authorization, however, does not imply that the
United Nations is substituting itself for the regional
organization or that it is automatically assuming
political, logistical or financial responsibility.
The situation is somewhat different when the
United Nations decides to support the operation of a
regional organization. In the case of a joint operation,
the United Nations and the regional organization are
both responsible for the preparation and conduct of the
operation. That is a particularly complex form of
cooperation that can succeed only if it is based on a
common political vision.
In order to avoid all misunderstandings,
appropriate consultations between the organizations are
vital, especially in the initial decision-making phase.
Such consultations must help to prevent decisions
made by one party from taking the other by surprise
and to facilitate cooperation in their implementation.
They should also allow us better to determine the kind
of cooperation that is most appropriate, based on the
nature and geographical characteristics of a given
conflict.
Common experiences and lessons learned will
help us to improve cooperation between international
organizations. The African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur is in and of itself a unique
experiment. However, the stakes are extremely high,
since they involve the fate of a local population that
has endured terrible suffering in recent years.
Unfortunately, we must conclude that progress in
deploying the mission has been far too slow. At the
same time, the political process that was to be the
foundation of the peacekeeping operation seems to be
at a standstill. In that context, a strong, shared political
vision of the two organizations involved — the United
Nations and the AU — is critical.
In Central Africa, too, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Burundi have benefited from useful
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the EU has contributed to the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo through the EU-led force in that country,
while in Burundi, significant cooperation has been
established with the AU through the Regional Initiative
and the United Nations Office in Burundi on the
question of the Forces nationales de libération.
In spite of the great progress made in those
countries — with regard to the democratic electoral
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
give just one significant example — the challenges are
considerable. Peace remains fragile, and civilians, who
deserve the international community’s protection,
continue to face daily violence. Belgium will remain
strongly committed in its support for the countries and
peoples of the Great Lakes region, and we will
continue to work closely with the United Nations, with
African regional organizations and with the European
Union. In that connection, the Belgian Ministers for
Foreign Affairs, Cooperation, Development and
Defence will travel together to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and to Burundi next week.
Turning to the conflict in Somalia, let me first
commend the members of the African Union Mission
S/PV.5868
08-3067222
in Somalia for the work they have done in difficult
conditions. The Mission clearly demonstrates that
international efforts to bring security to the Somali
people will achieve lasting results only if they are
based on sincere efforts towards national political
reconciliation. Belgium therefore fully supports the
integrated and gradual approach recently proposed by
the Secretary-General. Such an approach gives us
another opportunity to develop cooperation between
the African Union and the United Nations and to
demonstrate the value it can add.
Finally, I wish to say a few words about the
situation in Zimbabwe. I would like to stress that
Belgium is particularly concerned at the increased
tension in that country. We join others — in particular
the Secretary-General — in calling for decisive action,
including through the immediate release of the results
of the recent presidential election, in order to prevent
the deterioration of a situation that is already very
tense. I agree with Prime Minister Gordon Brown that
a very clear, unanimous signal is needed.
Let me conclude with some observations about
the general principles of conflict prevention and
peacebuilding. In the view of Belgium, improved
governance is imperative in that regard. A Government
that meets expectations, merits trust and is committed
to democracy and human rights will be better equipped
to eliminate the root causes of conflict. Natural
resources can be an important factor here: depending
on how they are managed, they can either fuel conflict
or bring a peace dividend. Responsibility in this sphere
lies in particular with national Governments, but the
United Nations and regional organizations should take
account of this dimension in their activities aimed at
restoring, maintaining and building peace.
The European Union is an example of a regional
cooperation project which has developed in a way that
none of its founders could have imagined 50 years ago.
The African Union, for its part, is powerfully
committed to blazing its own trail — a trail that is not
yet completely charted. The European Union and
Belgium are ready to assist it in developing the
capacities necessary to overcome the challenges it
faces. I welcome the similar readiness of the United
Nations, which will be reflected in the adoption of a
draft resolution on cooperation between the African
Union and the United Nations. Belgium commends the
two organizations for that outcome, and hopes that it
will be promptly implemented both in letter and,
especially, in spirit.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Meles Zenawi, Prime Minister of Ethiopia, to take
the floor.
Mr. Zenawi (Ethiopia): Allow me at the outset,
Sir, to join previous speakers in commending you for
your initiative, in South Africa’s capacity as President
of the Security Council for this month, to organize this
timely meeting. The meeting could pave the way to
more effective collaboration between our institutions.
We all know that primary responsibility for
international peace and security lies with the Security
Council. In that regard, the Council has been dealing
with security challenges in Africa on a continuous
basis. Indeed, as our continent has over the years had
more than its fair share of conflicts, African issues
have constituted a very significant part of the Security
Council’s deliberations on peace and security. We in
Africa too have been exerting efforts to prevent,
resolve and manage conflicts on our continent,
including through the establishment of a
comprehensive peace and security architecture within
the African Union. We bring a number of strengths to
the table in resolving African conflicts.
I am confident that we would all agree that there
is a great deal of room for fruitful collaboration
between the two institutions, consistent with the
Security Council’s primacy in terms of its
responsibility for international peace and security. In
that regard, I welcome the report of the Secretary-
General on this matter (S/2008/186) and, in particular,
his proposal to establish a panel to look at the issue of
ensuring predictable, sustainable and flexible funding
for peace operations of the African Union. I would like
to urge the Security Council to speedily consider the
recommendations of such a panel, and to act on them,
as such a funding arrangement could be crucial in
saving many African lives. As this process is bound to
take some time, I would urge the Security Council, in
the meantime, to support the African Union in its
peacekeeping operations on the continent, particularly
in Somalia. The African Union was unable to deploy
the full contingent of peacekeepers in Somalia solely
because of a lack of funding, and with the support of
the Security Council Africa will be better able to
support the people and the Government of Somalia in
achieving peace.
S/PV.5868
2308-30672
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Vitaly Churkin, Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation, to take the floor.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased, Sir, to welcome you and to
congratulate you on the Republic of South Africa’s
successful presidency of the Security Council. We
welcome the participation in today’s meeting of leaders
of African and European States, other representatives
and Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. Such high
interest in today’s Council meeting reflects the
international community’s commitment to meeting the
challenge of bringing stability to the situation in Africa
and ensuring sustainable development on the continent.
The threats that African States face today can be
overcome only through collective political and
diplomatic action and through unified efforts by
African countries and the international community that
supports them. The development of cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union will
help to achieve that. The provisions of Chapter VIII of
the Charter provide a firm legal basis for the
implementation of African peacekeeping operations
sanctioned or supported by the Security Council.
Combining the efforts of the United Nations and
the African Union, taking account of the comparative
advantages offered by that important regional
organization, is proving its effectiveness. Today,
regional and subregional organizations in Africa are
participating actively in preventing and settling
conflict situations and are demonstrating increasing
willingness and ability to assume responsibility for
resolving African problems.
The potential of African countries to counter
crises must be developed in every respect to
comprehensively encompass the areas of crisis
prevention, crisis resolution and post-conflict
peacebuilding. It is essential that the conflict
prevention and settlement mechanisms created on the
continent begin to work at full strength. Russia has
consistently urged that the peacekeeping activities of
the African Union be appropriately bolstered by the
authority of the Security Council and by the world
Organization’s logistical and technical capacity, on the
understanding that we are not talking about directly
financing such activities from the United Nations
budget.
It is essential to improve the practice of regular
reporting by regional bodies to the Security Council,
especially where their peacekeeping operations have a
mandate from this organ, with its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. It is our view that the main
responsibility for effective implementation of the
mandates of those operations rests squarely on regional
organizations and their members.
In the area of practical interaction between the
United Nations and the African Union (AU), the
impulse for which came from decisions of the 2005
Summit, there is already substantial accumulated
positive experience. Joint peacekeeping forces in
Darfur were established under the auspices of the
United Nations and the African Union and are making
efforts to advance the political process. In Chad and
the Central African Republic, we have established a
multi-component United Nations peacekeeping
presence, acting with support from the European Union
operations. It is important through these joint efforts to
ensure that innovative models of cooperation prove
their effectiveness.
On the agenda is the comprehensive
strengthening of the partnership between the United
Nations and African Union. We are in favour of
strengthening cooperation between the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council.
Constructive dialogue between the two organs is taking
place on a regular basis. Provisions in the joint
communiqué issued at the end of the meeting between
the Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council in Addis Ababa have become an important
springboard for this process. We would expect that
tomorrow’s second joint meeting of these two organs
will move this interaction forward.
The Russian Federation is enhancing its
contribution to the settlement of African conflicts. Our
country is actively participating in developing and
implementing programmes for international assistance
in Africa, including through the Group of Eight.
Specialized Russian educational institutions are
training African peacekeeping personnel. Russian
peacekeepers are engaged in all United Nations
operations on the continent. Furthermore, we are
planning an ongoing upgrade of our level of
participation in United Nations peacekeeping activity
in Africa as well as in other regions.
S/PV.5868
08-3067224
In conclusion, I would like to express the
willingness of the Russian delegation to support South
Africa’s draft Security Council resolution aimed at
strengthening interaction with regional organizations
and especially with the African Union.
Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): It is indeed a great honour, Mr. Mbeki, to see
you personally assume the presidency of Security
Council today. It is my pleasure to convey to you the
greetings and support of your brother, Colonel
Al-Qaddafi.
We are also honoured to have with us heads of
State or Government, ministers and heads of
delegations. We welcome the presence of Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and Oumar Konaré, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission. We
certainly appreciate all of their efforts.
I congratulate you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting, as it paves the way for our meeting
tomorrow with the African Union Peace and Security
Council. We have set great expectations on that
meeting, as the topic falls squarely within the core
functions and objectives of our two Councils as stated
in their statutes. The topic is very important and not
enough time has been provided to expand on it.
Therefore I shall provide a written statement for
distribution and will merely stress some important
points here today.
My country fully agrees with the statement made
by the President of the United Republic of Tanzania
and Chairperson of the African Union, Mr. Jakaya
Kikwete.
This proceeds from the important concept paper
prepared by the presidency stressing the need for a
practical movement ensuring effective long-term
participation by both regional and subregional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security. The Charter, in Chapter VIII, specifically
recognizes such a role for those organizations. Many
international resolutions and declarations have stressed
the importance of the participation of regional and
subregional organizations — particularly with regard to
conflict prevention and finding effective joint measures
to deal with the root causes of threats to peace — as
being fundamental international commitments and
objectives provided for in the United Nations Charter.
My country, Libya, has been committed to the
prevention and settlement of African conflicts and, as
an African member of this Security Council, we have
come to understand the urgent need for a more
comprehensive international framework for such
efforts. There has certainly been recognition of Africa’s
development and its role in a collective security
organization based primarily on the efforts of regional
and subregional organizations in the prevention of
disputes.
However, let me also state that, frankly, we
continue to need to prove that practical measures must
take precedence over rhetoric and that long-term
conflict resolution remain the priority. The Secretariat
continues to lack the necessary resources for logistical
support of national and regional capacities, and
therefore insufficient efforts have been made to prevent
conflicts at their source. The price has been very high.
We now face humanitarian situations with spreading
tragedies and ramifications. We are also incurring
enormous expenditures related to conflict management,
as well as peacekeeping operations with no end in
sight.
No one, of course, would argue that there is one
simple prescription for prevention. Such an effort
would require a diagnosis of the causes of such
conflicts, which are complex and interrelated. The
prescription is necessarily complex: internal, regional
and, specifically, international.
Article 1 of the United Nations Charter includes,
among the purposes and principles of the Organization,
upholding principles of equal rights and self-
determination for all peoples and assisting them in
solving economic, social, cultural and humanitarian
problems.
There has been increasing appreciation for the
growing role of the African Union, under difficult
circumstances, particularly since the establishment of
its Peace and Security Council, as an entity entrusted
with decision-making, in partnership with the United
Nations. The Council has been active in many of the
cases that have been raised here this morning.
Africa does not seek a narrow continental interest
nor do we seek to be dealt with with modesty, as the
late leader Léopold Senghor said. Africa’s security and
development are an essential component of the
collective global security system. Furthermore, the
mandate and procedures of the United Nations Security
S/PV.5868
2508-30672
Council cannot be separated from those of the African
Union Peace and Security Council.
Structural strategies aimed at conflict prevention
in Africa have evolved as a result of valuable reports
submitted regularly by the Secretary-General,
particularly since the end of the last century. Two
important reports have been submitted in the past few
months. It is now up to us to implement the
recommendations set out in those reports and to
capitalize on the exceptional momentum achieved thus
far. In Addis Ababa last year, the foundations were laid
for relations between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council. Annual
meetings have been scheduled. Sharing experiences
and information with regard to current conflicts and
seeking ways to cooperate in order to prevent such
conflicts have become established practices that are
welcomed by all.
Finally, I believe that we must now begin our
work to formalize a global-regional partnership, in
which all United Nations bodies should be encouraged
to participate. Such a partnership should guarantee, in
the context of Chapter VIII of the Charter, the
integration of resources, priorities, capacities and
mandates, assigning them according to comparative
advantages and areas of strength. Contrary to the
notion that the United Nations must not provide
funding unless it has control, it should provide support
to the African Union and its security structure both
logistically and financially. We hope that that will be
the outcome of today’s deliberations. Only such a
partnership will enable us to face the real challenges
and, as stated in the most recent report of the
Secretary-General, to develop more planned, consistent
and reliable arrangements.
In conclusion, I should like to thank the
delegation of South Africa for the draft resolution
before us. We fully endorse it and look forward to its
adoption at the end of this meeting.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Mompati Merafhe, Vice-President of Botswana, to
take the floor.
Mr. Merafhe (Botswana): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of April. We are particularly grateful to you for your
initiative in organizing this high-level meeting to
deliberate on an issue of the utmost importance to
Africa and the wider international community. Indeed,
the fact that you are presiding over this meeting is a
clear testimony of your commitment and of the
determination of your country, South Africa, to
consistently use its membership of the Council to
elevate to a global level the African agenda of
achieving durable peace, security and sustainable
development. Our presence here today is a clear
demonstration of our full support for this initiative.
We strongly believe in the instrumentality of the
United Nations and, in particular, of the Security
Council, as the organ vested with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Peace is indivisible. The search for
solutions to conflict is the responsibility of all. It is
therefore imperative and urgent that we assume
collective ownership of these challenges.
Africa has the political will and determination to
work alongside other countries in the prevention of
conflict as well as in the management and resolution of
disputes. In that respect, Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations provides for cooperation with
regional organizations, such as the African Union, in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Therefore, there can be no doubt that, when the
African Union deploys a peacekeeping mission in an
African country, it does so on behalf of the Security
Council and of the international community as a whole.
As the United Nations recognizes the advantages of
regional organizations in responding timeously to an
outbreak of war in a given region, it is necessary that
that recognition be translated into practical measures
that can strengthen this relationship for the common
good. A clearly defined partnership would achieve not
only faster results in alleviating human suffering, but
also better cohesion and alignment and efficient
utilization of resources in peacekeeping operations.
Regional organizations, such as the African
Union, have a crucial role to play in enhancing the
capacity of the United Nations to respond more
timeously and efficiently in the prevention of armed
hostilities. That is vital if we are to save human lives as
well as improve the credibility of the mission of the
United Nations.
The Peace and Security Council of the African
Union embodies the strong resolve of Africa to
prevent, manage and resolve conflicts. It is a
S/PV.5868
08-3067226
dependable mechanism that the international
community should support and put to good use.
We have to acknowledge that there are capacity
constraints. A lack of adequate resources severely
hampers Africa’s ability to successfully execute and
sustain peacekeeping operations. We believe that
financial and material resources can be mobilized to
assist regional organizations in effectively carrying out
peacekeeping operations.
Issues related to peace and security in Africa are
urgent and important. This is not the first time that the
Council has considered this matter at the summit level.
There is a time to talk and negotiate. Clearly, there
should also be a time for action and results.
In that respect, it is our expectation that the
outcome of this meeting will be practical and
measurable. We urge the Council to adopt a draft
resolution that can set in motion concrete measures
aimed at translating into reality our hope that the
necessary support will be provided to the African
Union peacekeeping missions. We strongly believe that
the proposals put forward are realistic and achievable.
We encourage the Council to adopt them. We must now
put in place a granite foundation in the area of conflict
prevention and management, to ensure that the
continuing threat to development and economic
prosperity in Africa is brought to an end.
I wish to conclude by reiterating what I said
before this Council two years ago. Our business as
States Members of the United Nations is to take out of
business the business of making war. We must invest
more resources in the capacity of both the United
Nations and the African Union to make peace.
Mediation and good offices must be strengthened, so
that conflict does not break out because of a poverty of
diplomacy or a lack of capacity to prevent, manage and
resolve disputes.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Neven Jurica, Permanent Representative of
Croatia, to take the floor.
Mr. Jurica (Croatia): First of all, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this exchange
of views on peace and security in Africa. We sincerely
believe that today’s deliberations will help us to take
stock of the lessons learned and to better understand
future challenges. Let me also join previous speakers in
thanking the Secretary-General for his pertinent and
valuable remarks, as well as for his active engagement
in promoting effective cooperation and collaboration
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in general and the African Union in particular.
Croatia recognizes the primary responsibility and
leading role of the Security Council in the maintenance
of international peace and security, as the only global
body mandated with that task. Nevertheless, that global
task can be accomplished more effectively with active
engagement at the regional, subregional and national
levels. Optimally, those three levels of responsibility —
global, regional and national — should, owing to their
intertwining nature, act in harmony, respecting the
principles of subsidiarity, division of labour and
effectiveness, in order to achieve peace and security. In
that respect, regional organizations should assume their
share of the responsibility, as appropriate, in this
global-regional partnership mechanism.
The unique knowledge and local expertise of
regional organizations often place them in a better
position to assess regional and local situations.
The question remains of how to make the best use
of these assessments. Having said that, Croatia believes
that the Security Council should evaluate regional
initiatives on their own merits and contributions,
especially as they are complementary to the continued
and active engagement of the overall United Nations
system, for example in supporting peace processes and
peacekeeping operations in Africa.
Here, we come to the first point that my
delegation would like to raise: capacity-building as a
way of enhancing regional organizations’ effectiveness
and efficiency in conflict prevention, management and
resolution. My delegation attaches particular
importance to security sector reform, as discussed in
numerous reports of the Secretary-General, in
particular taking into consideration the input and
expertise of his Special Representatives in the field. In
that respect, we acknowledge some encouraging
developments in West and Central Africa.
Secondly, we would like to single out one
particular concept, conflict prevention, which could
and should be strengthened and given more
prominence in the work of this global-regional
partnership. We can all agree that experience teaches
us that any crisis can be better handled in its early
stages. Therefore, an approach encompassing a better
early warning system as a means to identify potential
S/PV.5868
2708-30672
crises before they emerge is of utmost importance. On
that point, we welcome the meeting regarding
Zimbabwe convened by the Southern African
Development Community last week in Lusaka.
My delegation is very concerned about the recent
situation in Zimbabwe, especially as we firmly believe
that every nation has the right to enjoy the benefits of
democracy, and not to have them denied, as seems to
be the case in Zimbabwe. On the other hand, Kenya
provided a good example of timely intervention by a
regional mediation mission, led by former Secretary-
General Kofi Annan.
The third point we would like to make relates to
the need for new thinking and innovative functional
approaches. There is one lesson that we always like to
repeat: there can be no one-size-fits-all approach, and
any attempt to build upon such an approach necessarily
leads to failure. The Sudan is an excellent example,
where the Security Council is working together with
the African Union to create a special relationship in
addressing the ongoing crisis in that country. Thought
should be given to using a similar model in other
conflict areas.
Fourthly, in response to the growing need to
develop a comprehensive approach encompassing
political, military, humanitarian and development
components in the post-conflict period, we recognize
the valuable goals and role of the Peacebuilding
Commission. The Commission has been successful in
its tailored approach, and within that framework we see
an excellent opportunity for meaningful cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations.
Allow me to reflect here upon a matter that my
Government deems to be of utmost significance. There
has been a great deal of talk about the danger of the
culture of impunity taking root in some of the conflict-
ridden areas of Africa. We would like to reiterate that
there can be no lasting peace without justice — and
development, of course — and that justice is vital to
any reconciliation process and to the building of a
healthy society.
Finally, Croatia acknowledged that the formation
of the African Union back in 2002 was a major step
forward in strengthening Africa’s regional political-
security structures and conflict prevention
mechanisms. Also, I would like to note that Croatia
established formal relations with the African Union in
May 2007, and subsequently participated in an African
Union summit for the first time, in Accra in June and
July 2007.
Croatia also aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Slovenia
on behalf of the European Union.
My delegation would like to express its
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for your personal
dedication to peace and stability in Africa and
elsewhere, and for your presence here at this fruitful
debate.
The President: I invite His Excellency
Mr. Zalmay Khalilzad, Permanent Representative of
the United States, to take the floor.
Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): I
would like to thank you, President Mbeki, for
convening this important meeting.
President Bush noted upon his return from a
recent trip to Africa that there have been striking
changes in Africa, which are the result of a new
generation of African leaders. The United States
supports democratic transition and economic
development in African countries, working in
particular in post-conflict situations to strengthen
democratic institutions and across Africa assisting civil
society organizations in combating gender-based
violence, trafficking in persons and other human rights
violations.
Despite substantial improvements, we face
enormous challenges. The focus of today’s discussion
is on how the Security Council can cooperate and
enhance its relationship with the continent’s regional
organizations, particularly the African Union (AU).
As we all know, United Nations peacekeeping is
overstretched. The supply of well equipped
peacekeepers does not meet the demand. We must find
ways to use existing resources effectively and
efficiently and to build capacity, particularly regional
capacity, to do more. This will take time, so we must
look at both short-term and longer-term solutions. With
that in mind, I would like to make five points.
First, the Security Council needs to reassess how
we plan for and sustain peacekeeping operations. Our
peacekeeping operations should be goal-oriented in
nature and should clearly define missions, timelines
and budgets. Peacekeeping operations should be a
means to an end, rather than a substitute for resolving
S/PV.5868
08-3067228
conflicts or an excuse for delay. While we understand
the risks of leaving too soon, we should look to
terminate non-viable peacekeeping operations. The
goal must be to encourage self-reliance and free up
forces and funds for where they are needed most:
places like Darfur, where the United Nations is
collaborating with the African Union to address a dire
regional crisis.
On the subject of Darfur, the United Nations and
AU have embarked on a historic cooperative effort: the
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). Although it is
much too early to judge whether that cooperation has
been successful, the early results suggest that
UNAMID will not become a model to be followed in
other places of shared United Nations-AU concerns.
The United States continues to call for the immediate
and full deployment of UNAMID, both to improve the
situation on the ground in Darfur and to demonstrate
that the AU and the United Nations can form
formidable partnerships. The Government of the Sudan
must lift all restrictions and delays to allow for all
UNAMID troops and equipment to be deployed.
Secondly, the AU must enhance its capacity to
plan and execute viable peacekeeping operations, and
we should help. As we all know, the African Union
needs to build increased administrative, logistical and
military planning capacities, as well as better financial
accountability and transparency. To that end, the
United States has substantial programmes to assist
these efforts. We have provided significant support in
the form of logistical support and technical expertise to
the African standby force, to the AU Commission’s
emerging Strategic Planning and Management Unit and
to the AU’s Situation Room. The United States
continues to provide significant logistical capability in
support of both United Nations and AU peacekeeping
efforts in Africa. We are prepared to work with the AU
and other regional organizations to further enhance
their capacity, and we call on all other countries to step
up their bilateral support as well. The United Nations
should prioritize its efforts to help the AU deal with its
deficits in financial management and administrative
capacities. Improvement in this area will undoubtedly
help donor countries feel more comfortable in giving
resources to AU missions, such as the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
The United States would like to recognize the
AU’s efforts to stabilize and improve the situation in
Somalia. Over the past two years, the United States has
provided over $57 million to support the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), and we continue to
seek additional resources to support that critical effort.
We call on all AU member States to send forces for that
important mission, and we call on the international
community to donate generously so that AMISOM can
deploy fully. In addition to AMISOM, we support the
Secretary-General’s call for a credible political process
and security presence, which the United States believes
should lead to a United Nations peacekeeping
operation.
Thirdly, we must work with African Union
member States to increase their national peacekeeping
capacities. The United States is committed to helping
African States to increase their capacities. Since 2005,
the United States has trained over 34,000 African
peacekeepers from 19 countries and has provided
$375 million to increase global capacity for
peacekeeping operations in Africa and elsewhere.
Additionally, we see an opportunity for several African
countries to increase their capacity for combined and
joint operations by stressing interoperability in
equipment, training and communication and by
building professional relationships among officers of
all African nations. Steps such as these will enhance
overall AU peacekeeping capacity and will be a focus
for the new United States Africa Command.
Fourthly, funding for AU peacekeeping capacities
is important. The United States is well aware of the
financial shortfalls that the AU faces, especially in
peacekeeping missions. We welcome the exploration of
realistic ways to address the financing challenges faced
by regional peacekeeping missions. In that regard, we
support the Secretary-General’s proposal for the
establishment of a panel of distinguished persons from
the African Union, the United Nations and other
relevant stakeholders to seek viable alternative and
cost-effective means of financial support, such as the
establishment of a trust fund or enhanced donor
coordination.
Fifthly, with regard to closer United Nations-AU
cooperation, in the realm of peace and security, we
applaud the formation of the joint United Nations
Department of Peacekeeping Operations-AU Peace
Support Team and its work in the areas of mission
planning and the management of logistics and
resources. In the area of conflict prevention and
mediation, the United States is encouraged by the
S/PV.5868
2908-30672
efforts currently under way by the Department of
Political Affairs to strengthen AU conflict prevention
and mitigation capacities. On humanitarian action, the
United States appreciates the Secretary-General’s
recommendations on enhancing the AU’s early warning
systems through the development of a multi-risk early
warning tool that includes socio-political, natural,
human-made and economic vulnerabilities.
Such a system would have been particularly
useful in places like Zimbabwe. The United States
remains extremely concerned about the situation there.
Despite significant pre-election irregularities, the
people of Zimbabwe expressed their will during the 29
March elections. It has been 18 days since the elections
and the results of the presidential race still have not
been announced. However, based on publicly posted
results, it is clear that the people of Zimbabwe voted
overwhelmingly for change. The Zimbabwe Electoral
Commission needs to immediately release the
presidential election results and ensure their veracity in
a transparent manner.
We are gravely concerned about the escalating
politically motivated violence perpetrated by security
forces and ruling party militias that target opposition
supporters in rural areas. The Government and its
supporters must desist immediately from violence and
intimidation, act with restraint, respect human rights
and allow the electoral process to continue unfettered.
We commend the efforts of the Southern African
Development Community to urge the Zimbabwean
Government and electoral authorities to address the
unfolding crisis. The time has come for the United
Nations to support their efforts through a joint mission
with the African Union to ensure that the electoral
authorities act in conformity with the regional
organization’s principles for democratic elections, that
the political violence ceases and that the will of the
Zimbabwean people is upheld. In that regard, we
welcome and support the Secretary-General’s call
today for international observers.
Finally, I would once again like to thank
President Mbeki for his leadership in convening this
important meeting. We understand and appreciate
South Africa’s interest in keeping the Security
Council’s attention focused on Africa and in
developing a more effective working relationship
between the Security Council and the African Union.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Mustafa Osman Ismail, Special Envoy and Adviser
to the President of the Republic of the Sudan, to take
the floor.
Mr. Ismail (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, on behalf of your brother President
Omer Hassan Ahmad Al-Bashir, I have the pleasure to
express our sincere gratitude for the kind invitation to
participate in this important debate on the relationship
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
in particular the African Union (AU), in the
maintenance of international peace and security. I
should like to inform the Council that an urgent
domestic matter has prevented President Al-Bashir
from taking part in this meeting. He has entrusted me
to deliver the following message.
“Allow me to express the appreciation of
the Government and the people of the Sudan for
the positive and historic initiative of South Africa
and you yourself, President Thabo Mbeki, to hold
this summit meeting. As members know, this is
the fifth time that the Security Council has met at
the summit level since the establishment of the
United Nations, in 1945. With its long and unique
experience and wise leadership, South Africa is
the country most worthy of putting forward such
an important initiative to promote concerted
efforts to settle disputes and build peace on
behalf of the international community. That
heritage is a source of pride for Africa as it
repeatedly leads the world’s peace-loving States
to international achievements, such as the
elimination of apartheid in your country of South
Africa.
“Following the many political, economic
and social changes that have taken place on the
continent, Africa is now strongly playing an
important and historic role on the world stage.
Those changes have included the establishment of
the African Union and its various associated
institutions, including the Pan-African
Parliament, the Economic, Social and Cultural
Council, the Peace and Security Council, the
African Peer Review Mechanism and the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development, among
others. This is unquestionably a reflection of
Africa’s determination to reform the United
Nations, including the Security Council, in order
to make it more transparent and effective, to
S/PV.5868
08-3067230
promote democracy in international relations and
to respond to new facts and challenges on the
ground that did not exist when the United Nations
was established in the middle of the past century.
The Sudan is determined to cooperate with the
United Nations in the field of peacekeeping,
whether in the framework of the Naivasha
Agreement or under the Darfur Peace Agreement.
That places us in a special position to talk about
the item before the Council at today’s meeting.
“Providing consistent, sustainable and
predictable financing and, resources is the
fundamental challenge facing the international
community and today’s Security Council summit
meeting. We therefore express our full support for
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s proposal to
establish a joint African Union-United Nations
panel to consider the resources necessary to
support the African Union’s peacekeeping
operations, including funding, logistics and
equipment on the ground. The panel should take
up the possibility not only of direct financing
through the United Nations scale of assessments,
but also of establishing a specific fund to that
end.
“In expressing our thanks to the Secretary-
General for the importance he has attached to
resolving African problems and for his relentless
efforts to develop cooperation with the African
Union, we would stress the need for priority
always to be given to the peaceful — and, more
specifically, the political — settlement of
disputes. Peacekeeping requires that there be a
peace to be kept. In that respect, we believe that
support for regional peacemaking capabilities
must be prioritized, because political settlements
are the mother of all solutions to all conflicts.
“Effective cooperation with regional
organizations, and the African Union more
particularly, requires a reordering of support
priorities and a building of capacities that take
the following elements into account.
“First, preventive diplomacy and conflict
prevention must be promoted and strengthened.
As we know, those are very important elements
that include political, development, humanitarian
and social dimensions in which the role of the
United Nations and the Security Council
dovetails with those of regional and subregional
organizations, the States concerned, non-
governmental organizations and civil society
actors.
“However, any observer of the Security
Council’s role in that regard will find that the
Council’s response in taking preventive measures
to avert and mitigate the escalation of tensions is
far more subdued than the speed with which it
dispatches peacekeeping operations, although we
know that preventing disputes requires far fewer
resources than peacekeeping. We therefore
believe that cooperation with the African Union
requires, first and foremost, emphasis on
preventive diplomacy and the strengthening of
the appropriate African Union mechanisms,
particularly the regional early warning system,
the Panel of the Wise and the African standby
force.
“We believe that understanding the true root
causes of African disputes will speed the way to
their settlement, particularly since the continent’s
conflicts are rooted in the lack of development,
poverty, a shortage of resources, and such natural
phenomenon as desertification, drought and
numerous climate change phenomena that have
sapped our development efforts. All such root
causes give rise to internal crises.
“Secondly, as to the building of capacities
in mediation and political settlement, we have
always believed that the United Nations should
take practical and concrete steps to exploit the
respective capacities of regional organizations,
particularly the AU, in mediation, negotiation and
peacemaking through political settlements in
order to begin resolving African problems in an
African context and enabling regional
organizations to achieve peace through financial,
moral and political support from the United
Nations, including the provision to the AU of all
available information on peacemaking.
“Thirdly, with respect to support for
regional peacekeeping capacities, I would stress
above all the experience of the AU Mission in the
Sudan. We believe this to be the ultimate example
of the primacy of regional organizations in
peacekeeping and their ability to achieve great
things despite a lack of resources and capacities.
S/PV.5868
3108-30672
They fully understand and, indeed, live in close
familiarity with the root causes of strife. They
also fully understand the values, culture and
heritage of local communities. Perhaps the
founders of the United Nations, in drafting
Chapter VIII of the Charter, grasped the
importance of all those dimensions to the
international and regional success of regional and
subregional peacekeeping efforts. They are the
best way to achieve international peace and
security.
“The Sudan was therefore most eager to
support the African mission, as reflected in the
Abuja Agreement. Since July 2004, when it was
first dispatched, primarily to monitor the
implementation of the Ndjamena ceasefire
agreement, the mission has experienced the
situation on the ground and fully understands it.
“The only way to fully resolve a dispute is
politically. It is now up to the Security Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council to
convince the rebels to heed reason and not the
logic of guns. Effective and constructive
negotiations are essential to a permanent and
comprehensive settlement in Darfur.
“We wish to address the issue of impunity.
Pressure should be brought to bear on the rebel
groups living in the territories of our neighbours,
and they should be convinced of the need for the
option of peace. Amnesty ought not to be granted
to those who take advantage of the situation in
Darfur to smuggle children out of the country. We
should heed the statement made by the
representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to
the effect that the United Nations should not
invest resources in a situation that it does not
control. Let us avoid all double standards in
international relations. The Sudan has honoured
and continues to honour its commitments. Let
others do the same.
“Once again, in expressing our appreciation
for the wise leadership of South Africa in calling
for the convening of this historic meeting, we
also express the hope that its results will
encourage our peoples’ aspirations to stability,
peace and security.”
The President: I call on His Excellency
Mr. Jorge Urbina, Permanent Representative of Costa
Rica.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to begin by thanking you, Sir, as well as
Ambassador Kumalo and the delegation of South
Africa, for organizing this debate. We welcome the
presence among us of the Secretary-General and of
high representatives of friendly countries. Today’s
debate is an ideal opportunity to exchange views on
our shared responsibility.
International organizations are historical realities;
as such, they are changeable instruments. Fortunately,
they are better prepared today to prevent, manage and
resolve conflicts than they were several decades ago.
Unfortunately, however, we are also much more
vulnerable to conflict than we were even just a few
years ago. Natural and man-made disasters threaten the
future of coming generations. There is no doubt that
such phenomena as climate change, food crises, water
shortages and the large-scale migrations they would
entail augur poorly for the future with respect to
conflicts. There is also no doubt that Governments’
lack of legitimacy, historical resentments and conflicts
over natural resources, together with illicit trafficking
and terrorism, will fuel new and recurrent conflicts in
the future. We in the developing world cannot stop
warning that inequality on a global scale and the lack
of attention to the extreme poverty that affects one fifth
of humanity will also provide fertile ground for the
roots of conflict to take hold.
However, we are better prepared than ever before.
The international community has continued to advance
in the development of new concepts and instruments to
deal with conflicts and mitigate their destructive
effects.
The concept of the responsibility to protect is a
recent development that has turned what was once an
absolute right of sovereignty into something much
more complex: a right that encompasses the obligation
of the State to protect populations on its territory and
the subsidiary obligation of the international
community to protect those populations when a State is
unable to do so.
This contemporary system, which inextricably
links the actions of States, international organizations
and the international community, unavoidably imposes
the concept of shared responsibility in the face of
S/PV.5868
08-3067232
conflict. And facing that shared responsibility, we
should ask ourselves how we can work together to
prevent conflicts and how we can work together to
resolve them once they have begun.
From the perspective of the United Nations,
Security Council resolution 1625 (2005) is a real road
map by which to approach our responsibilities in
conflict prevention, particularly in Africa. Furthermore,
conflict prevention is the approach that should guide us
and towards which we should direct our greatest
efforts.
We will be less effective if we face conflicts and
their manifestations and forget, as we often do, their
root causes. In the words of the Secretary-General, “If
we do not deal with the root causes of conflict — and
offer sustainable solutions — we will be left with
humanitarian emergencies and peacekeeping operations
without end” (S/2008/18, para. 62).
I would like to underline a fundamental concept
in the Secretary-General’s comment, when he speaks of
the need to offer sustainable solutions. There may be
no better moment than this to state that there can be no
sustainable peace without sustainable development.
Those two concepts are inseparable, and now that our
Organization has matured to the point of not limiting
its tasks to peacekeeping and of assuming its
peacebuilding responsibility, we cannot set aside the
sustainability of the solutions we help to build.
However, there will be no sustainable solutions
without the legitimacy of Governments and
institutions. We understand the concept of cultural
diversity and we accept its consequences, but we know
very well that where populations do not recognize their
Governments as legitimate, there will be no sustainable
peace. We also know that where there is no legitimate
justice, there can be no sustainable peace either. We
know, finally, that attempts to conceal or manipulate
the will of the people do not provide a solid basis on
which to build a sustainable peace.
For that reason, we are concerned by the current
situation in Zimbabwe.
Another concept that Costa Rica would like to
emphasize on this important occasion is the shared
responsibility of the African Union and the United
Nations to build peace on strong foundations of justice.
Indeed, we underline the need to prevent conflict by
implementing a justice that provides security for the
population but that also puts an end to conflict by
punishing those guilty of human rights violations and
crimes against humanity. We will not be able to prevent
or permanently resolve conflict while impunity exists;
nor will we be able to build a sustainable peace on a
foundation of impunity.
We said before that today we are better prepared
to prevent and put an end to conflict. In this context,
the contribution of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) to the civilized world deserves special mention.
We welcome the trust that many African States have
placed in the Court, and we take this opportunity to
call for respect for its authority, particularly in the
Sudan, in connection with executing the arrest warrants
that have been issued by the ICC.
This meeting should help both organizations to
improve the basis of our cooperation. Africa occupies a
good part of United Nations peace efforts, even though
there are some situations in Africa to which the
international community is not properly attending.
Here I am referring in particular to Somalia.
In order to build more efficient cooperation
towards the attainment of our purposes, it is
fundamental to define responsibilities and mandates
more clearly. We also need to give regional
organizations the means necessary to properly fulfil
their responsibilities. We must also strengthen
communication between our respective Councils.
All of this seems particularly necessary in the
light of the experience, new to all of us, of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), the first of its kind. From UNAMID we
will certainly learn many lessons towards improving
our future cooperation.
Let me conclude by reiterating my country’s firm
commitment to strengthening the Organization’s
mechanisms for conflict prevention, which will
undoubtedly benefit Africa and the entire developing
world. I also reiterate my country’s support for the
political and military efforts that we undertake to
resolve current conflicts and to resolve them in a way
that is lasting and sustainable.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Ricardo Alberto Arias, Permanent Representative
of Panama, to take the floor.
Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to recognize the presence here today of
S/PV.5868
3308-30672
the Secretary-General and of our guests from the
African region. Above all, I would like to congratulate
you, President Mbeki, and my good friend Ambassador
Kumalo for the interest that South Africa has shown in
the search for mechanisms to strengthen and render
more effective the role of regional organizations and
their relationship with the United Nations in
maintaining international peace and security. This is a
good opportunity to recognize in general terms the
valuable contribution that regional organizations have
made in identifying and resolving the causes of armed
conflict, as well as their fundamental importance in
conflict prevention and resolution.
Panama reiterates its support for the continued
collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union, as a mechanism for preventing and, if
necessary, dealing with threats to peace and security in
the region. Despite the successes achieved in these
efforts, we would like to share our concern about, inter
alia, the difficulties encountered in establishing the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and the international community’s
inability to provide the necessary resources to the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
In the case of Somalia, the African Union has
submitted a detailed report on what the forces on the
ground require. We regret that, to date, the Security
Council has not paid heed to this request. In this
context, we must also mention Panama’s deep concern
about piracy off of the Somali coast, which hampers
the vital transport of humanitarian supplies and
threatens marine commerce in the Horn of Africa.
My delegation agrees with the recommendations
of the Secretary-General to intensify the coordination
between the African Union and the United Nations in
conflict prevention and to strengthen the African
Union’s early warning system by, among other
strategies, creating an appropriate multi-risk
mechanism. Similarly, we need to extend collaboration
to other aspects of great strategic importance. It is
important, inter alia, to highlight the work undertaken
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations on the
establishment of an African standby force that can
respond to potentially explosive situations and deter
belligerent groups from resorting to arms for resolving
conflicts and thus putting civilian lives at risk. Clearly,
that requires determination, readiness and capacity on
the part of African States.
It is difficult to discuss conflict prevention in
Africa without referring to the political crisis in
Zimbabwe. Panama highlights the important efforts
made by you, Mr. President, and by the South African
Development Community in helping to resolve that
crisis, respecting the democratic will of the citizens of
Zimbabwe and ensuring a legitimate process. However,
the actions of the current Government are disturbingly
similar to those of autocratic regimes when they refuse
to recognize the outcomes of elections and resist giving
up power. Ignoring that situation could head us for
another disruption in the peace and security in the
region.
In addition to conflict prevention, cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations should seek to protect the
civilian population, particularly the most vulnerable
groups, such as women and children. That is why we
commend the important collaboration among the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
the African Union and subregional organizations to
build a more effective normative framework for the
protection of civilians in Africa. Such a framework
should be based on the principles of promotion of and
respect for human rights, which are the guiding
principles of both OCHA and the AU.
Before concluding, I must point out that the
current situation in the region of Latin America and the
Caribbean is largely the result of close cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
American States in preventing and resolving conflicts.
That cooperation is currently reflected in the progress
that is being made in Haiti. Nonetheless, the existing
regional mechanisms must be constantly evaluated and
fine-tuned so that the collaboration between those
mechanisms and the United Nations is as effective and
efficient as possible.
Finally, Panama reaffirms its commitment to
international legality, multilateralism and the principles
governing relations between States. We are firmly
convinced that it is only through dialogue,
understanding and consultation that we can unite forces
capable of developing new proposals to resolve the
major imbalances and problems suffered by our
peoples and regions. Panama reiterates that, if we are
to expand the cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations, particularly the African
Union, we must all become true partners in our plans
S/PV.5868
08-3067234
and, thus, repositories of mutual confidence and
respect.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Alpha Oumar Konaré, Chairperson of the
Commission of the African Union, to take the floor.
Mr. Konaré (Commission of the African Union)
(spoke in French): I particularly thank you,
Mr. President, for your country’s leadership and your
personal leadership on all African issues. Thank you
for having convened this meeting and for dedicating
your two presidencies to Africa, in March 2007 and
now, by listening to African peoples and African
leaders. The problem of financing was raised during
our most recent summit and is not a new issue; it was
already on the agenda in 1992, when we were
establishing the crisis management mechanism.
I should like to attest to the great amount of time
that Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has devoted to
Africa, and to the great interest that he has shown and
the listening that he has done in order to be able to
assist us. The Secretary-General has demonstrated that
through the report that he has submitted to the United
Nations and through his proposal that a committee of
eminent persons be established so that we can move
from discussion to practice. The Secretary-General will
also permit me to commend his predecessor, Kofi
Annan, who did his utmost for Africa. I should like to
thank all our partners present here, from across the
spectrum, without whose support the difficulties might
have been greater.
You yourself, Mr. President, made an excellent
plea to President Kikwete. I cannot add anything to it,
because your voice is the most authoritative and
legitimate, by virtue not only of your duties, but also of
your experience. But I have taken the floor regarding
the issue of financing, to say that it does not involve a
policy on our part of holding out our hand. We are
aware — because I speak on behalf of a responsible
Africa — of the efforts that we ourselves must make
and of the resources that we ourselves must mobilize.
But we are asking this question to clearly indicate
Africa’s will to make its contribution to peace
throughout the world. We are also asking this question
to indicate that it is important to have confidence in
Africa and in African men and women. We have
achieved results in Côte d’Ivoire and in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and we see what is being done
in the Sudan and in Somalia. We must support the
interested parties so that they can have more
confidence in themselves and in each other, and must
not act in their place.
Today, it is certain that resources must be swiftly
mobilized to help us put out the fires in Somalia and in
Darfur. Of course, there are political problems. Efforts
are required from the parties. But we cannot
sufficiently stress the fact that, in Somalia and in
Darfur, significant resources have been lacking and
that, if they had been there in time, we would have
been able to do more in the political context.
It is important to build African capacities,
because the responsibility is, first and foremost, our
own. Building African capacities means consolidating
the continental peace and security architecture,
strengthening our planning capacities, helping us to
swiftly build an early warning system and deploying
standby forces. And I would go even further: the
standby forces should be able to quickly deploy a
standing rapid intervention force. Strengthening the
continental peace and security architecture also means
refusing to allow lawless zones to exist in Africa. It is
not normal that the Somali coasts, despite the presence
of significant military bases, are still under the control
of pirates today.
I hope that the appeal by the President of Somalia
will be heard. To strengthen the continental
architecture is to strengthen African capacities. It also
means reviewing our relations with all foreign military
bases in Africa. I mentioned that last September.
I am pleased that the statement of the President of
the French Republic offered perspectives that we
should explore together. I am pleased that the
authorities of the United States of America came to
listen to us regarding the AFRICOM problem and hope
that our concerns will be heard, because there is no
other policy than to be in harmony with Africa in its
will to assume its responsibility for defence and
security.
Certainly we should embrace the recommendations
of the Secretary-General and establish this panel.
Certainly we need to speed up the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission, but we must take care that
we do not have a thousand restrictive clauses. In order
to assist Côte d’Ivoire today, we need considerable
means; to help the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
we need considerable means. I am not saying to write a
blank check. However, if there are a thousand
S/PV.5868
3508-30672
conditions delaying the implementation of
programmes, the countries emerging from conflict or
countries that have fragile democratization processes
could suffer as a result. Public opinion needs to be
informed of what is going to be done and what it has
been agreed.
It is important for us to explore and make proper
use of everything that Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations offers. Apparently, however, it is
insufficient. President Gbagbo mentioned that. In fact,
today we need to look at the entire philosophy and
culture of the United Nations, which has done what it
could. But today the nature of conflicts has changed.
Today, nation-States that were the foundations of the
United Nations are experiencing much upheaval.
Today, beyond intergovernmental cooperation, there
are countries that wish to proceed towards shared
sovereignty — co-managed sovereignty. It is important
that these organizations be able to integrate the United
Nations architecture.
It is vital for our roles with the United Nations to
be clearly defined. We are not talking about being
present and giving to the United Nations and then
stepping aside. We need to reflect on a system of co-
management, in which, depending on the cases, the
roles are defined. We cannot all be parallel; footbridges
are needed. We need more coherence among the
different representations of the United Nations and
even of the United Nations system. It is important, and
I wish to commend the Secretary-General, who
acknowledged that the leadership of the AU is
recognized and significant.
I have spoken at some length about this. I spoke
with the Secretary-General yesterday about it; the
Minister of Burkina Faso spoke about it; the Secretary
of State of France mentioned it as well: the United
Nations must act in the case of the current food crisis.
The United Nations must act on the current financial
crisis. This is a problem of human security. The
President of the World Bank, the Executive Director of
the International Monetary Fund and the Director
General of the Food and Agriculture Organization have
made appeals to Governments, but what Government
could affirm collective legitimacy more than the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, more than the
Security Council?
In relation with the Group of 8, in relation with
all financial and economic institutions and in relation
with regional organizations, we ourselves have
launched an appeal to African regional organizations to
quickly hold summit meetings, because this crisis is
not cyclical, it is structural. It is not a matter of
questions and answers for tomorrow. Even for
countries that find answers for today, those would be
only solitary solutions that could not last.
The four months to come, April to July, is the
period of making ends meet in many countries. Prices
will go up. If we are unlucky and the rainy season is
not good, we could be looking at a most serious
catastrophe. This morning we call on the Security
Council. The Secretary-General must have all political
means. Less than one month ago we held a high-level
meeting to talk about the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs). But there will be no MDGs if we do
not manage over this difficult period.
This is an urgent appeal requiring an urgent
response. It cannot await the G8 summit in July.
Legitimacy is in this House and must grapple with the
problems of security, which include more than simply
conflicts. Poverty and hunger kill as well. They will
bring unexpected instability if we are not careful.
I would like assure the Secretary-General of the
support of the new Chairman of the Commission, Jean
Ping, of his determination to continue this work. He
has been to this House; he knows it well. There is no
doubt that he will be at the side of the Secretary-
General in the name of Africa.
For my part, I can give you, Sir, the pledge that in
my new functions, this commitment will be an ongoing
one. These functions and responsibilities, new for me,
are also my responsibilities as the former President of
Mali and today as the former Chairman of the
Commission of the African Union, because on 30 April
at the latest the new President will take on those
functions.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. I
intend, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.40 p.m.


United Nations S/PV.5868(Resumption 1)
Security Council
Sixty-third year
5868thmeeting
Wednesday, 16 April 2008, 3 p.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.
08-30700 (E)
*0830700*
President: Ms. Dlamini-Zuma/Mr. Kumalo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (South Africa)
Members: Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Chevalier
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Bassole
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wang Guangya
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Weisleder
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Skračić
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lacroix
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wirajuda
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Spatafora
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ettalhi
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Arias
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Churkin
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . Sir John Sawers
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wolff
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Bui The Giang
Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Letter dated 8 April 2008 from the Permanent Representative of South Africa
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2008/229)
Report of the Secretary-General on the relationship between the United
Nations and regional organizations, in particular the African Union, in the
maintenance of international peace and security (S/2008/186)
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1625 (2005) on conflict prevention, particularly in Africa
(S/2008/18)
S/PV.5868 (Resumption 1)
08-307002
The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers, as
indicated this morning, to limit their statements to no
more than five minutes, in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
their texts in writing and to deliver a condensed
version when speaking in the Chamber.
I now invite His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Ouyahia,
Former Prime Minister and Personal Representative of
the President of Algeria, to take the floor.
Mr. Ouyahia (Algeria) (spoke in French):
Mr. Abdelaziz Bouteflika, President of the People’s
Democratic Republic of Algeria, has asked me to
convey to the Security Council his deep regret at not
being able to be here in person to attend this important
meeting due to an especially busy national agenda. He
has also asked me to convey to the Council his best
wishes for the success of this meeting between the
African Union and the United Nations. He has also
given me the honour of reading out to the Council the
following message on this occasion.
“I wish at the outset to thank the President
of the Security Council for having taken the
initiative to organize a high-level Security
Council debate on strengthening partnership
between the Security Council and regional
organizations, particularly the African Union
through its Peace and Security Council. It has
indeed become urgent to improve the capacities
and to strengthen the action of regional
organizations, especially the African Union, in
the critical area of maintaining peace and
security.
“For the African continent, seeking and
maintaining peace and security represents a major
challenge as significant as the issue of
development. In that respect, we note with
pleasure the decrease in recent years of the
number of conflicts and crisis situations on the
continent, as well as the undeniable progress that
has been made in Sierra Leone, Liberia, Burundi,
Côte d’Ivoire and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. That trend should strengthen and grow
thanks to Africa’s collective commitment to
peace, embodied in the actions of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union. It should
also be encouraged and robustly supported by the
entire international community.
“At the tenth summit of the African Union
that took place in Addis Ababa in January, the
Secretary-General stressed the importance of
tightening cooperation links between the African
Union and the United Nations. He pointed out
that it was vital to enhance that partnership in
order to overcome the obstacles to peace and
security on the continent. I welcome the high
quality of cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union and the success
that has been achieved in that area.
“In the framework of that cooperation, a
transfer of authority took place late last year from
the African Union Mission in Sudan to the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur. That major development was based on
a dynamic balance between imperative political
considerations and unavoidable operational and
logistical requirements. Elsewhere, the United
Nations has supported such African countries as
Burundi, Sierra Leone and Guinea-Bissau under
the programme of work of the Peacebuilding
Commission. In January 2007, two of those
countries benefited from the Peacebuilding Fund.
Unfortunately, the allocated budgetary envelope
has not been fully disbursed.
“With respect to issues of peace and
security, the situation in Africa has been
characterized by emergences from crises and the
perpetuation of conflicts that we had hoped to see
resolved, first, by the mobilization of Africans
themselves, and later by that of the international
community. That is the case with the Western
Sahara, where the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara has been deployed
for more than 15 years. It is also the case with
Somalia, where the African Union Mission has
clearly been unable to provide the conditions
necessary for resolving the security, policy and
humanitarian aspects of the situation.
“The implementation of a peace and
security architecture of the African Union —
including a mechanism for the prevention,
management and settlement of conflicts, the
Peace and Security Council and a council of
elders — reflects Africa’s resolve to take
S/PV.5868 (Resumption 1)
308-30700
responsibility for itself and to act in favour of
political solutions that integrate the values of
conciliation and reconciliation and ensure the
sustainability of agreements reached.
“I hope that this high-level Security Council
debate will represent a decisive step towards
strengthening cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations, in particular
the African Union. Such cooperation, based on
the principles of the United Nations Charter,
could give rise to innovative modes of operation.
In that respect, it would be extremely useful for
us to adopt a more ambitious interpretation of
Chapter VIII of the Charter, which is the legal
basis for peacekeeping operations led by regional
organizations. Such an interpretation could take
account of local realities and favour responses
adapted to specific contexts and characteristics,
with a clear view of each party’s respective
responsibilities and complementarities.
“It is indeed important that the as yet
unexploited potential for synergy, interaction and
coordination of cooperation between the Security
Council and regional and subregional
organizations be fully achieved. There is no doubt
whatsoever that a successful synthesis of regional
and subregional efforts with the activities of the
international community will allow us to mobilize
all the energy necessary to achieving goals that
serve the cause of peace.
“In that context, as soon as it is approved by
the Security Council, a peacekeeping operation
on the African continent should be treated in the
same way as operations led by the United
Nations, particularly in terms of the management
and disbursement of funding, which should be
adequate and regular. The time has come to
institutionalize funding and to move beyond the
ad hoc approach of some financing that makes it
difficult to plan and manage such missions.
“If we are to lay such uncertainties to rest
once and for all, we should consider funding
mechanisms that are more consistent and better
coordinated. In that respect, the path laid out in
January 2007 by the heads of State of the African
Union — which consists of organizing missions
that are led by the Union, agreed with the
Security Council, and funded by assessed
contributions of United Nations Member States in
the context of Chapter VIII of the Charter —
should be endorsed and implemented as soon as
possible. Such an approach would allow us
sustainably to overcome the significant funding
constraints facing Africa. It would help to
enhance the partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations and to reassert the
authority and credibility of the Security Council
in its supervision of regional initiatives, which
would then be undertaken with clear objectives,
effectively and in the certainty that funds would
be put to best use, to the satisfaction of the
international community as a whole.”
Having read out President Bouteflika’s message, I
should like very briefly to add two comments on behalf
of the delegation of Algeria.
First, we support the statement made by the
President of the United Republic of Tanzania, the
current Chairman of the African Union, and endorse
the proposal he made on behalf of Africa.
Secondly, Algeria pays homage to the personal
efforts of President Mbeki to convene this meeting and
to draw up the draft resolution that has been submitted
to the Security Council. Such a commitment on his part
is a tribute to his country, South Africa. It does honour
to Africa. On behalf of President Bouteflika, we thank
him very warmly.
The President: I now call on Her Excellency
Mrs. Laure Olga Gondjout, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Cooperation, Francophonie and Regional
Integration of Gabon.
Mrs. Gondjout (Gabon) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the President of the Gabonese Republic, His
Excellency Mr. El Hadj Omar Bongo Ondimba, whom
I have the honour to represent here, I would like to say
how pleased our delegation and I myself are to see
Mr. Mbeki presiding over this high-level meeting on
the role of regional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
As the Council knows, the President of the
Gabonese Republic is very interested in questions
related to international peace and security, particularly
in Africa. He thus fully supports the initiative that the
Council presidency has taken to organize this meeting
to examine questions related to the maintenance of
international peace and security. The Council can be
S/PV.5868 (Resumption 1)
08-307004
assured of his solidarity with the resulting
recommendations.
The report of the Secretary-General on the
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations, in particular the African Union, in the
maintenance of international peace and security
(S/2008/186) has proposed interesting paths for
reflection on strengthening cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations.
While today we have reasons to be pleased with
developments in recent years in this area, particularly
in Africa, we must acknowledge that a great deal
remains to be done so that this cooperation can have
more solid content. With a constant and significant
contribution to United Nations peacekeeping
operations and to our own, in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter, Africa has shown
its will and capacity to mobilize for the resolution of
conflicts and crises that threaten collective security.
That is the case with the African peacekeeping mission
in Burundi, African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the recent African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
The President of the Gabonese Republic, in
consultation with his peers in the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community
(CEMAC), is contributing to the search for solutions to
the crises in the subregion. As Chair of the Ad Hoc
Committee on the Situation in the Central African
Republic, he encourages consultations and inclusive
dialogue to reach political and economic stabilization
of that country.
The President of the Gabonese Republic has also
been active in the deployment of the Multinational
Force of the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community (FOMUC). The same is true of the case of
Chad, where Gabon is working for an inclusive
dialogue between the various stakeholders.
Gabon is also in the contact group to follow up
the Dakar agreement signed on 13 March 2008
between Chad and the Sudan at the initiative of
President Abdoulaye Wade of Senegal. The group held
its the first meeting of Foreign Ministers in Libreville
on 10 April 2008. Another meeting of the contact
group, this time at the level of experts on defence,
security and intelligence, will be held in Tripoli, Libya
at the end of this month to consider and plan for the
rapid establishment, with the support of the United
Nations and the European Union, of a surveillance
force at the border between Chad and the Sudan.
Unfortunately, all of these African initiatives
come up against the insufficiency of resources, in
particular with regard to financing, human and
institutional capacity-building and peacebuilding.
Because of this, my country supports the Secretary-
General’s proposal to quickly create a panel of eminent
experts for an in-depth consideration of predictable and
stable financing of peacekeeping operations initiated
by regional organizations.
Capacity-building in preventive diplomacy is
another area of concern, which was addressed in
resolution 1625 (2005) of 14 September 2005. From
that perspective, joint mediation and good offices
missions could help defuse the brewing conflicts and
crises.
On a completely different topic, Gabon would
like to launch a strong appeal to the international
community for assistance to developing countries
facing increases in food prices, which could produce
socio-economic troubles likely to degenerate into
lasting crises.
I express the wish that the resolution to be
adopted at the end of this debate will strengthen the
framework for cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations, the African Union in
particular, in the maintenance of international peace
and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sierra Leone, Her
Excellency Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura.
Mrs. Bangura (Sierra Leone): At the outset, I
would like to convey the sincere appreciation of His
Excellency Mr. Ernest Bai Koroma, President of the
Republic of Sierra Leone, for the invitation extended to
him to participate in this debate. While also
congratulating President Thabo Mbeki on conceiving
this laudable initiative, allow me to convey President
Koroma’s profound regret for his inability to be
personally present to contribute to this all-important
subject, due to compelling preoccupations at home.
My gratitude also goes to the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report to the Security Council
S/PV.5868 (Resumption 1)
508-30700
on this subject (S/2008/186) and the recommendations
therein.
The remarkable talent and ability of President
Mbeki, coupled with his consummate experience,
convince us that we can exude pride and confidence
that his special talents can be brought to bear on the
proceedings of this meeting.
Partnership and cooperation provide the
opportunity to tap into the comparative advantages of
the United Nations and regional stakeholders to
respectively contribute to addressing threats to
international peace and security. Thus a concerted
effort in managing, resolving and preventing conflicts
constitutes a vital ingredient for international peace,
security and prosperity.
As a nation that has emerged from a protracted
conflict and that is still grappling with the effects of
that menace, Sierra Leone is a living testimony to the
critical importance of a regional approach to conflict
resolution and prevention. The historic decision by
Security Council in resolution 1181 (1998), in
welcoming and recognizing the important contribution
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in support of Sierra Leone Government’s
efforts to re-establish effective administration and the
democratic process and to embark on the task of
national reconciliation, reconstruction and
rehabilitation, is a clear demonstration of the
imperative of these partnerships.
With two thirds of the world’s poorest countries,
Africa has experienced a myriad of civil conflicts that
resulted in abject poverty and socio-economic
exclusion. Efforts by the African Union (AU) and
subregional organizations such as ECOWAS in
establishing mechanisms for conflict prevention,
management and resolution — particularly the crisis
situations in Liberia, Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau,
Côte d’Ivoire and the Darfur region in the Sudan —
clearly demonstrate the willingness and commitment of
the continent to take on its responsibility for peace,
security and stability in the continent.
Despite positive trends and advances with regard
to obtaining durable peace in Africa, the conditions
required for sustainable development have yet to be
consolidated throughout the continent. Thus, these
efforts can yield dividends only through the
cooperation and support of the international
community, based on the principle of mutual respect
and trust. There is therefore an urgent need to intensify
and harmonize national, regional and international
efforts in order to develop African human and
institutional capacities, particularly in countries
emerging from conflict.
The need to support those countries in getting
back on their feet is more than imperative, and it
involves peacebuilding and preventive diplomacy. We
know only too well the challenges faced by post-
conflict countries after years of civil strife. Such
countries, often fragile and reeling under the weight of
poverty, are usually not equal to the Herculean task of
rebuilding what has been scarred by years of
devastation. Supporting those countries in order to heal
the wounds of conflict is, in itself, an antidote that
could stabilize them as well as prevent them from
sliding down the thorny path that leads to renewed
conflict.
It is in that light that we applaud and greatly
appreciate the efforts and engagement of the
Peacebuilding Commission regarding countries like
ours, grappling with post-conflict reconstruction. We
trust that the call for close collaboration between the
Peacebuilding Commission and the AU Standing
Multidimensional Committee could be strengthened
through regular consultation and coordination. The
abundant resources that we muster for intervention and
peacekeeping operations could be significantly reduced
if we heavily invest in preventive diplomacy, by
tackling the root causes of conflicts upstream. Thus, a
stitch in time saves nine.
In order to accomplish that goal, the United
Nations system should adapt itself to the
transformations and developments that the continent is
currently experiencing, particularly in the context of
the evolving structures and programmes of the AU. In
the spirit of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, the AU and subregional organizations have
devised mechanisms to strengthen their peacekeeping
capacity and to take the lead in peacekeeping
operations on the continent. Those ongoing efforts
require close collaboration and coordination between
the United Nations and the AU.
In concluding, I wish to emphasize that, in the
promotion of international peace and security, the real
challenge lies in strengthening partnership and
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, in particular the African Union. That
S/PV.5868 (Resumption 1)
08-307006
also calls for implementation of the relevant mandates
of the General Assembly and the Security Council and
highlights the need for the United Nations and the
international community to provide further support to
the AU in the following ways.
First, the AU Peace Fund should be replenished,
and flexible, predictable and sustainable financing
should be ensured for AU peacekeeping operations so
that they can expedite or step up troop deployment in
peacekeeping operations. Secondly, the initiatives of
the African Union and subregional organizations to
prevent, mediate and resolve conflicts with the
assistance of the United Nations should be encouraged
and supported. Thirdly, cooperation with the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) should
be strengthened by providing coherent support for its
programmes through the mobilization of internal and
external financial resources. Fourthly, the individual
and collective efforts of African countries should be
supplemented so that agricultural productivity can be
increased in a sustainable way, in order to ensure food
security in the context of NEPAD’s Comprehensive
Africa Agriculture Development Programme. Finally, a
well-structured multi-stakeholder post-conflict
peacebuilding programme that has clearly defined and
coordinated roles for each partner should be
established.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Majozi Sithole, Minister of Finance of Swaziland,
to take the floor.
Mr. Sithole (Swaziland): I wish at the outset to
join all those who have spoken before me in
congratulating South Africa on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the current
month. I also wish to commend the initiative that your
delegation has taken, Madam President, in convening
this very historic meeting. We fully support you in this
initiative.
The Swaziland delegation welcomes the report of
the Secretary-General on the relationship between the
United Nations and regional organizations, in
particular the African Union, in the maintenance of
international peace and security (S/2008/186).
The preparation of the report signifies the
importance of the subject matter. Over the past few
years, experience has shown that regional
organizations play a significant role in the maintenance
of international peace and security. The importance of
that role emanates from the fact that regional
organizations have a comparative advantage over the
Security Council when it comes to understanding the
nature of the conflicts obtaining in a particular region,
by reason of proximity. Even the Charter of the United
Nations recognizes the importance of regional
organizations, in its Chapter VIII.
While it is recognized that it is the primary
responsibility of the Security Council to maintain
international peace and security, the Council cannot
carry out that mandate in isolation. That highlights the
importance of the need to strengthen and deepen the
relations between the United Nations and regional
organizations in order to effectively maintain
international peace and security.
Close collaboration between the United Nations
Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council can significantly improve the
handling of the conflict situations in Africa. The
challenges faced by the African Union in its efforts
aimed at conflict prevention, management and
resolution are daunting. All too often, the African
Union has had to initiate its own missions in conflict
areas because the United Nations has not been able to
deploy peacekeeping missions there. Even after
peacekeeping operations have been authorized by the
Security Council, the United Nations has been slow in
operationalizing such missions.
The frustration experienced by the African Union
emanates mainly from a lack of the resources it
requires to operationalize its initiatives. It is therefore
imperative to establish a mechanism that would
provide funding in a predictable, flexible and
sustainable manner for the long-term planning of
peacekeeping missions. In that regard, we welcome the
timely proposal contained in the report of the
Secretary-General that a high-level panel be
established to study the funding situation and to come
up with modalities for how it should be done.
Swaziland wishes to align itself with the
statement of the Chairperson of the Commission of the
African Union, which we fully support. We urge that
the exercise by the high-level panel be conducted
expeditiously. We believe that it would not be an
academic exercise, because we are talking about
human lives here. We also welcome the progress made
in the operationalization of the peace architecture of
S/PV.5868 (Resumption 1)
708-30700
the African Union. We look forward to the continued
support of the international community in that regard.
The importance of strengthening relations
between the United Nations and the African Union
cannot be overemphasized. Let us look forward to its
success.
Finally, I wish to join colleagues who have
spoken before me in saying the following. Let us keep
our eyes on the problems that we are currently facing.
The food prices that continue to escalate every day
have the potential to cause problems and uprisings in
our countries.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Dieudonné Kombo Yaya, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Central African Republic, to take the
floor.
Mr. Kombo Yaya (Central African Republic)
(spoke in French): Permit me to convey to you, Madam
President, the regrets of His Excellency Mr. François
Bozizé, President of the Republic and Head of State,
who, because of other commitments, could not
personally take part in this meeting on cooperation
between the United Nations Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council. He remains
convinced that, under your country’s presidency, the
Security Council will further strengthen its cooperation
with the African Union Peace and Security Council.
The African architecture in the area of conflict
prevention, management and resolution is the outcome
of the commitment of our heads of State or
Government, first within the former Organization of
African Unity and then within today’s African Union
(AU), to ensure that peace and security — which are,
moreover, inseparable — are the top priority, because
without peace there can be no economic and social
development. The relevant provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations and of the Constitutive Act of the
African Union emphasize that point quite clearly.
We welcome the active cooperation between our
two organizations in the area of peacekeeping. There
are many examples in that regard. I need not refer to
them in detail, as most of those who have spoken
before me have eloquently cited numerous examples of
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union. However, I would like to emphasize in
particular the need to strengthen the capacity of
subregional organizations with conflict settlement
mechanisms, such as the Council for Peace and
Security in Central Africa. Such bodies work at the
grass-roots level, play a basic and crucial role in the
settlement of conflicts and should rely on the African
Union only as a last resort. We therefore welcome the
proposal of the Secretary-General for the establishment
of a joint United Nations-African Union group of
experts to consider in detail how to support the
peacekeeping operations of subregional organizations,
especially in terms of funding.
I should like to take this opportunity, on behalf of
my President, to commend Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his support for the establishment of a
regional office for the Great Lakes region of Central
Africa.
In the light of the new situation, enhancing the
capacity of the African Union also continues to be a
priority. As you are aware, Madam President, the
Central African Republic is a post-conflict country that
is trying to emerge from two decades of ongoing crisis.
Any effort aimed at re-establishing and strengthening
peace should take into account the economic situation
in the country, because extreme poverty, hunger and
the precarious state of our people’s health constitute
fertile ground for instability.
I should like to take this opportunity to welcome
the joint efforts made by the African Union through the
United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the
Central African Republic, including the efforts of the
Special Envoy of the Chairman of the African Union,
in order to bring about reconciliation in Central Africa,
including the work done to prepare for the inclusive
dialogue, which came to an end on 31 March and
which will open up the way for the dialogue to take
place very soon.
In conclusion, we fully support the draft
resolution put forward by your country, Madam
President, which opens up new horizons for our
continent.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Chief Ojo Maduekwe, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Envoy of the President of Nigeria, to take the floor.
Mr. Maduekwe (Nigeria): On behalf of President
Umaru Musa Yar’Adua, may I commend South
Africa’s initiative in bringing this crucial subject
before the Security Council. By the same token, I
commend Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
S/PV.5868 (Resumption 1)
08-307008
comprehensive report on the issue. The report is
pertinent not only in terms of its proposals for
prospective cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union (AU), but also in proffering
targeted recommendations to improve that partnership.
We are pleased with the effort of the Secretary-General
and agree with his viewpoint that there are outstanding
questions about the nature of the partnership between
the United Nations and regional organizations,
including the AU, that need to be clarified.
African problems are truly global problems, in
ways that grim statistics render more disturbingly
challenging than the current pace of global response
would suggest, especially in the area of funding,
despite the untiring best efforts of the Secretary-
General. Nigeria therefore fully endorses this debate,
as it affords us an opportunity to redefine and realign
the major strands of the evolving strategic partnership
between the AU and the United Nations. Indeed, the
foundations of the functional relationship we seek
between the United Nations and the AU are rooted in
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and
in the Constitutive Act of the African Union. In a
global village, one cannot afford unsafe compounds; it
is too close for comfort.
Regional organizations like the AU are uniquely
placed to tackle threats to regional peace and security.
Nigeria recognizes the efficacy of complementarities
and partnerships in that regard. That is part of the
reason that we have been steadfast in our commitment
to the United Nations, the AU and subregional
organizations such as the Economic Community of
West African States.
We believe that this debate, which comes at a
time of reduced shooting wars in Africa, serves to
energize a momentum which we should build upon. On
its part, the African Union has sufficiently
demonstrated political will for the peaceful resolution
of the continent’s problems. What is now required is
for the international community to put its money where
its mouth is.
I would like to conclude by calling for very close
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU in
drafting a resolution that will not only meet the
challenges of today but address our dreams for
tomorrow, namely, that of a more peaceful world
underpinned by an ever-closer partnership between the
United Nations and regional organizations, in
particular the African Union. I am confident that we
can achieve that objective. But that will be difficult if
the United Nations continues to ignore the wisdom of
the African proverb that says that you do not shave a
man’s head in his absence. If close to 60 per cent of the
Security Council’s time is devoted to African issues,
and Africa is the only continent not represented on the
Security Council in the permanent category, how can
the United Nations make progress on the issue of
African ownership of its own problems and solutions
without addressing that imbalance?
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Ronnie Shikapwasha, Minister for Home Affairs
and Special Envoy of Zambia, to take the floor.
Mr. Shikapwasha (Zambia): First of all, I would
like to commend South Africa for its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council, which comes at a
momentous period in the affairs of the African
continent.
With regard to peace and security on the
continent, Africa continues to grapple with intractable
peace and security situations in many parts of the
continent. South Africa’s presidency is therefore a
further confirmation of the confidence of the
international community in the leadership and role that
South Africa continues to play in the various conflicts
and their resolution. South Africa’s role has in many
ways enhanced Africa’s initiatives in the resolution of
some of Africa’s long-standing conflicts. In that regard,
the convening of this meeting is relevant in our attempt
to find solutions to Africa’s raging conflicts. This
meeting also comes at a time when the international
community is seeking to partner with the African
Union to find solutions to Africa’s flashpoints. Finally,
South Africa’s presidency also comes at a time when
the world is looking to the continent to assume greater
responsibility for its own human condition arising from
conflict situations.
While we recognize the centrality of the Security
Council in the maintenance of peace and security, the
evolution of conflicts and their management has thrust
new responsibilities on the African continent, and
indeed the African Union (AU). Africa’s willingness to
find solutions to some of the hard conflicts has
increased Africa’s role in the finding of solutions to
those conflicts on behalf of the international
community, especially the Security Council.
S/PV.5868 (Resumption 1)
908-30700
Africa continues to suffer from a lack of
resources and capacity to secure lasting solutions to the
continent’s conflicts. There is a need, therefore, to
develop and work on mechanisms with the United
Nations system to enhance the provision of predictable
and sustainable resources to Africa’s efforts in finding
solutions to its conflicts. The United Nations efforts in
that respect should include the funding of peace
operations, especially that related to start-up financing
for equipment and logistics.
Zambia supports in that regard the amendment of
United Nations rules on peacekeeping budgets to
finance regional operations authorized by the Security
Council. As regards the deployment and management
of African Union-led peace support operations, Zambia
recommends for consideration at this meeting that such
operations be funded through United Nations assessed
contributions. Considering the importance of resources
to the success of AU missions — and indeed, to those
of the United Nations — it is proposed that an in-depth
analysis of the current financial outlays to peace
missions also be made.
While financial resources are cardinal to positive
outcomes in conflict zones, Zambia would support
cooperative mechanisms that ensure human dignity
based on the development of coherent strategies and
policies that would protect civilians in armed conflicts.
Zambia would, in that respect, support early warning
systems that anticipate human-made social, political
and economic upheavals which are the precursors of
Africa’s conflicts.
The President: I now call on His Excellency
Mr. Cheikh Tidiane Gadio, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Senegal.
Mr. Gadio (Senegal) (spoke in French): On
behalf of President Abdoulaye Wade of the Republic of
Senegal, whom it is my honour to represent, I should
like at the outset warmly to congratulate South Africa
and President Thabo Mbeki on having again this year
convened an open Security Council debate on the
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations, in particular the African Union, in the
maintenance of international peace and security. I
should also like to commend the leadership of
President Kikwete of Tanzania, the acting Chairman of
the African Union.
The interest that all Member States have shown in
today’s debate is justified by the complex nature of
conflict situations in Africa and throughout the world.
That complexity requires synergy and dynamic
interaction between the United Nations, which has the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, and regional
organizations, which are a complementary tool to the
activities of the Organization. In that respect, Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter clearly sets out the
modalities for cooperation between the Security
Council and regional organizations.
In that regard, we should welcome the high
quality of the partnership between the African Union
and the United Nations. That partnership is all the
more necessary given that Africa contributes almost
35 per cent of contingents and hosts almost half of all
peacekeeping operations, including the largest and
most complex. In that respect, at their 2006 summit,
the heads of State and Government of the African
Union called on the United Nations to consider, within
the framework of Chapter VII of the Charter, the
possibility of funding, through contributions by its
Member States, peacekeeping operations deployed by
the African Union or under its authority, with the
consent of the United Nations.
That invitation demonstrates the resolve of
African leaders to take responsibility for conflicts as
soon as they break out and to intervene relatively
quickly when the United Nations cannot do so. The
case of Darfur is a perfect illustration of that approach.
However, as all are aware, Africa does not always have
the necessary resources to assume such a burden, nor
does it always remain concretely engaged by
providing, quantitatively and qualitatively, the forces
necessary to the success of its interventions. The case
of Darfur also raises the issue of striking a balance
between the urgent need to act to stop atrocities and
due respect for the initiatives of such regional
organizations as the African Union.
African solutions for African problems represent
a noble and praiseworthy approach, but they should not
add to the unbearable suffering of the victims of
conflicts in Africa. In the face of the urgency that has
been recognized by the United Nations and the African
Union, action needs to be taken immediately.
The delicate issue of funding arose during the
operations in the three African missions in Burundi,
Somalia and Darfur. It should be considered in depth
so that we can find a solution. Any solution should,
S/PV.5868 (Resumption 1)
08-3070010
however, take equal account of the start-up phase of
missions and their long-term viability.
There is a similar concern with regard to
implementing the key provision of the Dakar Accord
between Chad and the Sudan concerning the peace and
security force to monitor the long common border
between those brotherly countries. The Dakar
Accord — concluded on 13 March 2008 in the
presence of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Chairman of the African Union
Commission, and with the strong support of the
Secretary General of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and all the States of the Islamic ummah —
needs important logistic and financial resources if it is
to be successful. Senegal therefore strongly supports
the proposal contained in paragraph 76 of the
Secretary-General’s report of 7 April 2008 on the
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations, in particular the African Union, in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The greatest attention should be given to
strengthening African peacekeeping capacities,
particularly in terms of planning and managing training
operations for civilian, military and police personnel,
as well as logistical support. Regional organizations, in
particular the African Union, should have the ability to
be more alert to potential conflicts so as to be able to
avert them and to take all necessary measures, in close
collaboration with the United Nations, and in particular
the Security Council.
We need to make better use of preventive
diplomacy and strategic anticipation if we are to be
able to fulfil our commitments. The entire world is
listening to the African continent today, as for instance
with regard to the electoral processes in Zimbabwe
and, earlier, in Kenya. Unfortunately, we Africans have
answered only with a deafening silence that can be
heard everywhere. In establishing its council of elders,
the African Union has understood and recognized that
conflicts, be they dormant or active, can be resolved
only by political means — in other words, negotiation,
early warning and good offices.
In closing, I would insist on the need for the
international community to take urgent measures to
address the humanitarian crises sorely afflicting many
States in Africa and throughout the world, as reflected
in the brilliant plea made this morning by the leaders of
the African Union Commission.
The President: I now call on Her Excellency
Ms. Rosemary Museminali, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Rwanda.
Ms. Museminali (Rwanda): The Rwandan
delegation applauds the initiative of President Mbeki of
South Africa to strengthen the relationship between the
United Nations and regional organizations, in
particular the African Union (AU), in the maintenance
of peace and international security. More particularly,
it could not have come at a more appropriate time than
at this moment, when people all over the world are
remembering the over 1 million Rwandans who lost
their lives 14 years ago in circumstances that could
have been prevented or halted later on. This forum thus
offers us an opportunity to review mechanisms by
which we can prevent and effectively intervene in
future conflicts in Africa and other parts of the world
with greater coherence and effectiveness.
What we need to do is direct our efforts towards
creating a mechanism that will address effective and
efficient coordination of both organizations in order to
deliver peace and security where it is needed most: in
conflict areas. AU member countries have taken up
their responsibility. They have shown goodwill and a
readiness and willingness to actively engage in
peacekeeping and security maintenance, mainly on the
African continent but also in other parts of the world.
What we expect from the Security Council, which is
mandated by the Charter to maintain international
peace and security, is the realistic, timely and
predictable provision of adequate resources to
accomplish those missions. Timely intervention has
been hampered by the inefficient provision of
resources, which in turn leads to missions being
ineffective.
AU member countries are capable of raising
sizable numbers of professional military and police
personnel for peacekeeping, but they are still largely
incapable of properly equipping them. The United
Nations therefore needs to agree to effectively maintain
its central role of sustaining peacekeeping forces in
conflict areas by equipping them effectively and by
making available the logistical support they need to
perform their duties.
In our view, this meeting offers us an opportunity
to forge a greater mutual partnership to address
regional conflicts by putting in place a joint team from
both organizations to work together to deal with
S/PV.5868 (Resumption 1)
1108-30700
practical issues that have hampered our effectiveness in
the past. We are grateful that this has been provided for
in the draft resolution before the Council.
Greater participation by regional organizations in
conflict resolution needs to be tapped more and more,
given the fact that those regional organizations have
greater proximity to conflict areas and a better
appreciation of the political and cultural issues.
Therefore, it is urgent to institutionalize relations
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
particularly the African Union, in the areas of conflict
resolution and peacekeeping by building the AU’s
capacity to implement initiatives that are in fact
possible but that seem impossible at current resource
levels.
My delegation therefore wishes to propose, inter
alia, the following measures, some of which have
already been mentioned by other delegations. We wish
also to support all the proposals set out in the draft
resolution before the Council. These measures include
the following.
First, AU peace and security measures taken to
resolve conflicts should be considered pivotal and
should be reinforced and supported by the Security
Council.
Secondly, we feel that the United Nations should
work on more predictable ways to fund peacekeeping
operations. More reliable funding should be considered
through assessed contributions by Member States,
because we find that these resources are more
predictable and therefore facilitate better planning and
contribute to greater efficiency. Current fundraising
measures need to be reviewed.
Thirdly, as most African nations willing to
contribute to United Nations peacekeeping operations
do not have the matching resources, we feel that,
whenever regional organizations undertake peace and
security roles, the United Nations should work out
ways to immediately prepare light and heavy support
packages to ease the transition from operations by
regional organizations to United Nations operations, in
order to avoid the costly delays that have plagued some
of the missions in the region, such as those in Somalia
and Darfur. Consider how much the former African
Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS) — the current African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) — would have been able to achieve with
better mobility, better logistics and well-paid, well-fed
forces provided with proper health care.
Rwanda is happy to contribute to the promotion
of international peace and security through its military
and police contributions to United Nations and African
Union peacekeeping missions in the Sudan, Liberia,
Côte d’Ivoire, the Comoros and Haiti. We are
committed to continuing these contributions for as long
as they are required, and as our meagre financial
resources permit.
We are committed to this quest for a working
partnership to spread peace because, more than
anybody else, we have tasted the lack of peace and
security, and we know what the lack of peace means
for a country and a region. The failure to address the
threat posed by genocidal forces such as the members
of the former Rwandan Armed Forces and
Interahamwe, also known as the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda, has perpetuated conflict in
the Great Lakes region. My delegation therefore
welcomes the recent adoption by the Security Council
of resolution 1804 (2008), which aims to address the
threat posed by those forces not only to Rwanda but
also to the entire Great Lakes region. Any delay in the
response to this threat undermines us all. It allows the
international supporters of those forces to increase
their activities of destabilization, which are manifested
in the current blatant activities and international
conferences aimed at genocide denial. Genocide denial,
as a last stage of the implementation of the genocidal
ideology, is a formidable threat to peace and security,
as it energizes perpetration.
We all need to watch out for masked political
manoeuvres aimed at undermining peace and stability.
This poses a serious threat to peace and security, and
we urge the Security Council and regional
organizations to discourage and deal with the threat.
Today in Rwanda we face a situation where, ironically,
those who stopped the 1994 genocide are being
labelled as perpetrators by those seeking to manipulate
the international system; these allegations are based on
misinformation provided by perpetrators still at large
or by their sympathizers.
Our painful experience in Rwanda taught us that
peace comes at a huge price. There can be no peace
without reconciliation and without recognition of the
rights and interests of all people, including the right of
States to exist and the right of self-determination. We
S/PV.5868 (Resumption 1)
08-3070012
have learned that no community’s rights can or should
supersede another’s. We have learned the value of
sharing, the value of communities finding and
consciously forging ways to promote living side by
side in peace and mutual respect. It is these initiatives
that this joint meeting needs to recognize; it needs to
enhance mechanisms to help nurture and enhance long-
lasting peace and stability.
In conclusion, I express the hope that the
outcome of this meeting will be a firm and clear
mechanism to strengthen the mechanisms for
institutionalizing relations between the United Nations
and regional organizations, particularly the African
Union, in the crucial areas of conflict resolution and
peacekeeping. Once again, an opportunity is before us
to translate our many challenges and opportunities into
a shared destiny of peace, security and prosperity for
all.
The President: I invite the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Angola, His Excellency Mr. João Bernando
de Miranda, to take the floor.
Mr. Miranda (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese;
English text provided by the delegation): I would like
to start by conveying our appreciation to the President
for holding this high-level meeting on peace and
security in Africa. I am greatly honoured to participate
in this forum on behalf of the President of the Republic
of Angola, His Excellency José Eduardo dos Santos,
who for unavoidable reasons could not travel to New
York.
Allow me to congratulate the President, on behalf
of my Government and on my own behalf, for the wise
manner in which he has been conducting the work of
the Security Council, especially for the opportunity and
pertinence of including in its agenda an issue that is
vital to its good performance, and that is matters
related to peace and security in Africa. I would also
like to express my appreciation to the previous Council
President for the constructive manner in which he,
together with the Secretary-General, contributed to the
realization of this important high-level meeting, which
takes place at a juncture when both the United Nations
and the African Union (AU) are confronting multiple
and complex challenges linked to peace and
development in the African continent.
On the occasion of the 2007 Security Council
meeting on the same topic, under the French
presidency (5749th meeting), the Council recognized,
among other aspects, the fundamental role of regional
and subregional organizations in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts on the basis Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter, as well as of Council
resolutions 1625 (2005) and 1631 (2005), to which we
can add presidential statement 2005/39. The Council
reiterated the importance of the relevant paragraphs of
the Outcome Document of the 2005 Summit, General
Assembly resolution 60/1, on the need for development
aid for Africa and strengthening the African Union’s
operational capacity for peacekeeping operations for a
10-year period.
Africa is aware that the principal causes for the
conflicts in the continent have a direct relationship
with circumstances resulting from the complexity of its
ethnic and linguistic phenomena. However, they are
also fundamentally linked to the underdevelopment
that is a consequence of the undeniable legacy of a
long period of colonization that dramatically marked
the course of its history. It is in that context that the
AU, along with subregional economic communities,
has been deeply engaged in the operationalization of its
peace and security structures and mechanisms, namely
the African Standby Force, the early warning system,
the Panel of the Wise and the Special Fund for peace
and security.
We understand that in order for the United
Nations and the AU to be able to adequately counter
the constraints on the efficiency of the necessary
cooperation in the domain of conflict prevention,
management and resolution, it is of the utmost
necessity to address the issues of peace and security in
an inclusive manner, not dissociating them from
development problems. The convergence of those
elements is fundamental for the success of
peacekeeping operations. That is one of the lessons we
learned while following and observing certain conflict
resolution, peace consolidation and economic
reconstruction processes as the first Chairman of the
United Nations Peacebuilding Commission, in 2006
and 2007.
As we have already mentioned, peace and social
development are correlated elements that complement
one another. Having achieved peace, the Republic of
Angola has been undertaking enormous efforts to
create subjective and material conditions for its
reconstruction, with a view to reaching sustained
development. The accomplishments of my Government
have deserved the recognition of all the Angolan
S/PV.5868 (Resumption 1)
1308-30700
society and the international community, in light of the
tangible results already reached in the recovery of the
economic and social infrastructure destroyed during
the war and in the construction of new infrastructure.
Judging from the positive trend in our economic
growth, which is above of 19 per cent, our perspectives
are, frankly, encouraging.
It is in this perspective that the Angolan
Government conceived and is implementing the
National Strategy for Poverty Reduction in order to
reach the human development indicators set out in the
Millennium Declaration. Our experience has
demonstrated that in the African context, the
consolidation of peace results from the combination of
various factors such as the conception and
implementation of a coherent policy of national
reconciliation, the implementation of economic
reforms that favour the provision of ample space for
free initiative on the part of national and foreign
citizens, the constant reinforcement of State authority
as an imperative for the consolidation of democratic
institutions, and respect for and safeguarding of human
rights as a component of peace, democracy and
development, among others.
Indeed, under the able leadership of the President
of the Republic, José Eduardo dos Santos, Angola has
been removing the hurdles that hindered the smile of
its people. Today, only six years after the end of the
internal conflict that lacerated the country for several
decades, peace and national reconciliation are
consolidated, and with them democracy, whose
consecration will be strengthened with the holding, for
the second time in the history of Angola, of the
legislative and presidential elections foreseen for 2008
and 2009, respectively.
The Republic of Angola reiterates, therefore, its
firm commitment to working in a self-sacrificing and
altruistic manner in the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union, and in the subregional organizations
of which it is a member, towards helping to find
peaceful solutions for the conflicts that still persist in
certain countries of our continent. To that effect, my
Government considers the cooperation between the
African Union and the United Nations to be of extreme
importance.
I would like to state that my delegation will
support the deliberative text that will result from our
debate.
The President: I now invite the Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Special Envoy of the President
of Egypt, Mr. Ibrahim Ali Hassan, to take the floor.
Mr. Hassan (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to convey the greetings of His Excellency
President Mohamed Hosni Mubarak and his wishes for
the full success of this summit. We would also like to
extend our thanks and appreciation to His Excellency
President Thabo Mbeki, President of the Republic of
South Africa, for his constructive initiative in calling
for this important meeting at this high level to discuss
one of the most important issues of concern for Africa
and the world.
I am confident we all agree on the high priority
that the issue of peace and security represents on the
international list of concerns and on the agenda for
African collective action. This matter was clearly
reflected in devising the Constitutive Act of the African
Union (AU) in 2001 and earlier in the Charter of the
Organization of African Unity, in 1963. The issue of
peace and security in the African continent also comes
at the forefront in the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development (NEPAD) document, which considered it
a necessary precondition for achieving comprehensive
development in the continent, hence emphasizing the
firm correlation between the promotion of peace and
security on the one side and the efforts to eradicate
poverty and achieve the Millennium Development
Goals on the other.
In this context, the African Union has been keen
on establishing institutions and mechanisms that are
capable of dealing, both seriously and effectively, with
conflict situations in Africa. Efforts have not been
confined only to the establishment of the African
Union Peace and Security Council, which plays a
crucial role in promoting security, stability and in
dispute settlement in the continent; they also extend to
the establishment of the African Standby Force, the
Panel of the Wise, a Peace Fund and a continental early
warning system, along with a comprehensive political
framework for reconstruction and rehabilitation in
countries emerging from conflict. That rendered the
AU highly capable of taking rapid and effective actions
to contain existing conflicts and avert the emergence of
new ones. As a result, many conflicts were resolved
within the past few years, bringing the number down
from 12 at the beginning of this century to a limited
number, for which efforts are under way to find
peaceful settlements.
S/PV.5868 (Resumption 1)
08-3070014
The NEPAD initiative was launched in tandem
with the establishment of the African Peer Review
Mechanism in order to consolidate the pillars of good
economic and political governance, in fulfilment of the
aspirations of the peoples of the continent for a
promising future based on solidarity and integration
and arising from the principle of African national
ownership, stressing that the future of Africa will be
built by the Africans themselves.
Despite the numerous developments and the
continuing changes on the regional and international
scenes — which all reaffirm the need for further
cooperation and consultation between the United
Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council — we still lack the institutional
mechanism needed to consolidate such cooperation in a
specific framework that commits to the historical,
cultural and developmental particularities of the
African States. Such a framework must take into
consideration the delicate balance agreed upon in the
2005 United Nations Summit between the issues of
peace and security, economic and social development
and respect for the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of the African citizen.
At an early stage Egypt discerned the dire need to
bolster the cooperation between the United Nations and
the AU. To that end, Egypt proposed, during its
presidency of the African Union Peace and Security
Council in December 2006, its well-known initiative to
establish a Coordination and Consultation Mechanism
between the African Union Peace and Security Council
and the United Nations Security Council. We would
like to place on record our appreciation for the warm
welcome and interest with which the Egyptian
initiative was received and for the progress achieved in
its invigoration through joint sessions of the two
organs.
Furthermore, Egypt emphasizes the need to
promote cooperation and consultation between the
peace and security structures on both sides through
exchanging information and reports between the two
Councils, dispatching fact-finding missions or
conducting joint missions. In addition, there is a need
to speedily adopt the appropriate norms and to agree on
the necessary conditions by which to consider African
peacekeeping missions as United Nations missions and
to provide the necessary funding. Such coordination
should also expand to include the various African
subregional arrangements, as they play a vital role in
dispute settlement and maintaining peace and security
in the continent through their active regional
mechanisms.
Moreover, there is a much-needed constructive
cooperation between the United Nations, the League of
Arab States and the Organization of Islamic
Conference in maintaining international peace and
security. We wish to highlight in this respect the
ongoing cooperation between the AU and the
subregional economic groups and the increasing
coordination between the AU and the League of Arab
States to achieve security and stability in Africa and to
contribute jointly to the settlement of existing conflicts
in a number of African States, such as the Sudan,
Somalia and the Comoros, etc. We salute the summit
decisions on both sides, as they reveal how highly they
value the cooperation between them, and underscore
the need to carry on their efforts to reinforce peace and
security in Africa.
In the light of its responsibilities towards the AU
and the United Nations, Egypt has steadily been keen
on actively participating in peacekeeping operations,
most recently through its broad participation in the
Hybrid Operation in Darfur. Within the framework of
capacity-building in preventive diplomacy, it has
established the regional Cairo Center for Training on
Conflict Resolution and Peacekeeping in Africa, which
since 1995 has been organizing regular training courses
for African diplomatic and military cadres to enable
them to gain the necessary capabilities in the field.
Furthermore, Egypt attaches great importance to
the issue of peacebuilding and reconstruction in the
area, especially in countries emerging from conflict. In
the context of its membership in the Peacebuilding
Commission, Egypt is eager to elevate the standards of
those efforts so as to reach a situation that would
magnify the benefits derived from the international and
regional financial institutions and to serve the process
of rehabilitation and reconstruction in those States.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming that
Egypt is keen to continue to advance its role in the
African continent. It is committed to continue and
reinforce its contributions in peacekeeping operations,
settling disputes and achieving security and stability in
the continent. I reaffirm our confidence that the
resolution to be adopted by this summit will positively
contribute to consolidating the pillars of cooperation,
coordination and complementarity between the efforts
S/PV.5868 (Resumption 1)
1508-30700
of the United Nations on one hand and the pivotal role
undertaken by the AU and other regional organizations
on the other, towards fulfilling the aspirations and
ambitions of our peoples in a safe world where we all
live in peace, freedom and prosperity.
The President: I next invite the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Liberia, Her Excellency Madam
Olubanke King-Akerele, to take the floor.
Madam King-Akerele (Liberia): It is an honour
to address this body, representing Her Excellency the
President of Liberia, Madam Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf.
She was unable to be here as she would have liked. On
her behalf, we want to congratulate South Africa on its
presidency of the Security Council, while commending
the Council on this initiative. We also wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his very thought-provoking
report and the proposals contained therein.
I wish to state here that Liberia is an example par
excellence of what can be accomplished through a
combination of a regional initiative — in our case, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), which took the high road in intervening in
the Liberian crises in the 1990s — and then the
international community, through the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) in the following years.
Let me begin by referring to the intervention of
the Special Representative of the United Nations
Secretary-General to Liberia, Ellen Margrethe Løj,
who addressed the Council on 14 April (5864th
meeting) and to brief it on the status of developments
in Liberia. Having benefited and continuing to benefit
from an extraordinary United Nations presence through
UNMIL, which combines a range of peacekeeping
forces representative of the United Nations
membership, we remain most grateful for that role. The
peace we enjoy today is largely attributable to their
presence, as well as to the fact that ECOWAS laid the
foundations in the 1990s. Indeed, many of our
ECOWAS brothers have paid dearly for that peace.
Given the fragility of that peace — the reasons
for which were detailed by Ms. Løj — it is clear that
there is still much to be done if we are to achieve
sustainable peace and security. Hence the subtitle of
my intervention on the issue before us today: “No
sustainable security without development; no
development without sustainable security”.
If we are to have an enhanced and meaningful
relationship between the United Nations Security
Council and the African Union (AU) Peace and
Security Council, that perspective must guide us. I now
want to focus on a few specifics.
The objectives of the AU Peace and Security
Council include the promotion of peace, security and
stability in Africa, the anticipation and prevention of
conflict and the promotion of peacebuilding and post-
conflict reconstruction. In the letter dated 8 April from
the Permanent Representative of South Africa
addressed to the Secretary-General transmitting the
concept paper (S/2008/229), it is indicated that today’s
debate will provide an opportunity to address, at the
highest political level, the complex nature of some
current conflicts and the need to respond in a timely
manner to threats, taking into account factors such as
the capacity — and, at times, the limitations — of
regional organizations. Here, I want to underscore the
word “threats”.
Liberia wishes to submit that the growing food
crisis is not only a worldwide crisis, but is also proving
to be a major security issue for the continent. It is a
serious threat to peace and security that could
undermine the gains that are being made throughout
the continent if it is not addressed urgently. A recent
Jeune Afrique article refers to it as a food crisis that is
spreading like wildfire. Thus, protests have been
sparked throughout the continent, from Morocco to
Mauritania and Senegal and from Côte d’Ivoire to
Mozambique, Tunisia, Cameroon, Burkina Faso, Egypt
and Tunisia. This speaks for itself.
Surely that is sufficient warning: we can ill afford
to wait. Liberia proposes high-level attention and the
holding, on an urgent basis, of a special meeting of the
Security Council on the food crisis. We further propose
that we join forces, bringing together the expertise of
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the African Union and relevant food-
producing countries in Asia and food-importing
countries in Africa and elsewhere to tackle this matter
within the shortest time possible. We believe that, on
this issue, we need the equivalent of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security.
In addition, this situation will undermine one of
the key Millennium Development Goals, related to
improving food security. This is a major security
S/PV.5868 (Resumption 1)
08-3070016
matter that needs to be tackled. It is at the core of the
economics of insecurity, with which we all must be
concerned if we are to achieve sustainable security.
Next, I would like to refer to Council resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. It is an
excellent example of an important Security Council
resolution that is being considered and implemented at
the local and national levels in many African countries,
including my own. That resolution has now been
adopted in the context of an African Union declaration
of heads of State. However, we need a mechanism for
monitoring its implementation, and we urge the
Security Council to look into that. We are pleased that,
in response to the resolution, the Secretary-General has
appointed a woman as his Special Representative for
Liberia. Indeed, we believe that Liberia could be used
as a case in point in the implementation of the
resolution. Plans are under way for the Presidents of
Finland and Liberia to convene a meeting in 2009 on
women and international peace and security, within the
framework of the resolution.
I would now like to highlight the importance of
collaboration between the African Union and the
United Nations Security Council to ensure stronger
border security among African countries, in order to
implement counter-terrorism measures and to control
the trafficking of small arms and light weapons.
With regard to the series of reports on various
topics submitted by United Nations panels of experts to
the Security Council and other bodies, while Liberia
fully appreciates their importance, we would like to
emphasize that they need to include the views and
contributions of the relevant countries.
As far as the African Union and Security Council
forces in Darfur are concerned, there are clearly major
lessons which we must learn and on the basis of which
we must make corrections.
In closing, I wish to reiterate Liberia’s view, in
the light of its very painful experiences over the past
15 years, that Africa’s leadership must, through the
African Union, do everything possible to avert the
looming crises that pose threats to the continent and to
world peace and security. I also wish to reiterate that
there can be no sustainable security without
development and no development without sustainable
security.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Mrs. Bernadette Simvura, representative of
Burundi.
Mrs. Simvura (Burundi) (spoke in French): First
of all, I should like to convey to you, Madam
President, the apologies of Her Excellency
Ms. Antoinette Batumubwira, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Burundi. For reasons beyond
her control, she was obliged to leave the Chamber in
order to catch her flight this afternoon. She requested
that I read out the following message to the Council.
“Permit me at the outset to express the
regrets of His Excellency the President of the
Republic of Burundi, who is unable to attend this
meeting. The President, Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza,
requested that I wish you, Madam President,
every success in this meeting and express
Burundi’s commitment to work within the United
Nations and the African Union for regional and
international peace and security.
“Burundi’s presence at this meeting, and its
commitment to strengthen the relationship
between the United Nations Security Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council,
are based on three considerations.
“First, since 1 April 2008, Burundi has been
a member of the African Union Peace and
Security Council. Therefore, the Government of
Burundi is preparing to contribute to that
important task with every means at its disposal.
“Secondly, over the past 15 years, Burundi
has benefited from the support and assistance of
the United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, and of the African Union, in particular
its Peace and Security Council.
“In that regard, our experience as a country
that has seen the deployment of Organization of
African Union observer missions and the African
Union Mission in Burundi, followed by the
United Nations Operation in Burundi, equips us
today to make a valuable contribution to the
analyses and debates on issues relating to joint
efforts between the United Nations and the
African Union aimed at restoring and maintaining
peace. Beginning with peacekeeping efforts by
the United Nations and the African Union,
Burundi has now moved on to the peacebuilding
S/PV.5868 (Resumption 1)
1708-30700
phase. In that connection as well, Burundi’s
contribution will be enriched by our experience.
“Thirdly, and finally, our participation in
this meeting is relevant because Burundi is taking
part in peacekeeping operations in Africa. A
Burundian national defence force battalion is now
in Somalia as part of the African Union Mission
in Somalia. A second battalion is preparing to
deploy to Somalia. Although we have been
saddened by the death of a soldier in that
operation, the Government of Burundi continues
to believe that it has a duty to contribute in this
way to peace on our continent, all the more so
because our country has enjoyed the support of
many African countries and countries from other
continents. In that regard, I wish in particular to
refer to the large South African contingent that
has already contributed a great deal in the
context, initially, of African Union and,
subsequently, of United Nations peacekeeping
efforts in Burundi. Our military and police
officers are also participating in observer
missions in Darfur and Côte d’Ivoire. Burundi
also plans to send troops to Chad.
“It is in the light of all these considerations
that the Government of Burundi is here today. We
hope that the draft resolution to be adopted at the
end of this meeting of the Security Council on
Cooperation with the African Union will enjoy
the full political and financial support necessary
for its implementation. At stake is the credibility
of our two organizations — and, more so, that of
our overriding commitment to maintain regional
and international peace and security.”
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Sanya Štiglic, Permanent
Representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Štiglic (Slovenia): I have the honour to
address the Council on behalf of the European Union
(EU). The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries
of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, and the European Free Trade
Association countries Liechtenstein and Norway,
members of the European Economic Area, as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
Given the time constraints, I will shorten my
statement. The full version is now being distributed
and constitutes our official statement.
The creation of the African Union (AU) and its
organs has been one of the most promising
developments in recent years. It is therefore highly
appropriate to focus this discussion on Africa. The very
presence of such distinguished guests adds particular
weight to the significance of today’s debate.
I would like especially to thank the Secretary-
General for his remarks and his personal commitment
to promoting dialogue between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations.
The European Union is firmly committed to, and
actively supports, effective multilateralism. In that
context, the importance of regional organizations and
their potential in preventive diplomacy, peacekeeping,
peacemaking and post-conflict peacebuilding has
grown considerably over the past years. It is only to be
expected that their contribution in the foreseeable
future will continue to increase steadily.
The development of a stronger international
society, well-functioning international institutions and
a rules-based international order with the United
Nations at its core is a central objective of the
European Union, which recalls the primary
responsibility of the Security Council to maintain
international peace and security. Regional
organizations can reinforce and complement United
Nations efforts through an active role in maintaining
international peace and security, in the spirit of Chapter
VIII of the Charter, as was also stressed in resolution
1631 (2005).
The European Union seeks to strengthen
cooperation with the United Nations on, inter alia,
areas of crisis management and peacekeeping
operations, counter-terrorism, human rights,
sustainable development and climate change. In recent
years, the European Union has made significant
progress in the development of its own crisis
management structures. This has allowed the EU to
deploy numerous civilian and military operations,
many of them in support of or at the request of the
United Nations.
Under the framework of the European Security
and Defence Policy, and in addition to individual EU
member States’ commitments, the European Union
S/PV.5868 (Resumption 1)
08-3070018
continues to support peacekeeping efforts in Africa,
particularly in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Guinea-Bissau, Chad and the Central African Republic,
in line with substantial European Commission support.
We remain committed to further developing our
relationship with the United Nations, especially by
working closely together in implementing the joint
statement on United Nations-EU cooperation in crisis
management signed in June 2007.
The second European Union-Africa Summit, held
in Lisbon in 2007, laid down the foundations of a
strategic partnership. We have reached a new milestone
in our cooperation. In the field of peace and security,
the first priority of the partnership aims at
strengthening dialogue to reach common positions and
implement common approaches on challenges to peace
and security in Africa, in Europe and globally. The
second priority is to work together towards the full and
effective functioning of the African peace and security
architecture, in particular through the African standby
force, the Continental Early Warning System and
regional mechanisms and organizations. The third
priority is to provide predictable and sustainable
financing for Africa-led peace support operations, to
ensure that the AU and regional mechanisms will be
able to plan and conduct peace support operations.
Substantial support has been provided to capacity-
building at the regional and subregional levels, as well
as to specific African-led peace operations, including
in Darfur, Somalia and the Central African Republic.
These operations have been supported by the Peace
Facility for Africa, through which €350 million has
already been committed, and by bilateral contributions
of EU member States. Furthermore, we are working
with the Group of Eight (G-8) and other members of
the international community to contribute to the
funding of African-led peace support operations.
A culture of prevention is indeed gaining ground,
as is the understanding of the need to strengthen and
support the tools used when responding to situations
that could potentially lead to violence. In parallel,
more attention has been given to addressing the root
causes of conflict. The sooner we act to prevent
conflict, the greater the chances of success.
The EU recognizes the importance of different
conflict prevention tools, as highlighted in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2008/18). The use of quiet
diplomacy and preventive mediation, such as the
Mediation Support Unit of the Department for Political
Affairs, as well as the effective use of sanctions and the
Secretary-General’s good offices, are essential in de-
escalating potential violent conflicts.
The European Union believes that it is essential
to include civil society in conflict prevention, as it
promotes encouraging links between civil society and
Government, as well as local ownership. Moreover,
women should play a positive role in conflict
prevention, and they are still underrepresented in
formal stages of conflict prevention. Similarly, the
implementation of resolution 1612 (2005) on children
affected by armed conflict continues to require further
application.
The European Union considers the Peacebuilding
Commission to be an important achievement of the
United Nations reform process. We welcome the
engagement the Commission has shown in Burundi and
Sierra Leone in the first year of operation, and
welcome the placing of Guinea-Bissau on its agenda.
Through the European Development Fund and other
European Commission instruments, the EU plays a
major role in assisting those countries in meeting their
peacebuilding challenges. The recent launch of the
European Security and Defence Policy mission in
support of security sector reform in Guinea-Bissau
further reaffirms the EU’s readiness to use its full
policy mix of instruments in support of the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
The European Union remains committed to
international justice, which is particularly relevant in
conflict areas. We firmly believe that there can be no
impunity, in particular for the most serious crimes, and
that there can be no long-standing peace without
justice.
While the primary responsibility for conflict
prevention rests with Member States, the international
community is crucial in providing much-needed
support, especially through regional and subregional
organizations. The recent support provided by the
United Nations and the EU to such organizations in
their efforts to improve relations between political
parties in Kenya, as well as ongoing international and
regional efforts in dealing with humanitarian and
security situations such as those in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Sudan and Somalia, only
reaffirm the need to further cooperation with regional
organizations.
S/PV.5868 (Resumption 1)
1908-30700
The European Union remains very concerned
about the political situation in Zimbabwe and will
continue to closely monitor the situation on the ground
and support efforts towards ensuring democracy,
stability, economic recovery and respect for human
rights. The European Union supports the call launched
at the special summit of the Southern Africa
Development Community for the expeditious release of
the presidential election results, in accordance with the
due process of law. It reiterates its concern at the
prolonged and unexplained delay in releasing the
presidential results, which is undermining the
credibility of the process.
In conclusion, I would like to thank South Africa
for its leadership in convening this debate. Let me
reaffirm that it is a priority for the European Union to
continue providing its expertise and resources to peace
and stability in Africa as a partner of both the United
Nations and the African Union.
The President: I now call on His Excellency
Mr. Vanu Gopala Menon, Permanent Representative of
Singapore.
Mr. Menon (Singapore): I am making this
statement on behalf of the 10 States members of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
Today, we live in a more complex and
interconnected world, with many new actors on the
international stage and more variables and alignments
to consider. While the threat of global war has receded,
there has been an increase in the number of smaller
conflicts. Those are often asymmetric, low-intensity
and diffused. It has become a messier world. The
situation presents new challenges to global peace and
security. Obviously, the United Nations has a crucial
role to play, but in a globalized world regional
cooperation can also play a key role. Even the United
Nations Charter recognizes the role that regional
arrangements can play in helping the United Nations to
achieve its objectives.
ASEAN and the African Union (AU) are
examples of regional organizations that have helped to
build and protect regional peace and security. We note
that many ASEAN members have long-standing
historical ties with Africa. Since 1955, the Bandung
Asian-African Conference has promoted the Bandung
spirit of solidarity, friendship and cooperation between
Asia and Africa. That spirit was reaffirmed by
President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa on behalf of
the African Union at the eighth ASEAN summit in
Cambodia in November 2002. President Mbeki not
only recalled the historical roots of cooperation
between Asia and Africa, but he also commended
ASEAN’s programmes in South-South cooperation and
its determined efforts to promote a region free of
nuclear weapons and terrorism.
In response, ASEAN leaders found much
common ground with African aspirations and
acknowledged the need for greater interaction between
ASEAN and the AU. They acknowledged the need for
greater interaction between the two regional
organizations, including a possible meeting between
the two secretariats. They also agreed to take steps to
promote stronger ties between Asia and Africa,
including convening an ASEAN-New Partnership for
Africa’s Development conference.
That idea was soon followed by the Asian-
African Subregional Organizations Conference
(AASROC) process, which was initiated in Bandung,
Indonesia, in 2003. A second AASROC was held in
Durban, South Africa, in 2004. In 2005, an Asia-Africa
Summit was held in Bandung, commemorating the
golden jubilee of the Bandung spirit. At the Summit,
the leaders of the Asian and African countries adopted
a declaration on the New Asian-African Strategic
Partnership to serve as a framework for building
stronger links between Asia and Africa covering three
broad areas of partnership — political solidarity,
economic cooperation and sociocultural relations. The
Strategic Partnership would address issues of common
concern, such as armed conflicts, weapons of mass
destruction, transnational organized crime and
terrorism, which are fundamental to ensuring peace,
stability and security. In that respect, ASEAN looks
forward to the further strengthening of cooperation
with the AU.
As a regional organization, the AU serves as a
key forum for African States to interact and cooperate
with each other to promote such common objectives as
good governance, sustainable development, and peace
and stability. For example, AU peacekeepers have been
deployed to areas such as Burundi, Somalia, the
Comoros and Darfur. We note that a mutually
beneficial AU-United Nations partnership has grown
over the years and continues to serve as a good
example of how regional organizations can positively
contribute to the maintenance of international peace
S/PV.5868 (Resumption 1)
08-3070020
and security. ASEAN supports all efforts to strengthen
the AU-United Nations partnership.
On our part, ASEAN has evolved into a
multifaceted organization with cooperation in many
fields. A shared sense of destiny and community
motivated us to conclude the ASEAN Charter last year.
The Charter reflects our common vision and
commitment to the development of an ASEAN
community as a region of lasting peace and stability,
sustained economic growth, shared prosperity and
social progress. It will remake ASEAN into a more
effective and rules-based organization in today’s
rapidly changing global landscape.
ASEAN has always regarded economic
cooperation as a key factor to achieving peace and
prosperity in the region. In that regard, our leaders
adopted an ASEAN economic community blueprint last
year to integrate the 10 ASEAN economies into one
single market and production base. We will also be
developing similar blueprints for our other two
pillars — political security and sociocultural
cooperation. For example, within ASEAN, we have
recently instituted the ASEAN defence ministers
meeting to further enhance mutual trust and confidence
among our defence establishments and to explore
practical and concrete cooperation. That allows us to
actively address non-traditional and transborder
security concerns among our members and with
external partners.
In conclusion, allow me to express ASEAN’s
appreciation to the AU and the United Nations for the
growing collaboration over the years. As observed by
President Mbeki in 2002, the potential for ASEAN and
the AU to enhance mutual understanding and
cooperation is significant. As for ASEAN-United
Nations cooperation, that has existed since our
establishment in 1967. We are pleased that ASEAN
acquired formal observer status in the United Nations
in 2006, and concluded a memorandum of
understanding on ASEAN-United Nations cooperation
the following year. Those moves reaffirm the mutual
commitment between our regional grouping and the
United Nations. ASEAN looks forward to enhanced
cooperation with both the AU and the United Nations
in working towards preserving international peace and
security and promoting sustainable development.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Yahya Mahmassani, Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States.
Mr. Mahmassani (League of Arab States) (spoke
in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I should also like to
commend your initiative to convene this debate to
enhance the Security Council’s role in strengthening
the relationship between the United Nations and
regional organizations, in particular the African Union,
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
I take this opportunity to express our appreciation
to your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
the Russian Federation, for his successful presidency
of the Council last month.
In view of the geographical and historical ties
between the African Union (AU) and the League of
Arab States, I want to stress the importance of
horizontal cooperation among regional organizations.
This is exemplified by the distinguished record of
cooperation between the Arab League and the AU.
Eighty per cent of Arab League citizens reside on the
African continent, and 50 per cent of the League’s
member States are also members of the African Union.
Moreover, 20 per cent of African Union member States
are members of the League of Arab States. This unique
situation must be taken into account in considering the
advantages offered by horizontal cooperation between
the two organizations.
In the light of their common responsibilities and
the interrelated interests of their member States,
regional organizations possess distinct advantages that
enable them to address regional challenges and threats
to international peace and security. These include their
proximity to conflict areas and their knowledge and
well-informed views on the specifics of the conflicts.
The great challenges of the first years of the
twenty-first century have resulted in stronger
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in the implementation of the relevant
resolutions and statements of the Security Council and
of the provisions of the 2005 World Summit Outcome
(General Assembly resolution 60/1).
In the framework of the shared responsibility of
the United Nations and regional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security and of
S/PV.5868 (Resumption 1)
2108-30700
the geographic and demographic interrelationship
between the Arab League and the African Union, the
two organizations have been taking positive steps in
the settlement of conflict issues. Effective cooperation
between our organizations has proven to be a viable
approach to resolving a number of crises and other
issues, along with strengthened cooperation between
the United Nations and our two organizations with a
view to safeguarding security and stability throughout
the African continent. We have witnessed this in the
Sudan peace negotiations and in the process of finding
a way to resolve the Darfur crisis, as well as in the
effort to attain security and stability in Somalia and,
more recently, in the Union of the Comoros. This
embodies the concept of tripartite cooperation among
the United Nations, the League of Arab States and the
African Union.
The Charter of the United Nations gives the
Security Council primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. But
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations has become inevitable; it is at the heart
of the interests and the policies of regional
organizations, owing to the positive and effective role
those organizations play in addressing regional issues
and in the peaceful settlement of disputes. Regional
organizations make an effective contribution to
strengthening United Nations capacities, especially in
the spheres of preventive diplomacy, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and exchanges of expertise.
The Security Council should undertake effective
cooperation with regional organizations, including the
African Union, in order to bolster its important role in
the maintenance of international peace and security and
in conflict prevention. It should define guiding
principles for the expansion of dialogue and
cooperation between the United Nations Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council in order to foster the political will needed to
maintain peace and to implement the relevant
resolutions.
In the context of strengthening the partnership
between the African Union and the Security Council in
the maintenance of international peace and security, the
Council must be more responsive and must make a
greater effort to achieve the partnership we are seeking
and to overcome the challenges it is facing. This would
be facilitated by early warning systems to address and
manage crises before they escalate, as well as by a
process by which to allocate responsibilities and by an
expansion of the scope of AU-Security Council
cooperation and consultation.
Enhancing the regional dimension of
peacemaking and strengthening the leading role of the
AU in conflict prevention and resolution in Africa are
of great importance, and the Security Council must
provide logistical and technical support to AU member
States as they work to maintain the peace in post-
conflict situations. It is also important to improve
coordination among various African initiatives, to
provide peacekeeping training and to establish regional
centres in order to prevent crises from recurring and to
enhance the financial and administrative capacity of
the AU with respect to peacekeeping operations, the
protection of civilians and the delivery of humanitarian
aid to those affected by conflict.
Issues related to international peace and security
are closely linked with those related to development
and economic growth in Africa; thus, the United
Nations must not view African issues in strictly
security or political terms. These are economic and
development issues as well, and they require greater
political will to provide further support to the AU,
enabling it to address and overcome the challenges
facing it, to make progress in the implementation of the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development and to free
the continent from conflict.
In addition, cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in the maintenance
of international peace and security must be enhanced in
the framework of United Nations reform. That means
reforming its institutions and improving its
performance to equip it better to confront the
challenges facing the international community.
The President: I now call on His Excellency
Mr. Yukio Takasu, Permanent Representative of Japan.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): First of all, I would like to
express my deep appreciation to you, Mr. President,
and, through you, to all the other members of the
Council for giving me the opportunity to address this
high-level meeting in my capacity as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission. The Peacebuilding
Commission is actively engaged in effectively
supporting post-conflict peacebuilding efforts, in the
belief that the measure of its success is real impact on
the ground.
S/PV.5868 (Resumption 1)
08-3070022
In accordance with its mandate, the
Peacebuilding Commission is striving to marshal
support and resources for peacebuilding and recovery
in post-conflict countries and to improve coordination
within and outside the United Nations system in an
integrated manner. We have been trying our best to
enhance cooperation with partners beyond the United
Nations system, such as regional and subregional
organizations, international financial institutions,
bilateral donors and civil society.
One of the key observations from our intensive
work is that all peacebuilding efforts require
addressing the regional as well as the local dimensions.
As most conflicts have significant regional dimensions,
it is indispensable to engage regional and subregional
organizations in the process. Issues such as the illicit
trade in arms and narcotics trafficking cannot be
addressed without coordinated regional and
international efforts, including effective border control
among the countries in a given region. Youth
unemployment and a lack of economic opportunities
are widely recognized as a common challenge to post-
conflict societies. This problem also requires a regional
approach, as unemployed youth often move from one
place to another in search of employment
opportunities, including, sometimes, as soldiers. The
Peacebuilding Commission has analysed those issues
and has offered practical guidance in our country-
specific activities and in the Working Group on
Lessons Learned.
The Peacebuilding Commission truly values the
ongoing efforts of regional and subregional
organizations. These organizations play an important
role in the areas of conflict prevention and
peacebuilding. At the same time, their activities are
more effective when they are fully integrated into, and
well coordinated with, the overall work of the
Commission. Successful peacebuilding requires the
sustained engagement of multifaceted stakeholders
with diverse expertise and specialties. I recognize the
essential added value that the Peacebuilding
Commission can provide with its convening role of
mobilizing the dedicated efforts of all stakeholders.
The founding resolutions of the Peacebuilding
Commission refer directly to Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter and thereby provide a strong
rationale for close collaboration between the
Commission and regional and subregional
organizations. The Commission will explore practical
and flexible ways to cooperate and make a concrete
difference on the ground.
The first three countries to be considered by the
Commission, namely, Burundi, Sierra Leone and
Guinea-Bissau, are all in Africa. As a member of all
three country-specific configurations of the
Commission, the African Union has been an effective
and active contributor to the Council’s deliberations,
both in New York and on the ground. We value and
appreciate the Union’s effective partnership. In that
connection, I would like to suggest two ways of
promoting more enhanced collaboration between the
African Union and the Peacebuilding Commission.
First, the African Union may wish to have more
active inputs in the process of drafting and
implementing the integrated peacebuilding strategies of
the Peacebuilding Commission and to align itself more
closely with them. The strategies are articulated in such
a way as to minimize the risk of relapse into conflict,
and they thus also contribute to conflict prevention.
The integrated strategies elaborated for Burundi and
Sierra Leone serve as a good basis for cooperation
activities by the African Union.
Secondly, we see great potential in harmonizing
the policy framework on post-conflict reconstruction
and development adopted by the African Union’s
Executive Council and the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which take similar approaches to
promoting post-conflict peacebuilding. The
Peacebuilding Support Office is engaged in active
collaboration with the AU’s subcluster on the policy
framework, which is expected to produce tangible
benefits for both the Peacebuilding Commission and
the African Union Peace and Security Council. Those
efforts will also facilitate the development of linkages
between post-conflict reconstruction and development.
In conclusion, I can tell the Council that we are
making great strides in fostering close collaboration
between the Peacebuilding Commission and regional
and subregional organizations, starting with the African
Union, to promote peacebuilding and conflict
prevention in Africa. I intend to consult further with
members of the Commission on how it can best address
that need. The Commission’s planned meeting
tomorrow afternoon with the Chairperson of the
African Union Peace and Security Council will provide
a useful opportunity to that end. I look forward to
fruitful discussions on that occasion.
S/PV.5868 (Resumption 1)
2308-30700
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Leslie Kojo Christian, Permanent
Representative of Ghana.
Mr. Christian (Ghana): I wish to congratulate
South Africa on presiding over the Security Council for
the month of April and on organizing this debate. I
wish to convey to the Council fraternal greetings from
His Excellency President J. A. Kufuor, who was
prevented from coming to New York by pressing
matters of State and the forthcoming twelfth session of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, to be held in Accra.
Ghana appreciates the continued support of the
United Nations and the international community aimed
at the resolution of the conflicts in Africa, including
the deployment of two thirds of all United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Africa, as well as the
commendable contributions of relief agencies towards
the alleviation of the plight of persons displaced by
conflicts. While there has been significant progress in
the resolution of some conflicts in Africa, the current
situation in other parts of the continent demands our
most urgent attention.
The role of the United Nations remains crucial in
Africa’s quest for a new era of peace and stability.
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter, which
explicitly prescribes a role for regional organizations in
the maintenance of international peace and security,
dictates the need for a close and symbiotic relationship
between the United Nations and the African Union,
given the current situation on our continent.
In that connection, it is my delegation’s view that,
if we are to ensure more effective resolution of
conflicts in Africa, there should be a calculated and
conscious strategy aimed at promoting the
interdependence of the United Nations Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council. That requires, among other things, full
implementation of the 10-year capacity-building
framework for cooperation concluded between the
Secretary-General and the African Union Commission
in November 2006.
The lack of resources, coupled with other factors,
has undermined the deployment of African Union
peacekeeping operations in Africa. Therefore, we urge
the United Nations Security Council and the
international community to step up their efforts to
address the critical resource gaps.
As recent reports of the Secretary-General have
shown, the cost of prevention is far less than the cost
of resolving conflicts. Therefore, the need to pursue a
strategy of prevention, which entails tackling the
underlying causes of conflict and instability, should
receive the priority attention of the international
community. To that end, we call upon the international
community, in particular the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, to actively support the
African Post-Conflict Reconstruction Policy
Framework, adopted in 2006, which focuses on
tackling the root causes of conflict and thereby
preventing the occurrence or recurrence of crises.
In that regard, we acknowledge the important
contribution of the Peacebuilding Commission, of
which Ghana is a current Vice-Chair, to the ongoing
efforts to rebuild Burundi, Sierra Leone and Guinea-
Bissau, aimed at ensuring sustainable peace in those
countries, which remain on the agendas of both the
Security Council and the Commission.
Africa’s development blueprint, the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD),
reaffirms the commitment of African States to the
tenets of good governance and democracy, underpinned
by the promotion of economic and social justice and
scrupulous respect for human rights and the rule of
law, as prerequisites for durable peace and security.
Ghana is proud to be among the African countries
that have so far subscribed to the African Peer Review
Mechanism in the context of NEPAD — a process by
which the quality of national governance in our
country is subjected to external scrutiny. It is our firm
conviction that it is only through such constructive
processes that Africa will emerge stronger and more
resilient. We are optimistic that the goals of the African
renaissance, namely, peace, stability and prosperity,
will be attained sooner rather than later throughout the
entire continent of Africa.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Francis K. Butagira, Permanent
Representative of Uganda.
Mr. Butagira (Uganda): Let me take this
opportunity to thank the South African presidency of
the Security Council for organizing this important
debate. My delegation is also extremely pleased at the
tireless efforts of the Secretary-General, who has
devoted so much time to the cause of global peace and
security.
S/PV.5868 (Resumption 1)
08-3070024
In June last year in Addis Ababa, the African
Union (AU) Peace and Security Council and the United
Nations Security Council issued a joint communiqué
by which they committed themselves to the
development of a stronger and more structured
relationship between the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council on conflict prevention,
management and resolution, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, including post-conflict reconstruction
and development. They further agreed to strengthen the
relationships between all the relevant structures of the
United Nations Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council.
We encourage close consultations between the
African Union and this important organ of the United
Nations, whose primary responsibility is the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Africa is inspired by the spirit of collective
security of the Charter of the United Nations. It was
out of that fundamental conviction and commitment
that the AU and the AU Peace and Security Council
were born to oversee Africa’s regional peace and
security concerns. We firmly believe that collective
security should be applied equitably, without
discrimination.
To millions of Africans, tangible improvements
relating to development, security and the enhancement
of human security remain pivotal. That is why we are
encouraged by the report of the Secretary-General on
the relationship between the United Nations and
regional organizations, in particular the African Union,
in the maintenance of international peace and security
(S/2008/186). The operations of regional organizations
and their relations with the United Nations must be
predicated on the principle of multilateralism. Hence,
the efforts of the United Nations Security Council and
the AU Peace and Security Council are mutually
reinforcing. However, the Security Council has primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
The effectiveness of the AU’s Peace and Security
Council is premised on three principles: first, the
ability to enforce agreed norms among AU member
States, secondly, the will to harmonize Africa’s
regional security arrangements and, thirdly, the
commitment by African Governments to provide
sustainable and predictable financing for AU peace
initiatives.
Regrettably, for this new and struggling
organization that is grappling with a multiplicity of
problems, there are deficiencies in all three areas. That
is why we have come here to make an earnest plea that
peacekeeping operations undertaken by the AU be
covered by the regular budget of the United Nations.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Rwanda has made
reference to that particular aspect, as did President
Kikwete of Tanzania this morning.
The international community must demonstrate
similar concern and generosity to Africa as it did with
regard to Bosnia, Kosovo, East Timor and Afghanistan.
For instance, in 2000, while $2 billion was pledged for
the reconstruction of the Balkans, barely $150 million
was pledged for Sierra Leone. Thirty thousand NATO
troops were deployed in Kosovo, as contrasted with
16,700 United Nations troops in the enormous country
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The AU
Mission in Darfur was grossly underfunded, and it had
a shortfall of $200 million in July 2005. The United
Nations is dragging its feet in assuming its full
responsibility to deploy in Somalia.
In order to allay fears that Africa is a breeding
ground for terrorists, concerted efforts must be made to
stem the tide of State failure. That means that the
United Nations must invest not only in governance and
capacity-building but also in enabling African States to
address basic socio-economic problems such as the
provision of education and health services. Poverty,
alienation and dehumanizing conditions can lead to
desperation and terrorism.
Another issue of special concern to my delegation
is the need for the conclusion of a memorandum of
understanding between the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission and the AU and the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), to
establish a symbiotic relationship in the post-conflict
and reconstruction areas. Such a relationship should be
based on complementarity and the avoidance of
duplication. They should enter into mutual relations to
address the multiple challenges that war-affected
societies face. They should establish a network of
institutions and mechanisms to guide, plan, monitor
and evaluate post-conflict reconstruction efforts in
Africa, to make them coherent and practical on the
ground. The Commission should avoid being
politicized, lest it become irrelevant. There is a need
for a programmatic and well-funded United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission.
S/PV.5868 (Resumption 1)
2508-30700
In conclusion, there is an overwhelming need for
the Commission to deepen its relationship with the AU,
NEPAD and other organs.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Araya Desta, Permanent Representative
of Eritrea.
Mr. Desta (Eritrea): At the outset, I wish to thank
your delegation, Madam President, for convening this
important meeting. I also wish to express my
delegation’s profound appreciation for being invited to
this debate on peace and security in Africa, which has
been organized by South Africa in its capacity as
President of the Security Council. My country holds
this issue dear. President Isaias Afwerki has expressed
his regret for not being able to attend this meeting due
to other earlier commitments.
In the interest of time, I will briefly highlight the
views of my Government on certain critical issues
facing Africa. As many speakers who have spoken
before me have highlighted the importance of
improving the institutional cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union, consistent with
General Assembly resolution 61/296 of 17 September
2007, I shall limit my statement to a few elements.
The challenge is to build on existing cooperation
in a manner that tackles crises and conflicts on the
ground by means of real tangible commitments: first,
by addressing African priorities; secondly, by having a
common political and security assessment of a given
conflict situation; thirdly, by being able to clearly
define the role of each institution; fourthly, by
initiating joint operations on clearly defined objectives;
and, fifthly, by developing a comprehensive strategy to
resolve conflicts and other pertinent issues. All of that
requires strong political and financial commitments on
the part of both institutions to resolve many of ongoing
conflicts.
As the agenda of the Security Council
demonstrates, Africa is the region that suffers most
from intra-State and inter-State conflicts. Both the
United Nations and the African Union are engaged in
addressing many of those conflicts. Most of the
conflicts continue to cause loss of life and
immeasurable suffering to the people of our continent.
The progress made in some conflict situations is
laudable and promising. Yet, in others the response has
been slow, necessitating that efforts be accelerated in
order to end the suffering and frustration of the peoples
affected.
Eritrea, which has risen from the ashes of war
itself, is making an effort to contribute to peace and
stability in the Sudan and Chad. It remains committed
to regional peace and stability. In the same spirit and
with the same objective as in southern and eastern parts
of the Sudan, Eritrea has been working unreservedly in
partnership with the United Nations, the African Union
and neighbouring countries to bring all stakeholders to
the negotiating table, with a view to reaching and
concluding a peace agreement in Darfur.
It is important to assess every conflict situation
objectively, on its own merits. Regional peace and
security are maintained not by circumventing peace
agreements when their implementation is being
prevented, but by maintaining the integrity of those
agreements and by accepting and respecting the
authority of the bodies empowered by peace accords to
carry out their mandates. When a peace treaty is
breached and international law is violated, the Security
Council, as the United Nations body empowered to
maintain international peace and security, should
exercise its moral and legal obligation to bring the
parties into compliance, in the interests of peace and
security. The African Union must also add its voice and
moral authority to ensure that the rule of law is
respected.
I would not want to conclude my statement
without concurring with the views expressed by many
that the support given to the African Union should be
predictable and sustainable and that more time and
resources should be devoted to preventing conflicts in
our region.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Indonesia, Italy, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Panama, Russian Federation, South
Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Viet Nam
S/PV.5868 (Resumption 1)
08-3070026
The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1809 (2008).
I wish to thank all the participants for joining
together to make this meeting possible. My thanks go
to all the heads of State and Government, ministers and
other representatives, as well as to the Secretary-
General.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.
