United Nations S/PV.6195
Security Council
Sixty-fourth year
6195thmeeting
Wednesday, 30 September 2009, 10 a.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.
09-53396 (E)
*0953396*
President: Ms. Clinton . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (United States of America)
Members: Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mayr-Harting
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Yoda
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Zhang Yesui
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Urbina
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Vilović
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Joyandet
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Takasu
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Shalgham
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Heller
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Churkin
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Apakan
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Rugunda
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . Sir John Sawers
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Le Luong Minh
Agenda
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council resolution
1820 (2008) (S/2009/362)
S/PV.6195
09-533962
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant
to Security Council resolution 1820 (2008)
(S/2009/362)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Estonia, Finland, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Panama, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and the United Republic of Tanzania, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I wish
to acknowledge the presence in the Chamber of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Cooperation
of Burkina Faso, His Excellency Mr. Bedouma Alain
Yoda, and the Minister of State for Cooperation and
Francophonie of France, His Excellency Mr. Alain
Joyandet.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/489, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Albania, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada,
Chile, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Poland, Portugal,
the Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Senegal,
Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United
Republic of Tanzania and the United States of America.
I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2009/362, containing the report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1820 (2008).
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Viet Nam
The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1888 (2009).
I now have the privilege of making a statement in
my capacity as Secretary of State of the United States
of America.
I am very grateful to speak before the Security
Council on this important issue. I want to thank
everyone who has worked very hard to reach this point
S/PV.6195
309-53396
on this resolution and, of course, to have it adopted
unanimously. We are here to address an issue that has
received too little attention, not only in this Chamber
over the past six decades, but also, I would suggest, in
all of our halls of Government across the world. It is an
important issue that goes to the core of our
commitment to ensure the safety of the United Nations
Member States and their citizens.
Under the United Nations Charter, the 15
members of this Council bear primary responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security.
Satisfying that responsibility includes our protecting
the lives and physical security of all people, including
the women who comprise half the planet’s population.
This responsibility is particularly acute in
circumstances where peace and stability are
challenged.
Even though women and children are rarely
responsible for initiating armed conflict, they are often
war’s most vulnerable and violated victims. The
resolution we have adopted today represents a step
forward in our global efforts to end violence
perpetrated against women and children in conflict
zones, and it builds on two prior Security Council
resolutions — resolution 1325 (2000), which calls on
all parties in conflicts to respect women’s rights and
increase their participation in peace negotiations and
post-conflict reconstruction efforts; and resolution
1820 (2008), which affirms the ambitions set out in
resolution 1325 (2000) and establishes a clear link
between maintaining international peace and security
and preventing and responding to sexual violence used
as a tactic of war to target civilians. Yet, despite these
actions by the Security Council, violence against
women and girls in conflict-related situations has not
diminished; in fact, in some cases it has escalated.
Reading the headlines, one might think that the
use of rape as a tactic of war happens only occasionally
or in a few places, such as the Democratic Republic of
the Congo or the Sudan. That would be bad enough,
but the reality is much worse. We have seen rape used
as a tactic of war before in Bosnia, Burma, Sri Lanka
and elsewhere. In too many countries and in too many
cases, the perpetrators of this violence are not
punished, and so this impunity encourages further
attacks.
Last month, I travelled to Goma in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where over 1,100
rapes are reported every month. I met with survivors of
sexual violence, and the physical and emotional
damage to individual women and their families from
these attacks cannot be quantified, nor can the toll on
their societies. The dehumanizing nature of sexual
violence does not harm just a single individual, a single
family or even a single village or a single group; it
shreds the fabric that weaves us together as human
beings. It endangers families and communities, erodes
social and political stability, and undermines economic
progress. We need to understand that it holds all of us
back.
Also, our failure as an international body to
respond concretely to this global problem erodes our
collective effectiveness. So we must act now to end
this crisis, not only to protect vulnerable people and
promote human security, but also to uphold the
legitimacy of this body.
The international community has made progress.
Many peacekeeping mandates now include Security
Council requests for strengthened measures to prevent
and respond to sexual violence. In Chad and the Sudan,
United Nations peacekeepers have clear instructions
underscoring their responsibility to protect local
populations against sexual and gender-based violence.
I recently met with United Nations troops in Liberia,
who provide an excellent example of the steps a United
Nations mission can take, both through its own actions
and in cooperation with the host Government, to
prevent violence against women and girls. It is also
very important that the United Nations Mission in
Liberia includes an all-women police unit from India.
That all-women police unit has helped to motivate
more Liberian women to become police officers, and
the Mission has launched a joint United Nations-
Liberian campaign against rape.
These steps are essential but, alone, they are not
sufficient. Resolution 1888 (2009) identifies specific
steps that the United Nations and Member States can
and should take to improve the Organization’s response
to sexual violence committed during situations of
armed conflict. It calls on the Secretary-General to
appoint a special representative to lead, coordinate and
advocate efforts to end sexual violence. We expect that
person to engage at high levels with civilian and
military leaders to spearhead the United Nations
activities on this front. It also calls on the Secretary-
General to rapidly deploy a team of experts to work
with Governments to strengthen the rule of law,
S/PV.6195
09-533964
address impunity and enhance accountability, while
drawing attention to the full range of legal venues that
can be brought into play, including domestic,
international and mixed courts that bring local and
international judges and prosecutors together to
strengthen local justice systems.
We must also recognize that ending conflicts
outright is the most certain path to ending sexual
violence in conflicts. So pursuing peace and successful
post-conflict transitions should be our highest priority.
In States where conflict is taking place and in those
that are moving beyond it, local police must receive
better training, the rule of law must be strengthened,
and survivors must be ensured full access to justice and
protection throughout the judicial process. We envision
that the team of experts called for in the resolution will
help us to strengthen initiatives like those.
Beyond the measures outlined in the resolution,
the Security Council should take additional steps.
Protecting women and children should be a critical
priority for all troops who wear the blue helmet. To
reflect this, new and renewed peacekeeping mandates
should include language condemning sexual violence
and giving further guidance to peacekeeping missions
to work with local authorities to end it. We must seek
to ensure that our respective military and police forces,
especially those that will participate in peacekeeping
missions, develop the expertise to prevent and respond
to violence against women and children. This will be
helped by increasing the number of women who serve
in United Nations peacekeeping missions. When I
visited the Mission in Goma, I was very impressed at
how integrated it was in every way — staff from every
country, every kind of person represented, and many
women in the leadership as well as in the ranks.
Let us not forget that it is often women who lead
the call for peace in communities shattered by
violence. We have seen women in this role from
Liberia, Rwanda and Northern Ireland to Guatemala.
Even when they suffer terrible losses in conflicts they
had no part in starting, women have the will to reach
across divisions, find common ground and foster
understanding. As they seek peace, so must we by
making sure they are part of all efforts. So I urge
United Nations Member States to make sure that their
foreign assistance programmes include measures to
prevent and respond to violence against women and
children and to ensure that women are included in
designing and implementing those programmes.
In his speech to the General Assembly last week,
President Obama challenged nations of the world to
assume responsibility for the challenges confronting
us.
Certainly, the challenge of sexual violence in
conflict cannot and should not be separated from the
broader security issues confronting the Council. It is
time for all of us to assume our responsibility to go
beyond condemning this behaviour and take concrete
steps to end it, to make it socially unacceptable, to
recognize that it is not cultural; it is criminal. And the
more we say that, over and over and over again, the
more we will change attitudes and create peer pressure
and the conditions for the elimination of this violation.
When I was in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, I was told of an old proverb that says, “No
matter how long the night, the day is sure to come”.
Well, I hope our work today, and every day going
forward, will hasten the time when thousands of
women around the world will be able to feel
comfortable in walking the streets of their cities and
villages freely again, to work outside their homes,
collect firewood and water without fear, play with their
children, spend time with their husbands and enjoy all
the blessings of life in freedom, peace and security.
That is our dream for a better future for them and
for us, and I thank this body for the strong commitment
that this resolution represents.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council. I kind of like being a president, so this may
go on a little longer than anticipated.
I now invite the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to take the floor.
The Secretary-General: I am pleased to address
the Security Council again on the subject of resolution
1820 (2008).
At the outset, Madam President, I would like to
welcome you again to the United Nations. I would like
also to commend your leadership and commitment on
all the major goals and ideals of the United Nations,
including this very important issue of women and
peace and security.
Despite some progress in responding to sexual
violence in armed conflicts, the deliberate targeting of
civilians continues unabated, including on a
widespread or systematic basis. Parties to armed
S/PV.6195
509-53396
conflict continue to use sexual violence with efficient
brutality. The perpetrators generally operate with
impunity.
States and other parties to conflict must uphold
their international legal obligations. The international
community must do more to prevent violence, protect
individuals, punish perpetrators and provide redress to
victims.
With its resolution 1888 (2009) today, the
Security Council is sending an unequivocal message —
a call to action. It is an ambitious platform for
intensifying this struggle. It builds on resolution 1820
(2008), which itself set a important precedent by
recognizing the links between sexual violence and
sustainable peace and security. I am fully committed to
ensuring that the provisions of both resolutions are
implemented, in partnership with all relevant
stakeholders. I will continue to ensure effective follow-
up by the United Nations system.
The Security Council’s continued engagement
will be crucial. My recent report to the Council
(S/2009/362) offered a series of mutually reinforcing
recommendations for action.
Sexual violence — in armed conflict or, indeed,
at any time — should have no place and find no haven
in the world. We must all do our part to fight and end
discrimination against women and girls. The new
gender entity recently agreed by the General Assembly
should strengthen our work for women’s
empowerment; I have asked the Deputy Secretary-
General to lead efforts to put that entity in place.
I will also continue to do everything in my power
to advance gender equality among United Nations
staff, including in my senior appointments.
Women’s empowerment must be at the heart of
our global work for peace and development.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement and for his support.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Bedouma Alain Yoda, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Regional Cooperation of Burkina Faso.
Mr. Yoda (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): My
delegation is grateful to the Security Council
presidency for the convening of this important meeting
of the Council, at which the Council adopted resolution
1888 (2009) to follow up the implementation of
resolution 1820 (2008), on sexual violence in areas of
armed conflict.
We greatly appreciate the presence among us of
the Secretary-General and his participation in this
important discussion, as well as the valuable and
unequivocal message he has sent on this topic. The
special attention that the Security Council has devoted
to the fate of women and girls living in areas of armed
conflict reflects the international community’s
awareness of the harmful consequences of sexual
violence against women and girls in conflict areas.
The momentum generated by the adoption of
resolution 1820 (2008) has sounded the alarm about
this scourge against the dignity of women, which
undermines their ability to contribute to the
maintenance of peace and social stability. The situation
is grave: especially in conflict areas in Africa, in
particular the Sudan and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, acts of sexual violence against women and
girls in areas of armed conflict are taking on a
worrisome magnitude, which the international
community can no longer tolerate.
Such acts of violence against women fuel hatred
among the warring parties and prevent the full
participation of women in the process of post-conflict
reconstruction.
The resolution the Council has just adopted under
your leadership, Madam President, will enable us to
equip the international community and the protagonists
in armed conflict to better understand the consequences
of this human tragedy and to shoulder their
responsibility to protect human rights during times of
conflict.
Burkina Faso has always endorsed all initiatives
aimed at ensuring respect for human dignity, in
particular the dignity of women, and at establishing a
peaceful society free of all serious violations of human
rights. In accordance with the ideals of peace and
freedom set out in the Charter of the United Nations,
Burkina Faso unreservedly supports the content of the
resolution we have just adopted and reaffirms its
thanks to the delegation of the United States and other
delegations for their effort to achieve a balanced
consensus text which can contribute to eradicating
sexual violence in armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Alain Joyandet, Minister of State for
Cooperation and Francophonie of France.
S/PV.6195
09-533966
Mr. Joyandet (France) (spoke in French): I
welcome the convening, on the initiative of the United
States presidency of the Security Council, of this
public debate on the issue of women and peace and
security, focusing on the fight against sexual violence
in armed conflict. The worldwide fight against this
scourge is a priority.
Sadly, right now the topic is a timely one. During
the events of 28 September in Conakry, Guinea, many
people were killed and women were raped in the streets
of the city. France would like to alert the Council to the
tragic situation that is currently taking place in
Conakry.
The worldwide fight against this scourge is a
priority of France’s foreign policy. We are delighted by
the commitment of the United States on this issue, and
I in this regard I hail the personal efforts of Hillary
Clinton.
This new resolution marks a decisive step for the
protection of women in armed conflict, nine years after
the Council’s adoption of the groundbreaking
resolution 1325 (2000), and one year after the adoption
of resolution 1820 (2008). It will strengthen the
genuine implementation of those resolution thanks to
its coherent set of provisions.
First of all, the appointment of a special
representative of the Secretary-General to direct the
fight against sexual violence in armed conflict is a
major step forward, aiming to ensure the coherence of
United Nations action with the support of United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict. We
hope that this post will be created as soon as possible.
We would like to see the appointment of a person with
experience in the field and real knowledge of the issues
of sexual violence. This person should also be in a
position to be a voice for the voiceless — that is, the
victims of these atrocities. We hope that the Secretary-
General’s report to identify possible improvements in
the coherence of United Nations action, which will be
put together over the next three months, will permit the
new special representative to gain time when taking up
the post.
Next, the creation of a team of experts charged
with helping Governments in need will help bolster
national authorities with high-level technical expertise
available from within the United Nations or made
available by nations that so desire.
Within the sphere of peacekeeping operations,
newly inaugurated women’s protection advisers, whose
mandate will be to monitor and follow-up on
situations, will complement the actions of gender
counselors. France will take a particular interest in
ensuring the implementation of this measure. It is also
essential that sexual violence be subject to specific
follow-up in the reports on peacekeeping operations
and the in annual report of the Secretary-General,
including information on parties to armed conflict who
commit sexual violence in situations that are on the
Council’s agenda, so as to provide more data and
information, which for the moment remains too
fragmentary.
I hope to have convinced everyone of the
coherence of the set of provisions the Council has
established with this new resolution, which include: the
special representative; the Secretary-General’s report
to be completed within three months, to strengthen the
effectiveness of the United Nations; the team of
experts to better prevent and deal with sexual violence
in States where it is necessary; strengthening the
contribution of peacekeeping operations through the
creation of the post of women’s protection counselors;
and annual reports by the Secretary-General so that the
Council has adequate information, which is an
essential prerequisite for its actions.
Allow me to highlight now France’s commitment
to two complementary elements in this plan: the
mechanism for the protection of children in armed
conflict; and the need for the Council to decide to
impose sanctions where necessary to combat impunity.
First of all, we must make use of the possibilities offered
by the Council’s Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict. This Group makes it possible to consider
problematic situations, to make recommendations and,
in case of persistent non-compliance with its
recommendations by belligerents, to consider adopting
sanctions by the Council. This is a unique mechanism
whose effectiveness on the ground is real.
I welcome the very significant institutional
progress made by the adoption last month of resolution
1882 (2009), which, inter alia, expanded the
monitoring and reporting mechanism of resolution
1612 (2005) to include sexual violence committed
against children, independent of the question of
whether or not child soldiers are present. While this
mechanism applies to children, it can nevertheless
make a useful contribution to combating sexual
S/PV.6195
709-53396
violence against women. Just one figure allows us to
grasp the relevance of such an approach: It is estimated
that 60 per cent of the women raped in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are minors. In this respect,
transparency, cooperation and coordination of efforts
between the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict and the new
special representative of the Secretary-General on
sexual violence and armed conflict will be essential.
We must also accept the idea that without genuine
punishment there can be neither prevention nor
deterrence. Here, France welcomes the work done by
the sanctions committees. Pursuant to the commitment
made in resolution 1820 (2008) the Council must
systematically consider the possibility of including
sexual violence as grounds for sanctions when creating
or reviewing the mandates of these committees. When
the grounds exist, it is up to the experts to cite them.
With this in mind, last March, together with Belgium,
the United Kingdom and the United States, we
supported the inclusion by the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo of four members of the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda on the list of persons subject to
individual sanctions.
Finally, France is pleased that the fight against
sexual violence was subject to particular attention
during the Security Council’s annual visit to Africa in
May. At that time the Security Council successfully
advocated with the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for the prosecution of five
officers accused of sexual violence. The Council must
remain mobilized on this issue.
In conclusion I would like to recall that it is our
responsibility to develop programmes to assist victims,
to offer them care and prospects for rehabilitation and
to work to avoid their stigmatization. Meeting their
needs means that they must be systematically consulted
and involved in all phases of the programmes designed
for them. Members may be assured that France fully
associates itself with and will join in the
implementation of specific projects to assist victims of
rape and other sexual violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
joining us at this important meeting of the Security
Council. We would also like to welcome to the Council
Chamber Mr. Bedouma Alain Yoda, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso, and Mr. Alain
Joyandet, Minister of State for Cooperation and
Francophonie of France.
I would like in particular to welcome you,
Madam Secretary of State, and to acknowledge your
personal commitment and leadership, which have
created renewed impetus for the issue of the protection
of women’s rights and the prevention of all forms of
violence against women. My delegation would also
like to thank the delegation of the United States for
leading negotiations on resolution 1888 (2009), which
has just been adopted.
With the unanimous adoption of that resolution,
the Security Council has reaffirmed its commitment to
the protection of women in armed conflict. The
significant number of delegations that joined in
sponsoring this initiative shows that the international
community is resolved to ensure that women and
children no longer remain the principal victims of the
armed conflicts which, deplorably, are occurring in
many parts of the world.
Council members were able to see for ourselves
the gravity of the acts of sexual violence against
women and children in areas of armed conflict in the
course of our visit to a number of African countries last
May, in particular the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. On that occasion we witnessed the
consequences of these crimes for societies and their
negative impact on efforts to find solutions to crisis
situations and promote an effective process of national
reconciliation. For that reason we wish to reiterate, as
does resolution 1888 (2009), the primary obligation of
all parties to an armed conflict to respect and to
enforce at all times international humanitarian law,
which grants special protection to women and children.
My delegation believes that the establishment of
the post of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict will make it possible to improve the systematic
and comprehensive attention that the United Nations
pays in response to sexual violence in these situations.
This new mandate should work in a coordinated
manner with other United Nations mechanisms and
agencies in order to harness synergies and to prevent
duplication. In particular, there is a broad relationship
S/PV.6195
09-533968
between the objectives of resolution 1888 (2009) and
resolution 1882 (2009), on children and armed conflict,
which was adopted by the Security Council last
August.
These common objectives must be duly explored
with a view to providing comprehensive protection for
all those who, due to their condition, suffer most from
the consequences of armed conflict, that is, women and
children. In the light of the aforementioned, we believe
that the Security Council must also pay close attention
to the ongoing negotiations on a composite gender
entity within the framework of the General Assembly
and decide to review the mandate of the Special
Representative in a reasonable period of time and in
the light of the results of the procedure outlined in
General Assembly resolution 63/311.
While more can be done at the international level
in order to prevent sexual violence in situations of
armed conflict, the eradication of sexual violence will
only be achieved if national capacities among those
States that are addressing situations of conflict are
improved with a view to bringing the perpetrators of
such crimes to justice.
Therefore, one of the most relevant aspects of the
resolution is the identification within the United
Nations of a multidisciplinary team of experts who,
when their assistance is required and with the consent
of the State concerned, can be deployed to the field in
order to work jointly with the Government and the
United Nations system to undertake projects for
technical cooperation to strengthen the rule of law,
prevent impunity and address victims’ needs.
It is clear that currently we have strong tools for
preventing sexual violence in areas of conflict. The
true challenge that we face is making full use of this
array of instruments, if we truly wish to ensure that
more women and children do not fall victim to the
spiral of violence that is caused by armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Kingdom.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I was struck
by the words of the Foreign Minister of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the General Assembly last
week. He said that acts of sexual violence committed
against women and girls in the east of his country
constituted the most shameful and serious crimes
experienced by humanity in the twenty-first century.
Those words were a powerful reminder of the
challenge this Council faces as it takes forward work
on the agenda set last year by resolution 1820 (2008).
Sexual violence is a crime for which individuals
can — and must — be held responsible, however senior
they are. Perpetrators of sexual violence know that one
result of their crime is to destroy local communities and
make lasting peace harder to achieve. That is often their
intention, as continued conflict leaves the men of
violence — and it is invariably men — in a position of
dominance.
You saw that challenge first-hand during your
visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Madam
President. We are grateful for the strong leadership that
you personally and that the United States has given on
this agenda. The Secretary-General’s presence here
today signals his personal engagement. He has taken
up the issue with passion, and I encourage him to
persist.
And as Minister Joyandet reminded us, the
Security Council mission to Africa in May made
forceful representations to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo leadership and we welcome the steps taken
to bring to account officers of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo armed forces who have been involved in
sexual violence.
The United Kingdom welcomes the resolution we
have unanimously adopted today. It further strengthens
our collective commitment to end impunity for sexual
violence. The resolution gives new coherence to United
Nations efforts through the initiative, UN Action
Against Sexual Violence in Conflict. It provides new
leadership to combat sexual violence, through the
creation of a special representative of the Secretary-
General. It creates new steps to name and shame
parties to armed conflict that perpetrate sexual
violence. It calls on the United Nations to boost its
support of national efforts to strengthen the rule of law,
by deploying teams of experts in situations where
sexual violence is occurring with apparent impunity.
And it improves the information flow to the Council on
patterns of sexual violence to allow us to develop
specific, actionable responses.
In combination, these measures give us new tools
to act on sexual violence. We welcome and support
them, alongside the General Assembly’s recent
decision to form a composite United Nations gender
entity. The key now will be implementation.
S/PV.6195
909-53396
The Council has come a long way since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) nine years ago. It
has taken time, too much time, for the United Nations
to address the issue of systematic sexual violence in
conflict. I would like to pay tribute to the pioneering
work of Dr. Denis Mukwege and his colleagues at the
Panzi Hospital in Bukavu, and Dr. Jo Lusi and his
colleagues at the HEAL Hospital in Goma, where the
women and children who have been raped and brutally
defiled are given treatment and care.
I also commend the work of the many people
around the world who have campaigned to raise the
issue of sexual violence onto the political agenda: Eve
Ensler, Lisa Jackson and the non-governmental
organization, Women for Women, led by Zainab Salbi,
have all played particularly valuable roles. And
resolution 1820 (2008), making systemic sexual
violence a war crime, was a landmark step forward.
But the problem persists, not just in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, but in conflicts
across the globe. The events in Guinea this week are a
cruel reminder of how rape and political repression go
hand in hand.
The message from today’s meeting should be that
women can never be truly empowered while they
remain threatened by sexual violence, and that peace
cannot take root when half the community — the
female half — lives in fear and trepidation. The
Security Council must take up its responsibilities and
never again relegate the question of systematic sexual
violence to being a secondary issue. It is not. The
measures we have adopted over the last two years,
including today’s resolution, now have to be pursued
and implemented.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Urbina (spoke in Spanish): Madam
President, Costa Rica recognizes your personal
leadership and the efforts that your country has made
in seeking to combat sexual violence in situations of
armed conflict. We believe that the adoption of this
new resolution is another firm step in the path that we
began last year with resolution 1820 (2008) to stop the
use of sexual violence as a weapon of war.
Costa Rica’s position on this subject was made
clear in the thematic open debate held on 7 August this
year. For that reason, I will limit myself to highlighting
only two points. The first point concerns the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and, the
second, the team of experts we are establishing in this
resolution 1888 (2009).
The appointment of a special representative of the
Secretary-General to combat sexual violence will,
without a doubt, play a strategic role in providing
visibility to this fundamental issue and, above all, in
helping to organize concerted action to combat sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict.
We believe that it is necessary to harmonize this
provisional mechanism with the setting up of the new
composite gender entity established by the General
Assembly in resolution 63/311, in order to avoid
duplication and overlapping of functions. We believe
that the Special Representative should be at the head of
the United Nations campaign against sexual violence in
conflict situations, UN Action, in order to make better
use of the existing resources and capacities of the
Organization. We hope that the enthusiasm generated
by the establishment of this new instrument can be
translated into tangible contributions to equip it with
the necessary capacity to live up to the high
expectations we all have for it.
In relation to the team of experts, we deem it
extremely timely to create such an entity on the basis
of such successful initiatives as the United Nations
Standing Police Capacity. We deem such strategic
interventions and technical assistance to be of utmost
use in helping States to establish their own mechanisms
to address the problem of sexual violence. We believe
that it would be useful to assess the possibility of
complementing and expanding these early and rapid
response capacities with technical assistance for the
strengthening of the rule of law and security sector
reform.
In conclusion, I should like, on behalf of the
Human Security Network, which is comprised of
Austria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland,
Jordan, Mali, Norway, Slovenia, Switzerland and
Thailand, with South Africa as an observer, to express
our gratification at the conclusion of the process that
led to the adoption of this new resolution. As we said
in our statement on 7 August, we commend the
progress that the Security Council has made in its
thematic discussions on this topic, and reiterate our
conviction that it is necessary to continue working
towards a comprehensive and strategic approach
S/PV.6195
09-5339610
focused on the critical areas of prevention, protection,
the participation of women, accountability, assistance
to victims and data collection, which we discussed in
detail at our most recent debate on this topic.
The President: I call on the representative of
Austria.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I should like at the
outset to thank you, Madam President, for your
personal leadership in the fight against sexual violence
in armed conflict. I should also like to thank
Ambassador Susan Rice and the United States Mission
in New York for the energy and determination they
have demonstrated in conducting our work on this
resolution in recent weeks.
We believe that this resolution will significantly
contribute to strengthening the United Nations
response to sexual violence in conflict situations. We
see a particular need for the strategic leadership that a
newly appointed Special Representative of the
Secretary-General can provide. Her or his work will
help us address this scourge on a systematic basis in
each and every conflict situation where acts of sexual
violence occur. With this goal in view, we also look
forward to the upcoming proposals to be submitted by
the Secretary-General on enhancing monitoring and
reporting on sexual violence. I should like to add that
we very much appreciate the personal commitment of
the Secretary-General in this matter.
Today’s resolution will, we hope, also pave the
way for a much more systematic flow of information
between United Nations peacekeeping missions and the
sanctions committees of the Council on sexual violence
in areas of conflict. Where necessary, the Council must
ensure the accountability of those responsible for
sexual violence in armed conflict, including through
the establishment of commissions of inquiry, referrals
to the International Criminal Court and the imposition
of targeted measures.
At the same time, it is absolutely unacceptable
that civilians, in particular women and girls, also
continue to fall victim to sexual violence on a daily
basis in conflict zones where United Nations
peacekeeping missions have a key responsibility for
their protection. The fight against sexual violence must
therefore also be at the core of our overall civilian
protection agenda. Austria thus pledges to take this
work forward when the Council next considers the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts during our
presidency of the Security Council in the month of
November.
The President: I call on the representative of
Japan.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I should like to extend a
warm welcome to you, Madam, and to thank you for
personally presiding over this important meeting of the
Security Council. We are also grateful to the Secretary-
General and the Deputy Secretary-General for their
presence and their leadership.
Japan is pleased with the unanimous adoption of
resolution 1888 (2009), and highly appreciates the
initiative taken by the delegation of the United States.
This resolution manifests the strong commitment of the
Security Council to combating sexual violence, which
is still prevalent in so many conflict areas in the world.
The resolution provides significant added value to last
year’s milestone resolution 1820 (2008). It calls on us
to meet urgent needs on the ground and to transform
our commitment in action. In particular, it enhances a
coordinated United Nations response to sexual violence
in armed conflict and strengthens United Nations
support for national authorities in strengthening the
rule of law.
We need first of all to strengthen measures to
protect victims of sexual violence, but we must also end
the impunity enjoyed by violators. At the same time, I
should like to emphasize the importance of supporting
and empowering women and children in vulnerable
situations. We need to support them in realizing their
full potential, even under difficult circumstances,
through the provision of health services, education and
vocational training, and to ensure the recurrence of
conflict and sexual violence is avoided.
In the general debate last week, Prime Minister
Hatoyama stressed the value of the human security
approach, that is to say, not only to protect but to
empower every individual to live in safety and dignity.
I believe that the human security approach could
provide useful guidance on assisting women and
children in armed conflict. From this point of view,
Japan once again welcomes the adoption of resolution
1888 (2009).
The President: I call on the representative of the
Russian Federation.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I thank you, Madam, welcome you to the
S/PV.6195
1109-53396
Security Council. Because this is the last meeting of the
September presidency of the United States, I should
like to express appreciation to the Permanent
Representative of the United States, Ambassador Susan
Rice, and the entire American delegation for their
effective leadership of the Council and for having
brought a number of important and relevant issues
before the Council. The Russian Federation has actively
worked to contribute to the success of this undertaking.
The Russian Federation welcomes the adoption of
resolution 1888 (2009) by the Security Council. This
document, we believe, completes and complements
previously adopted resolutions on the subject of
women and peace and security, resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1820 (2008).
We see sexual violence as an appalling crime that
requires decisive condemnation and harsh punishment.
Of particular concern are situations in which this
phenomenon is widespread and systematic. We are
convinced that we must not lower our attention to other
forms of violations of the rights of women and
violence against them in situations of armed conflict.
In this connection, Russia is in favour of a
comprehensive approach to addressing these problems.
The diverse nature of violence requires due attention to
be given to all categories of violence. This is in the
spirit of resolution 1325 (2000), which remains the
foremost guideline for protecting women and ensuring
their rights in conflict. We are convinced that these
issues should be looked at in the context of all issues
related to gender equality.
We should recall that an important prerequisite
for overcoming violence against women is the full
participation of women themselves in peace
negotiations and post-conflict reconstruction. In this
context, the Russian Federation welcomes Viet Nam’s
initiative to hold an open meeting of the Security
Council on 5 October on the subject of the
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), with a focus on the role of women in post-
conflict reconstruction.
In conclusion, we express our conviction that,
working together, we will be able not only to lower the
incidence of sexual violence in armed conflict, but also
to make significant progress in ensuring gender equality
and improving the situation for women in the spirit of
the Fourth World Conference on Women and the twenty-
third special session of the General Assembly.
The President: I call on the representative of
Viet Nam.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Madam, and Ambassador Susan Rice personally, as
well as the United States delegation for your efforts to
strengthen the Council’s commitment to combating
sexual violence in armed conflict. The implementation
of resolution 1820 (2008) since its adoption last year
has achieved meaningful progress, most visibly in the
markedly improved awareness of sexual violence across
the United Nations system and the international
community and in many conflict areas. The
international community is increasingly recognizing the
need to work together to effectively put an end to one
of the most vicious and inhumane types of violence.
However, my delegation believes that formidable
challenges remain, especially in implementing the
resolution on the ground. This requires concerted
efforts by United Nations bodies, Member States and
other stakeholders to ensure a comprehensive approach
to the issue of sexual violence, including, inter alia, its
incorporation into the earliest stages of the peace
process. In this connection, the strengthening of the
United Nations coordination role is essential. We look
forward to working with United Nations bodies, other
stakeholders and other Member States towards this
objective.
Having voted in favour of the resolution, my
delegation confirms once again Viet Nam’s strong
commitment to ending sexual violence wherever it
occurs. At the same time, we believe that resolution
1820 (2008) and resolution 1888 (2009), just adopted
by the Council, should be implemented in close
coordination with the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000).
Since women’s empowerment is among the most
effective tools for their protection, women’s
participation in peace, conflict resolution and post-
conflict processes should be promoted to ensure that
their weak voice is heard, their rights are respected and
their urgent needs met. Measures to protect women and
girls from sexual violence in conflict situations should
also be designed as part of a broader comprehensive
and strategic framework which covers social, economic
and development issues. United Nations bodies and
donors should be encouraged and helped to assist
national Governments in building gender-related
capacity and developing gender-sensitive programmes
S/PV.6195
09-5339612
to help survivors of sexual violence with services
ranging from access to justice and relief from stigma
and ostracism, to provision of mental and
psychological health care.
It is equally important that women’s physical
security be supported by economic and social security
through income-generation activities, education and
involvement in decision-making. Toward this objective
and in furtherance of the efforts the Council is taking
today under the guidance of the President, Viet Nam,
as the upcoming President of the Council, will convene
an open debate on Monday, 5 October, on the theme
“Responding to the needs of women and girls in post-
conflict situations for sustainable peace and security”.
We look forward to active participation, meaningful
discussions and a substantive outcome that will make
the international community’s efforts to protect the
better half of humankind more complete.
The President: I call on the representative of
Turkey.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would first like to thank
the United States delegation and in particular you,
Madam, for your personal involvement and leadership
in advancing the cause of women around the world and
for your most commendable efforts in mobilizing the
Council around the adoption of this important
resolution today. I also wish to express our deep
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
commitment to combating violence against women and
re-energizing the entire United Nations system in that
direction.
Today, with the adoption of resolution 1888
(2009), the Council has sent yet another strong
message to the world at large that violence against
women and children, particularly in situations of armed
conflict, is not acceptable and that such acts will never
be tolerated. Your presence here today, Madam,
amplifies this message and further solidifies our
resolve. Indeed, the women and children who continue
to be subjected to the cruelest forms of violence during
armed conflict shall hopefully see that they are not
alone in their plight and that the international
community will spare no effort to stop their suffering.
This is why Turkey has supported this resolution
from the very beginning and actively contributed to its
negotiation, bearing in mind the Council’s primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians in times of
armed conflict, in particular women and children.
The resolution we have adopted today has many
important aspects, but maybe its most significant added
value derives from its action-oriented nature. Indeed,
in the resolution we not only condemn those who
perpetrate acts of violence against women, but also call
for action against them. With the establishment of a
new mechanism and the decision to appoint a special
representative in particular, the United Nations and the
international community have demonstrated their firm
commitment and political will to effectively preventing
sexual violence against women, combating impunity
and enforcing accountability and the rule of law.
Turkey is fully committed to exerting every effort
in order to ensure the effective implementation of the
resolution. Together with resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008), resolution 1888 (2009) provides us with a
comprehensive framework for empowering women,
and we will do our utmost to make the best use of this
opportunity.
The President: I call on the representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I wish to thank you, Madam,
and to convey our appreciation for your initiative. I
also greet Ambassador Susan Rice and thank her for
her efforts and wise leadership of the Security Council
during the month of September, as well as for the
initiatives and projects she has launched. I welcome the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs who have joined us this
morning.
The Council’s visit to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and other African countries that have
experienced long periods of conflict, and our meetings
with a number of victims of acts of sexual violence and
torture, were shocking for all of us. At the same time,
we hold out great hope after meeting with young
people from all regions of the world who are providing
the victims with psychological and professional
assistance. We feel that the human conscience is
stronger and greater than those who commit such
crimes. The will to live is stronger than the will to die.
The perpetrators of acts of violence do not simply
kill their victims, but maim and defile the survivors
irreversibly. As a result, it is essential that domestic
legislation be adopted to ensure that those crimes do
not go unpunished and that the perpetrators be brought
to justice, as they incite hatred and violence.
S/PV.6195
1309-53396
The events that took place in Conakry, Guinea,
yesterday and the stories we have heard from the poor
and vulnerable women who have suffered and been
raped, then tortured and killed, are truly horrific.
Therefore, I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for this initiative, and the Secretary-General
for his initiative in appointing a Special Representative
for women and sexual violence in areas of conflict.
Any criminal anywhere, whether in Afghanistan, in
Iraq, in the Congo or in Palestine, must be brought to
justice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): Allow me first to thank
you personally, Madam President, and the United
States delegation and Ambassador Susan Rice for the
continuing leadership on the issue of sexual violence in
armed conflict. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his steady engagement.
Croatia would like to add its voice to those who
strive to put an end to that abhorrent practice. Since the
representative of Croatia delivered a speech during the
open debate on the implementation of resolution 1820
(2008) in August this year (S/PV.6180, p.16), allow me
here merely to add some brief remarks.
First and foremost, I would like to state that
Croatia was a strong supporter of resolution 1820
(2008) within the Council, from its conceptual phase to
its ultimate adoption. In that same vein, we now give
equal support to the new resolution 1888 (2009) that
we have just adopted today, and we would like to take
this opportunity to congratulate everyone who has
worked so hard to gain that result.
With resolution 1888 (2009), the Security
Council recognizes many important elements in the
fight against sexual violence in armed conflict. It
recognizes the need for civilian and military leaders to
demonstrate political will in combating impunity and
using their authority and powers to prevent sexual
violence. It demands protection for civilians from
sexual violence by all parties to an armed conflict and
urges them to investigate all reports of sexual violence.
The members of the Security Council have had
the opportunity to visit today’s most affected areas and
to talk to victims, and are fully aware of gravity of the
problem. Moreover, the Security Council has reiterated
its intention, when adopting or renewing targeted
sanctions, to consider including designation criteria
pertaining to acts of rape and other forms of sexual
violence.
Notwithstanding those positive measures, we
believe that the resolution’s request to the Secretary-
General to appoint a Special Representative to address
the issue of sexual violence in armed conflict, as well
as to rapidly deploy a team of experts to situations of
particular concern with respect to sexual violence,
deserves special praise.
In adopting resolution 1888 (2009), as well as
through the recently adopted resolution 1882 (2009),
the Security Council is sending a clear signal to those
who continue to perpetrate horrific crimes against
women and girls in armed conflict and to those who
tolerate or condone such sexual violence. They will be
held accountable.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uganda.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I welcome the fact that
you are presiding over this Council meeting in person,
Madam President. It is a demonstration of your
commitment to the total elimination of sexual violence,
which has been so prevalent, especially in a number of
African countries. Uganda voted in favour of
resolution 1888 (2009) because of our continued
commitment to the welfare of women, and especially
of girls, who tend to be the primary casualties in
conflict situations.
Sexual violence is a global problem. Therefore,
every effort must be made to ensure that the culprits
are held accountable for their despicable actions. Once
again, that is a reminder that sexual violence in
conflict-related situations can be prevented if peace,
stability and the rule of law are restored in the affected
countries.
Uganda welcomes the resolution’s recognition of
the needs of national justice systems that have been
weakened by conflicts and the understanding that, if
the international community does not assist those
institutions to rebuild their capacity, it is useless to call
for an end to impunity or for the prosecution of war
criminals or perpetrators of sexual violence.
Let me take this opportunity to thank Ambassador
Rice and the United States Mission for spearheading
the adoption of this resolution.
S/PV.6195
09-5339614
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of China.
Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First, I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
presiding over today’s meeting in person and the
Secretary-General for the statement that he has just
made.
China condemns all acts of violence against
women in conflict situations, including sexual violence.
We call on all parties to conflicts to abide by
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. We call on Governments to investigate and
punish the perpetrators of such crimes against women.
We also call on all countries to adopt measures for their
early accession to the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women.
In view of the above, the Chinese delegation
voted in favour of resolution 1820 (2008) in April last
year and of resolution 1888 (2009) that we have just
adopted. Here, we would like to express our
appreciation for the efforts of Ambassador Rice and the
flexible approach and constructive attitude of the
United States Mission during the consultations.
With regard to improving the protection of
women in armed conflict, I would like to underscore
the following three points.
First, Governments bear primary responsibility
for protecting women and combating crimes of sexual
violence. The international community should provide
effective assistance in that regard. While the primary
responsibility for implementing resolutions 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009) lies with Governments, both
conflict-affected countries and those in post-conflict
situations are often faced with many difficulties.
Therefore, the international and donor communities
should provide generous assistance to help their
capacity-building efforts. At the same time, I would
like to stress that the provision of external support and
assistance should comply with the principles of the
United Nations Charter and should respect the wishes
of the country concerned while not undermining its
sovereignty.
Secondly, women’s participation in the different
stages of a peace process should be strengthened and
attention should be paid to their status and their role.
The rights and interests of women must be respected
and protected throughout the entire peace process and
their special needs and concerns heeded. They should
be given greater participation and more decision-
making power. In recent years, the Secretariat has
taken many positives steps to increase the number of
senior women officials and female heads of United
Nations special missions. We hope that those efforts
will continue in the future.
Thirdly, efforts should be made to encourage and
support the participation of civil society in the
protection of women. Many colleagues in
non-governmental organizations work on the ground
under difficult conditions to promote the protection of
women’s rights and interests. Their work should be
acknowledged. China supports them in their continuing
constructive role to protect women in situations of
armed conflict. We encourage them to continue their
engagement with other United Nations agencies,
especially those directly involved in women’s issues,
as well as to put forward reasonable proposals in that
regard.
The Chinese Government has always paid great
attention to improving the status of women and
protecting their rights and interests. We would like to
work together with the international community in our
common effort to reduce acts of sexual violence in the
world and to achieve the goals in the area of women
and peace and security.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
Before I adjourn the meeting, I want to thank
Ambassador Susan Rice, our Permanent
Representative, and the United States Mission and all
who work with her every day on behalf of our country.
I also wish to thank Ms. Esther Brimmer, Assistant
Secretary for International Organizations, and her staff,
as well as Melanne Verveer, our Ambassador for
Global Women’s Issues. I also want to extend my best
wishes to Ms. Norma Chan, Chief of the Security
Council Secretariat Branch, who is retiring today after
36 years with the United Nations. We want to give
Norma a proper send-off as she embarks upon a new
chapter in her life. We thank her for her dedicated
service.
Finally, let me thank all members very much, not
only for their votes but also for their extremely helpful
and substantive comments.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.
