United Nations S/PV.6702
Security Council
Sixty-seventh year
6702ndmeeting
Thursday, 12 January 2012, 10 a.m.
New York
Provisional
:
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.
12-20534 (E)
*1220534*
President: Mr. Zuma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (South Africa)
Members: Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mammadyarov
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Liu Guijin
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Holguín Cuéllar
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Courtial
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Pieper
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Rodas Melgar
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Loulichki
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Haroon
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Brites Pereira
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Churkin
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Esaw
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . Sir Mark Lyall Grant
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Rice
Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
Strengthening the relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations, in particular the African Union, in the maintenance of
international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on United Nations-African Union cooperation
in peace and security (S/2011/805)
Letter dated 4 January 2012 from the Permanent Representative of South
Africa to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2012/13)
Letter dated 9 January 2012 from the Permanent Representative of South
Africa to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2012/20)
S/PV.6702
12-205342
The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
Strengthening the relationship between the
United Nations and regional organizations, in
particular the African Union, in the
maintenance of international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on United
Nations-African Union cooperation in peace
and security (S/2011/805)
Letter dated 4 January 2012 from the
Permanent Representative of South Africa
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2012/13)
Letter dated 9 January 2012 from the
Permanent Representative of South Africa to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2012/20)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Ethiopia, Kenya and Nigeria to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union (AU), to participate in this meeting.
I wish to welcome the Secretary-General,
Ministers and other representatives participating in
today’s meeting. Their presence is an affirmation of the
importance of the subject matter to be addressed.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2012/25, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Colombia, India, Pakistan,
South Africa and Togo.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/805, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on United Nations-African
Union cooperation in peace and security. I also wish to
draw the attention of Council members to document
S/2012/20, which contains a letter dated 9 January
2012 from the Permanent Representative of South
Africa to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council, and to document S/2012/13,
which contains a letter dated 4 January 2012 from the
Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting a concept paper on the item to be
considered.
I shall now make a statement in my national
capacity.
Let me take this opportunity to thank everyone
here for participating in this important debate on the
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations, and in particular the African Union.
Their presence here bears testimony to the significance
they attach to this matter, and indeed to the African
continent.
Allow me also to express my appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his report on the topic of this
debate. I would also like to thank him for his personal
commitment to the strengthening of the relationship
between the United Nations and the African Union.
When the founders of the United Nations drafted
the Charter, they had the foresight and vision to
enshrine in it provisions that encourage cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
More than six decades ago, when the Charter was
drafted, there was no practical example of how this
cooperation would be structured and executed.
However, Chapter VIII of the Charter was
groundbreaking in that, in spite of the fact that there
were no regional organizations at the time, it provided
for flexibility in cases where such regional
organizations would be established.
As members are aware, most African countries
were still under colonial rule when the United Nations
was formed in 1945. Our concerns, issues and voices
were not considered. The absence of African countries
at the time of the formation of the United Nations is
reflected in the fact that not a single African country is
a permanent member of the Security Council. This is
despite the fact that, on average, about 70 per cent of
the agenda items of the Security Council concern
Africa. It is a huge continent that has 54 member
States, representing more than 1 billion people.
S/PV.6702
312-20534
The failure of representation, on a permanent
basis, of such a big part of the globe in such an
important body as the Security Council points to the
necessity and urgency of the fundamental reform of the
Council so that it can become more representative and
legitimate. This body believes in and preaches the
culture of democracy and the will of the majority,
which is the key element in a democratic system. At
the same time, however, it cannot, in some of its key
and decisive structures, practise something that
contradicts the purposes and the principles of its
founding Charter.
The African Union, the successor to the
Organization of African Unity, was established a
decade ago to coordinate and spearhead the continent’s
efforts towards development and common security.
Through its peace and security organs, the African
Union has contributed immensely to the improvement
of peace and security and to the promotion of
democracy and respect for human rights in Africa. The
AU has also sought to give practical meaning to the
vision of the United Nations Charter on cooperation
with regional organizations.
We are mindful of the fact that the United
Nations Charter gives the Security Council the primary
mandate and responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, including on the
African continent. At the same time, we are of the view
that recognition should be accorded to the fact that the
Charter encourages cooperation with regional bodies,
such as the AU, in carrying out the United Nations
mandate in line with the spirit of subsidiarity. It is our
view that close cooperation with regional bodies has
advantages.
Regional bodies are closer to the situation, are
familiar with the issues and often understand the
dynamics of a given conflict. Neighbouring countries
also often bear the burden and consequences of conflict
in their neighbourhoods. It is for this very reason that
we support the principle of complementarity between
the AU and the United Nations and their respective
Security Councils.
We are pleased with the cooperation that has
existed between the African Union and the United
Nations since the AU’s formation 10 years ago. The
adoption of resolution 1809 (2008) in particular was a
significant development in strengthening our
cooperation. That positive experience has laid a firm
foundation for further enhancing and strengthening the
strategic relationship between the AU and the United
Nations.
Critical to building a stronger relationship will be
to avoid a situation such as that which transpired
during the conflict in Libya last year. As everybody is
aware, the AU developed a political road map that
would have assisted in resolving the political conflict
in that country. The AU’s plan was completely ignored
in favour of the bombing of Libya by NATO forces.
The consequences of the actions that were carried out
in Libya in the name of the Security Council have
spilled over into other countries of the region. A
problem that was confined to one country, Libya, has
now grown into a regional problem. It is the view of
the AU that resolution 1973 (2011) was largely abused
in some specific respects.
The lesson we should draw from the Libyan
experience is that greater political coherence and a
common vision between the AU and the United
Nations are critical to the resolution of African
conflicts. The views of the African Union must be
listened to if we are to strengthen our relationship and
prevent further conflict. We now need the United
Nations, the AU and the League of Arab States to work
together to help the Libyan people to resolve the
situation in which they find themselves.
It is also important that those who implement the
decisions of the Security Council interpret those
decisions correctly. They should also be held
accountable for the actions they take in implementing
the Security Council’s binding mandates. Unless we
take that serious view, the Security Council will be
undermined and lose credibility and respect in the eyes
of the world.
Africa can prosper and stability can be
maintained if we also avoid what happened during the
Cold War. We must never forget to take lessons from
history. As Council members are aware, a lot of
destabilization and conflict in the continent was
condoned and sometimes actively supported by the
protagonists of the Cold War because the conflict
furthered their interests. That should never be allowed
to happen again. Africa must never again be a
playground for furthering the interests of other regions.
It is important to underline that point so that conflicts
in Africa become manageable. They will be
S/PV.6702
12-205344
manageable if they are not promoted or aided from
outside the continent.
We have gained insight and understanding from
the experience of cooperation between the African
Union and the United Nations over the past decade in
addressing matters of peace and security. Based on that
experience, we wish to make the following proposals
for strengthening the strategic cooperation between the
two bodies.
First, we are of the strong view that there is a
need for greater strategic political coherence between
the two organizations in the resolution, prevention and
management of conflicts in Africa. In that respect, the
relationship between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council is of critical
significance. Mechanisms must be found to avoid
duplications and divergent points of departure in terms
of the approach. We therefore believe that we should
institutionalize the relationship between the two
Councils if our common objective of maintaining
international peace and security is to be maintained. In
that regard, aligning our collective policies, strategies
and mechanisms for conflict prevention, mediation and
resolution in Africa is paramount.
Secondly, we should consider the possibility of
developing and defining modalities for cooperation and
decision-making between the two institutions. That
will assist in ensuring uniformity, consistency and
certainty when the two institutions are pursuing a
common objective. We believe that this proposal will
particularly assist in addressing the challenge of how
the Security Council reacts to the requests, suggestions
and proposals of the African Union Peace and Security
Council.
Thirdly, we are convinced that a clear division of
labour will be crucial to the success of the strategic
partnership between the two organizations. That has to
take into account the different competencies, capacities
and comparative advantages of the two bodies.
Finally, the issue of capacity-building and
sustainable resource allocation remains a fundamental
challenge. That is something that the African Union
needs to discuss with the United Nations in order to
explore solutions.
The African continent has in the past decade
demonstrated sufficient political will and commitment
to rid the continent of all conflicts and wars. We are
working hard to move the continent forward on a
sustainable path of socio-economic development and
prosperity. We know that we have the support of the
United Nations on that path. We would like once again
to reiterate that, for the African continent, the
strengthening of the strategic relationship between the
African Union and United Nations is critical if we are
to rid our continent of the scourge of conflicts that has
scarred Africa for decades.
Last weekend, the African National Congress, the
oldest liberation movement on the African continent,
celebrated 100 years of existence. We wish once again
to thank the United Nations and its members for the
support that they provided to the people of South
Africa during the struggle for liberation. The United
Nations declared apartheid a crime against humanity
and, in so doing, put enormous pressure on the
apartheid regime and on its supporters. In this
centenary year, we extend our deepest gratitude to the
United Nations for supporting freedom, peace, human
rights and justice in our country. We also thank the
Secretary-General for the recent high-level symposium
on South Africa’s contribution to the fight against
racism and xenophobia, held here at United Nations
Headquarters last September.
We pledge to continue our dedication and
commitment to human rights, peace, democracy and
justice so that the support of countless men and women
here at United Nations Headquarters can prove not to
have been in vain. In that respect, partnership with the
international community and with the United Nations
in particular is critical. I wish the Council well in this
debate.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I would like to begin by
commending you, Sir, for having organized this very
important meeting at the beginning of the new year,
2012.
At the outset, I would like to welcome most
warmly the delegations of Azerbaijan, Guatemala,
Morocco, Pakistan and Togo, which have joined the
Security Council as the newest non-permanent
members. I look forward to their active participation
and to their committed involvement in the various
S/PV.6702
512-20534
agenda items before the Council. Their contributions
will be greatly valued by the Council, as well as by the
Secretariat. I wish them a very productive engagement
in this Chamber.
I would also like to express my deepest
appreciation to the delegations of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Gabon, Lebanon and Nigeria for
their committed involvement and hard work during the
past two years. They have done much to bring credit to
the Council, and their contributions will be long
remembered.
The African Union (AU) is a vital strategic
partner to the United Nations, and South Africa is
utilizing its presidency to deepen that relationship. I
welcome its continued engagement.
I also recognize Ambassador Ramtane Lamamra,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, and welcome the recent and first-ever AU
report on United Nations-AU cooperation. I thank the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Jean
Ping, for his initiative and leadership. As Secretary-
General, my remit is global, but I attach great
importance to the role of regional and subregional
organizations, as recognized in Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter.
Here at the United Nations, activities to enhance
stability in Africa take up a significant part of the
agenda of the Security Council and they are among my
leading priorities. Over the past decade, the AU and
subregional organizations have significantly bolstered
their own role in building an architecture for peace and
security on the African continent. Together, our
collective efforts in conflict prevention and mediation,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding are making a real
difference throughout the continent.
Of course, there is more room for improvement.
We often face complex and fast-moving crises, and we
are establishing mechanisms to build common
understanding and approaches. The annual meetings
between the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council are one important example. There
will be differences. That is natural. Organizations with
different mandates, membership and perspectives will
occasionally have differences in approach. The
question is how we manage those differences — how
we work together. My report (S/2011/805) and this
discussion are about building on our successes,
improving coherence and harmonizing decision-
making from a firm foundation of shared values and
principles.
Over the past few years, we have strengthened
our partnership with the African Union at the
Secretariat level in several concrete ways. First, the
United Nations-African Union Joint Task Force on
Peace and Security has proven to be an effective
mechanism for consultations on an array of issues,
including Côte d’Ivoire, Libya, Somalia and the Sudan.
Secondly, we have revamped our Office in Addis
Ababa to further strengthen our cooperation, including
by improving early-warning information that will help
foster timely action and joint threat analysis. Through
military and police planners based in Addis Ababa, we
have supported the AU’s planning for its expansion of
the operations of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM). We also continue to work closely on other
key areas, such as elections, conflict prevention and
post-conflict reconstruction. Thirdly, our regional
offices, peacekeeping operations and special political
missions are cooperating closely with the AU and
subregional organizations.
Examples abound, including the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and joint
mediation efforts there, United Nations logistics and
planning support to AMISOM, joint efforts to combat
the threat posed by the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA),
cooperation between Special Envoy Menkerios and the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel led by
President Mbeki, and much more. The United Nations
Office for West Africa, working closely with the AU
and the Economic Community of West African States,
has also been active in defusing tensions throughout
the subregion. The newly established United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, in cooperation with
the Economic Community of Central African States,
can play a similar role.
Fourthly and finally, joint assessment missions
have also been essential in ensuring a common
understanding of emerging issues. For example, we
recently deployed such a mission to the Sahel to assess
how developments in Libya are affecting the region.
We also have just dispatched a joint mission to the four
countries affected by the LRA. And under the
leadership of the AU, we have worked together to
develop a strategic concept for future AMISOM
operations, which is now under consideration by the
Security Council.
S/PV.6702
12-205346
I am greatly encouraged by the concrete progress
we have made in recent years. Let us pledge to do even
more to enhance our partnership. We can do so by
learning new lessons, developing new tools and
intensifying our engagement with civil society and
women’s groups active in mediation and conflict
prevention, particularly at the local level.
As we look ahead, we will need to ensure
flexibility, so that each new situation is addressed on
its own merits. We must also promote innovative
arrangements in complex situations that may require
joint actions, joint operations or enhanced partnerships.
As we do so, let us strive to maximize our collective
efforts and limited resources, and ensure that each
partnership arrangement has a clearly defined division
of labour and roles and responsibilities for each
organization. Regional organizations have comparative
advantages. So does the United Nations, not least the
weight of international law and the primary
responsibility of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Finally, let me say that I am eager to attend the
African Union summit later this month. It will be my
sixth African Union summit in a row. I look forward to
my meetings with African leaders and to continuing to
explore how we can make our strong partnership even
stronger in the years ahead.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lamamra.
Mr. Lamamra: I would like to first acknowledge
the presence of President Jacob Zuma of the Republic
of South Africa. His decision to be here with us to
preside over this meeting is a further illustration of his
leadership and the commitment of South Africa to the
promotion of a strong strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union (AU) in peace
and security matters. Over the years, South Africa has
used its successive memberships in the Security
Council to push forward that agenda, within the
framework of Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter. The African Union Commission is deeply
appreciative of that effort and the results achieved so
far.
Let me also recognize the presence of Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon. Since his appointment at the
helm of the Secretariat, he has spared no effort in
promoting the AU-United Nations partnership in the
area of peace and security, building on earlier
initiatives aimed at ensuring that regional arrangements
fully play their role in the post-cold war security
architecture. In his report of October 2010 on United
Nations support to AU peacekeeping operations
authorized by the Security Council, the Secretary-
General rightly observed that “[t]he complex
challenges in the world today require a revitalized and
evolving interpretation of Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations” (S/2010/514, para. 54). The
African Union fully shares that view.
It would be remiss of me not to pay tribute to the
Security Council and to its members. In the past three
years, the Council has held no less than four meetings
devoted to the African Union-United Nations
partnership. This is a clear indication of its
commitment and of its realization that, indeed, the
daunting peace and security challenges that continue to
face Africa require an innovative and creative
partnership between the AU and the United Nations.
Today’s debate comes at a time of renewed
recognition of the importance of building a strong
partnership between the AU and the United Nations in
order to enhance our efforts to promote peace, security
and stability on the African continent. The turbulence
that the partnership went through last year only adds to
the urgency of more clearly defining this relationship.
In carrying forward this debate, we have the
privilege of learning from our most recent experiences.
We also have the privilege of having before us the
reports submitted by both the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the African Union Commission
Chairperson. These are two complementary inputs
which provide not only an assessment of where we
stand as far as the partnership is concerned, but also
useful recommendations on the way forward. I note
that at their fifth consultative meeting, held in Addis
Ababa on 21 May 2011, both the AU Peace and
Security Council and the Security Council stressed that
they were looking forward to these reports.
The strategic relationship between the AU and the
United Nations has been growing steadily. Cooperation
between the Commission and the Secretariat has
recorded commendable achievements, as demonstrated
by the regular consultations between AU and United
Nations senior officials on issues of common concern
and the mechanisms put in place to that end.
S/PV.6702
712-20534
Innovative modalities such as the hybrid
operation in Darfur and the United Nations support
package to AMISOM have been devised and
implemented to meet the requirements of the fast-
evolving realities on the ground.
The AU Peace and Security Council and the
Security Council have also endeavoured to deepen
their partnership. Their efforts are all the more
praiseworthy as they have to overcome numerous
challenges, not least the novelty of the exercise and the
differences in their respective mandates and scope of
action.
Yet we are just at the beginning of our journey
towards a more strategic relationship between the AU
and the United Nations in the area of peace and
security. Such an approach is made more compelling
by the fact that Africa, in spite of the significant
progress made over the past few years, still accounts
for the highest number of conflicts worldwide.
In addition to the traditional threats to peace,
security and stability, the African continent is now
facing a new set of threats: first, governance-related
intra-State conflicts and violence, including election-
related ones, which could severely undermine the
nascent democracies on the continent and negatively
affect the social fabric in many countries; secondly,
terrorism and transnational crime, which is
compounded by the proliferation of weapons; thirdly,
maritime piracy off both the east and west coasts of
Africa, as well as other challenges to continental
maritime security; fourthly, border disputes, especially
in view of the limited progress made in the delimitation
and demarcation of the African borders, a situation
which gives rise to “undefined zones”, within which
the application of national sovereignty poses problems;
and fifthly, climate change, whose consequences,
whether they relate to scarce water resources, damage
to coastal infrastructure and cities, reduced agricultural
yields or environmentally induced migration, will have
a negative impact on the quest for peace.
Clearly, those challenges require concerted
responses by the African Union and the United Nations
and a much closer partnership, based on a creative
reading of the provisions of Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter to allow the African Union and its
regional mechanisms for conflict prevention,
management and resolution to fully play their role as
integral components of collective security.
The African Union and its regional mechanisms
are particularly well placed to make a significant
contribution to collective security, in view of their
proximity to and familiarity with the issues at hand. In
addition, they have developed comprehensive
architectures covering the whole range of security
challenges facing the continent, including those related
to governance.
It is critical to provide more effective support to
the African continent and its institutions, especially as
Africa has demonstrated renewed determination to deal
with peace and security issues on the continent and
provide the leadership that is required. Nowhere has
this proactive stance been more evident than in the area
of peacekeeping, where the African Union has shown a
strong willingness to take risks to seize the
opportunities that present themselves in order to
advance the agenda of peace, but is constrained by the
lack of the necessary resources, particularly in terms of
flexible, sustainable and predictable funding.
That is the background that informed the report
of the Chairperson of the Commission and the
subsequent decision of the Peace and Security Council
regarding the need for the AU and the United Nations
to develop a stronger partnership, based on an
innovative strategic and forward-looking reading of
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter.
More specifically, the African Union and the
United Nations should agree on a set of principles
aimed at clarifying their relationship and anchoring it
on a more solid platform. From the AU perspective,
such principles should revolve around the following:
support for African ownership and priority-setting;
consultative decision-making, division of labour and
sharing of responsibilities; and comparative advantage.
The African Union is committed to engaging in earnest
on a dialogue with the United Nations on the principles
that should underpin the relationship.
In parallel, and on the basis of the communiqués
of the consultative meetings held between the Peace
and Security Council and the Security Council,
practical steps should be taken to enhance the
effectiveness of the annual meetings between the two
organs, develop regular interaction between their
respective chairs and undertake joint field missions.
Equally important is the need for the Security Council
to give due consideration to our legitimate requests and
to address, in a more systematic manner, the funding of
S/PV.6702
12-205348
AU-led peace support operations undertaken with the
consent of the Security Council. On their part, the AU
Commission and the Secretariat should continue to
work towards greater collaboration and coordination.
We have come a long way in our efforts to build a
stronger partnership, but much remains to be done. As
we forge ahead, we need to draw appropriate lessons
from our past experiences, both our shortcomings and
our successes. We ought to be pragmatic and results-
oriented, driven, as we should be, by the imperative to
respond to the needs on the ground, to assist countries
and shattered communities to turn the page of violence
and conflict, to consolidate peace where it has been
achieved and, ultimately, to help Africa to fully exploit
its potential for the good of its people and humankind
overall.
In the past years, the African Union and its
regional mechanisms have demonstrated a strong
commitment to act, building on their comprehensive
and solid normative and institutional framework. The
responsibility of the United Nations, as we understand
it, is to fully support those efforts, which are consistent
with the principles and objectives of the United
Nations Charter, politically and by making available its
resources and expertise, as and when required.
The President: I thank His Excellency
Mr. Lamamra for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Moses
Wetangula, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kenya and
Chair of the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union.
Mr. Wetangula (Kenya): It is a great pleasure for
me to participate in this Security Council meeting on
the United Nations-African Union (AU) relationship in
matters of peace and security. In that context, I wish to
commend President Jacob Zuma of South Africa,
President of the Council for the month of January, for
making the partnership between the United Nations and
the AU the centrepiece of its presidency and for having
convened this meeting and deeming it fit to invite the
AU, in particular Kenya as Chair of the AU Peace and
Security Council, to join in this debate. I convey to the
members of the Council the very best wishes of my
President, Mr. Mwai Kibaki, who, owing to prior
commitments, could not join them at this meeting. He
asked me to express his full commitment to the
ongoing efforts to strengthen the strategic partnership
between the AU and the United Nations, in general,
and in peace and security matters, in particular.
Last Monday, 9 January, I chaired the 307th
meeting of the AU Peace and Security Council, in
Addis Ababa, on the AU-United Nations strategic
partnership in the maintenance of international peace
and security. Framed by the report of the AU
Chairperson, that discussion elaborated the form and
content of the desired partnership from an African
perspective. It is our hope that the recommendations of
the communiqué of that meeting will inform our
discussions today.
The quest for peace and security is a pressing
challenge in Africa today. Over the past two decades,
the continent has witnessed a number of crises and
violent conflicts, with huge negative consequences for
the African people, as well as our aspiration to a
peaceful and prosperous continent. We are therefore
faced with the tasks of resolving protracted conflicts,
such as those in Darfur and Somalia, and of facilitating
reconstruction and development in countries that have
emerged from conflicts, such as Burundi, Sierra Leone,
Côte d’Ivoire and, more recently, Libya, Tunisia and
Egypt — societies that have undergone radical
transformation.
The need to prevent conflicts and de-escalate
fragile situations calls for proactive engagement.
Additionally, growing threats of transnational crime,
including terrorism and piracy, especially off the coast
of Somalia and Western Africa, as well as the
trafficking of persons and contraband, increasingly
pose serious challenges to the consolidation of peace
and security.
In view of those conditions, for a considerable
time Africa has dominated the agenda of the Security
Council because such threats impact international
peace and security and their causes and dynamics
extend beyond the affected countries, regions and the
continent itself. In that regard, the need to maintain a
strong and well-structured strategic partnership
between the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council cannot be overemphasized.
While the Security Council has the primary
mandate for the maintenance of international peace and
security, the resolution of today’s complex threats calls
for collective action. That reality underscores the
wisdom that underpins the provisions of Chapter VIII
of the United Nations Charter, which provides for
S/PV.6702
912-20534
regional mechanisms to prevent, manage and resolve
conflicts. From that reality, modalities of engagement
have evolved. That that relationship is gaining
momentum is commendable, and that both sides
demonstrate a willingness to improve the relationship
needs to be encouraged further.
Yesterday’s Security Council meeting on Somalia
(see S/PV.6701) was instructive on the necessity to
enhance the relationship. Indeed, as most speakers
emphasized, the opportunity to turn Somalia around
depends almost entirely on the extent to which we can
elevate and improve the strategic and operational
relationship between the AU and the United Nations, in
general, and the AU Peace and Security Council and
the Security Council, in particular.
We commend the focused attention of the United
Nations on its partnership with Africa. The statements
by the President of the Security Council in 2009 and
2010 (S/PRST/2009/26 and S/PRST/2010/21), as well
as the reports of the Secretary-General to the Council
on both occasions (S/2009/470 and S/2010/514),
reaffirm the importance of developing effective
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
organizations, in particular the African Union, in the
maintenance of international peace and security,
consistent with Chapter VIII of the Charter.
However, that relationship has not been without
challenges, especially in the past year. For that reason,
today we have the opportunity to reflect on innovative
ways of interpreting Chapter VIII that add value,
improve the relationship and optimize the chances of
achieving sustainable peace. In that context, I wish to
highlight several issues that require measures of
improvement.
First, the process of decision-making, particularly
in determining when and how to engage in specific
crisis situations, has been a matter of divergence at
times, with serious consequences. The practice in the
past two years seems to indicate an undesirable trend
that appears to be selective on the part of the Security
Council and that seems to disregard full consideration
of the position and/or recommendations of the AU or
its organs. We all recall the manner in which the
African position was either ignored or partially
considered in the cases of Libya and Côte d’Ivoire last
year. President Zuma has articulated that point much
more than I myself can. I fully agree with him, and
have nothing useful to add.
We have proposed a number of measures,
including regular consultations beyond the annual
meetings of the Councils, even before decisions are
taken. It would also be valuable to give meaning to the
principles envisaged in Chapter VIII, namely,
complementarity, subsidiarity and comparative
advantage. The caution here is to avoid a framework
that compromises the value of the African Union and
other regional organizations as first responders to a
crisis.
A second significant area is the gap between the
requirements of an operation and the resources
available, about which many delegations spoke
eloquently yesterday in relation to the African Union
Mission in Somalia. To the extent that Africa’s peace
support operations are contributing to the maintenance
of international peace and security, the
recommendations of the Prodi report (see S/2008/813)
echoed yesterday to guarantee predictable, flexible and
sustainable funding/resourcing for such operations is
imperative. That is so because poorly resourced
operations are unlikely to deliver sustainable peace.
We welcome calls by some speakers for an
increase in voluntary contributions without caveats.
However, those are unlikely to be sufficient given the
tasks on the ground. For that reason, a reflection on the
modalities of bringing the value of the United Nations
for sustained operations, particularly through assessed
contributions, to AU-led missions is an unavoidable
necessity.
Thirdly, institutionally, we have witnessed
progress between the United Nations and the AU at the
various levels: between the African Union Peace and
Security Council and the United Nations Security
Council, the departments of peace and security,
political affairs et cetera, as well as between the United
Nations and regional organizations. Those relationships
need further clarification, particularly with regard to
the roles and responsibilities of all actors involved.
Clarity will minimize duplication and enhance
coherence, synergy of action and comfort levels, and
bring focus to the efforts of both the AU and the United
Nations.
Fourthly, operationally, Africa is demonstrating
renewed determination and willingness to deploy peace
support operations in fragile, even insecure,
environments. That calls for a shift in the United
Nations doctrine on peace operations. The practice that
S/PV.6702
12-2053410
the United Nations can only engage where there is
peace to keep translates into the United Nations
abandonment of some of the most challenging crisis
situations. That leads to the trend observed in the Prodi
report where the most challenging crisis situations are
left in the hands of the least resourced and able
organizations. Such a situation engenders less, not
more, security in the world.
Fifthly, at the AU we recognize that the
improvement of the AU-United Nations strategic
relationship also depends on building the capacity of
our institutions. We are now exploring ways of
increasing the pool of resources available for AU
activities, and are calling upon all our partners to assist
us in that regard. We are also in the process of
strengthening the interface between the various AU
offices, in particular between Addis Ababa and New
York, to ensure common messaging of African
perspectives and positions, especially where decisions
have been made by the AU.
This meeting follows an unprecedented window
of opportunity to finally restore security, peace and
stability in Somalia. The Council will recall that in
October 2010 the AU Peace and Security Council held
a meeting, ahead of the renewal of the AMISOM
mandate, in which we asked the Security Council to
consider a number of recommendations that we viewed
as critical for the operation in Somalia. The Security
Council responded to them in a limited manner. This
time around, we have approached the Security Council
after significant progress on the ground and with a
strategic concept developed by a joint assessment team
comprised of the AU, the United Nations and troop-
contributing countries. That underscores the growing
cooperation and partnership. Our expectation is that the
joint efforts will translate into better international and
Security Council support, as well as an effective
operation. Equally, we hope that the decision on
Somalia will be expeditious, and in no way be
predicated upon the outcomes of any future meetings
and engagements on Somalia. We must note that time
is of the absolute essence. The Security Council must
therefore act swiftly in order to protect and expand the
current gains.
In the area of mediation, it is crucial that that we
draw upon lessons from successful mediation
processes — for example, in the case of the Sudan,
where we have attained a good mix of United Nations
material, logistical and political support, together with
political legitimacy and access of the AU and its
subregional organization, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development. That is a vital lesson on
complementarity, comparative advantage and strategic
convergence.
In the light of those observations, the AU looks
towards a more innovative interpretation of Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter and to the
development of consensus on a set of principles that
will underpin greater synergy between the AU and the
United Nations. Key among those principles are
support for African ownership and priority setting;
flexible and innovative application of the principle of
complimentarily; and mutual respect and adherence to
the principle of comparative advantage.
In conclusion, I wish to re-emphasize the
significance of this agenda and to underscore the hope
of Africa that today’s deliberations will lead to greater
coherence between the United Nations Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council in the
areas of conflict prevention, management and
resolution on the continent. More important, I hope and
believe that the cooperation will be governed by the
basic and cardinal rules of mutual trust and respect.
Once again, I wish to express the gratitude of
Kenya for the invitation to attend and participate in this
historic meeting of the Security Council.
The President: I thank Minister Wetangula for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Holguín Cuéllar (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): On behalf of the Government of Colombia, I
would like to congratulate South Africa on its
presidency during this month, as well as to thank you,
Mr. President, for the timely initiative of convening
this debate of great pertinence and relevance for the
strengthening of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security. It is an honour to
participate in this meeting presided over by His
Excellency President Jacob Zuma. It is also a pleasure
to see high level representatives from the different
regions gathered here today. During its presidency,
South Africa will celebrate 100 years of the
establishment of the African National Congress. We
joint them in commemorating that event.
S/PV.6702
1112-20534
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2011/805) detailing the progress and
remaining challenges in the area of cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union on
issues of peace and security, as well as for his
participation in today’s debate.
I also wish to thank Ambassador Ramtane
Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, for his briefing.
The report of the Secretary-General leaves us
wondering how to complement peacekeeping
operations, as they, in and of themselves, do not
produce the changes that countries need in the long-
term to consolidate their stability and development. In
that context, in the debates of recent months, Colombia
has emphasized recourse to peaceful conflict resolution
mechanisms. Today, we would like once again to
underscore the great contributions of the provisions of
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations, which
allows the United Nations and the Council to support
the search for lasting solutions based on negotiation,
mediation and agreement.
For those practices to be effective, the role, vision
and leadership of regional organizations are crucial.
Without them, no action carried out focusing on the
interest of global balance will have the local effects
that improve the situation on the ground to provide
relief for populations affected by conflict. Concrete
actions have already been taken with regard to such
coordination, such as the common guidelines that
support a mediation framework in Africa based on the
cases of Kenya, Darfur, Somalia and Guinea-Bissau.
We hope those actions will be expanded and that
additional mechanisms will be found.
United Nations operations in Africa make up a
large portion of the Organization’s agenda. Without a
doubt, the coordination with the African Union in
recent years has been essential to the success that has
been achieved. The 25 operations authorized by the
Security Council in Africa since 1990 highlight the
importance of the work carried out by this body with
the African Union and other subregional organizations
on that continent.
The presence of some of those peacekeeping
operations on the ground for extended periods serves to
draw attention to the issue of exit goals in evaluating
joint work, as the criteria of strengthening national
capacity and the creation of conditions for countries to
be able to take on their full independence and
sovereignty and generate development and welfare for
their people must have a central role.
The experience of the African Union highlights
the need for an integrated approach to address
conflicts. That regional organization is in a privileged
position to contribute and define elements and establish
strategies on how to strengthen conflict resolution in
its region. The fact that the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union meet
annually is an indication of the greater awareness that
exists with regard to the need to coordinate policies
and actions in the search for solutions.
Chapter VIII of the Charter envisions the
contribution of regional organizations as an integral
part of collective security and values their vision,
actions and initiatives to find solutions within their
range of competence. The fact that the application of
Chapter VII makes way more frequently for Chapter VI
can hinge on the support of the Security Council for
those efforts, thus strengthening peaceful agreement
and diplomatic channels in conflict resolution.
We cannot lose sight of the fact that the greatest
aspiration in the face of conflicts is to achieve peace.
In this regard, the preservation of cooperation efforts
must include their continuous adjustment to ensure that
they do not to become permanent, self-serving
structures, or whose purpose becomes solving
temporary problems.
Mr. Mammadyarov (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank and congratulate the South African
presidency on convening this debate on the United
Nations-African Union partnership. We welcome the
presence at this very important meeting of His
Excellency Mr. Jacob Zuma, President of the Republic
of South Africa. We are grateful for the report
(S/2011/805) of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon. I would also like to welcome the delegation
of the African Union Commission and the chairs of the
African subregional organizations.
Over the past decade, the role of the African
Union and subregional organizations has increased
significantly. Indeed, not all regional organizations can
boast of their ability and political will to understand
the root causes of armed conflicts and to contribute
effectively to their resolution. As a country suffering
from the occupation of almost 20 per cent of its
territory and the forcible displacement of hundreds of
S/PV.6702
12-2053412
thousands of its citizens, Azerbaijan fully understands
the threats and challenges affecting countries with
unresolved conflicts, including those in Africa, as
indicated just a few minutes ago by Mr. Lamamra,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union.
The African Union has made great efforts to
promote peace, security and stability on the continent,
and has demonstrated its ability to take the lead. The
launch of the African Peace and Security Architecture
and the establishment of its constitutive elements, as
well as the African Union’s peace support operations
authorized by the Security Council, should be
particularly noted.
The challenges that Africa faces today and that
constitute a considerable part of the Security Council’s
deliberations can be better addressed through collective
political and diplomatic efforts. The high interest in
today’s debate demonstrates the vivid commitment of
the international community to supporting African
countries in bringing stability and ensuring sustainable
development on the continent.
In recent years, we have seen progress achieved
in developing the strategic relationship between the
United Nations and the African Union in the area of
peace and security. At the same time, we have to admit
that challenges remain and that more should be done to
further strengthen this relationship to effectively
address common collective security concerns in Africa.
It is critical that we further strengthen our joint
efforts to prevent conflicts before they occur. Greater
focus on the area of conflict prevention and mediation
has acquired additional significance. The development
of common guidelines by the United Nations and the
African Union as a framework for mediation in Africa
would contribute to achieving this objective. It is
crucial that all Member States strictly adhere to their
obligations, as laid down in the United Nations
Charter, with respect to the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of States. An
important determination in this regard has also been
made by the General Assembly in its resolution 65/283
of 22 June 2011 on strengthening the role of mediation
in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict
prevention and resolution.
We recognize the vital role of women in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts, peace
negotiations, peacebuilding, peacekeeping,
humanitarian response and post-conflict reconstruction.
The United Nations and the African Union need to
work to ensure that women and gender perspectives are
fully integrated into all peace and security efforts
undertaken by the two organizations, including by
building the necessary capacity.
It is important that the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union, as
well as the secretariats of both organizations, further
enhance their relationship, including through annual
meetings and more intense informal communications
between them. As the Secretary-General points out in
his report, efforts to find a solution to ensure
sustainable financing for African Union peace support
operations need to be continued. While the steps taken
by the African Union in developing its own financing
mechanisms are commendable, other means and
options provided by the United Nations and the
international community should also be available in
this regard, including in the prevention, management
and resolution of conflict, as well as in peacebuilding.
In recent times, Azerbaijan has significantly
developed its cooperation with the African Union and
its member States. Obtaining the status of observer
with the African Union has allowed my country to
advance mutually beneficial relations and dialogue.
Azerbaijan is actively participating in implementing
various assistance programmes for Africa. We
responded to the appeals of the respective
Governments and international organizations to
provide urgent aid aimed at addressing the
humanitarian crisis in the Horn of Africa and elsewhere
on the continent. Furthermore, we have contributed to
supporting the institution and capacity-building
programme of the African Union Commission and
offered scholarships for diplomats from African
countries to study in the Azerbaijan Diplomatic
Academy.
Azerbaijan has also joined the work of one of the
Peacebuilding Commission’s country-specific
configurations, and looks forward to pursuing its
efforts in this regard. We have started consultations
with the relevant stakeholders to apply in Africa our
rich experience in the field of demining, provided by
the Azerbaijan National Agency for Mine Action. We
look forward to advancing our cooperation with the AU
Commission and African countries and are planning to
host in Azerbaijan, in cooperation with the United
Nations and the African Union, a high-level
S/PV.6702
1312-20534
international conference on the issues of concern to
Africa.
In conclusion, I would like to express our full
support of South Africa’s draft resolution (S/2012/25),
aimed at developing effective partnership relations and
cooperation between the two organizations. Last but
not least, I would also like to take this opportunity to
stress the importance for the Council to monitor the
implementation of its existing resolutions, in particular
those related to the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts.
Mr. Rodas Melgar (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank your Government, Sir, for having
organized this timely debate, as well as for the concept
paper circulated among us (S/2012/13, annex). We
highly appreciate your personal presence at this
gathering, which undoubtedly adds to its relevance. We
also value the presence of the senior officials of the
five subregional institutions who have joined us, and
we thank the Commissioner for Peace and Security of
the African Union for his briefing on United Nations-
African Union cooperation in peace and security. We
also sincerely appreciate the Secretary-General’s
complete and illuminating report on the same topic
(S/2011/805).
This is a very special occasion for me — I would
even say an emotional one — since this is our first
participation in a debate of the Security Council since
we took our place as an elected member last week, and
because it takes place two days before the present
Administration of my country relinquishes power to
the new Government elected by popular vote in
November. In other words, this week is of special
relevance for our history of democratic consolidation at
the national level, and also for our presence, for the
first time, in this body of the United Nations. I
therefore welcome the opportunity to be present on this
occasion.
It might be argued that Guatemala has little to
offer in a debate on the strategic partnership between
the Security Council and the African Union, since we
do not belong to the latter, but that is not the case. On
the contrary, today’s debate is very pertinent for us,
since regional cooperation is one of the pillars of our
foreign policy. For 60 years now, our subregion,
Central America, has been a pioneer in promoting a
broad and deep integration process, which partially
explains the high value we place on regionalism in all
its manifestations. The support we offered to the recent
creation of the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States is, of itself, one more example of that
vocation.
The expression of that policy in the context of the
United Nations is found in the area of peace and
security under Chapter VIII of the Charter, which
covers the compatibility between the work of the
Security Council and regional organizations. Indeed,
we have witnessed the growing link between the
Council and regional entities in the resolutions adopted
by this organ recently, in which the African Union
certainly plays a prominent role, together with other
regional economic communities, such as the Economic
Community of West African States, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
League of Arab States.
The link between the Security Council and
regional entities is not limited to the preventive actions
and mediation contemplated in Article 52 of the
Charter or to the coercive measures contemplated in
Article 53; indeed, as the report of the Secretary-
General reminds us, those entities increasingly
participate in peacekeeping operations and, by
extension, in peacebuilding activities. In both
endeavours, we feel part of a community of interests
with our colleagues of the African continent, in our
double capacity as a troop-contributing country and as
a country that experienced a post-conflict situation
with very unique experiences of peacebuilding on the
heels of the signing of our own peace accords in late
1996.
Judging from the concept paper circulated by the
presidency (S/2012/13, annex) and the report of the
Secretary-General, much has been achieved in
partnering the Security Council with the African
Union — the latter, through the African Peace and
Security Architecture — since the Security Council
adopted resolutions 1625 (2005) and 1809 (2008). At
the same time, we take the point made in the concept
paper that there remains much to be done, above all in
the area of mediation and conflict prevention.
To the degree that concrete proposals emerge to
strengthen the link between both institutions, my
delegation will consider them with a positive
inclination. We are also well aware — and the
Secretary-General’s report makes the point — that
cooperation between the United Nations and the
S/PV.6702
12-2053414
African Union has at times faced divergent positions
on particular issues. The same can be said for different
points of view regarding complementarities and
burden-sharing. However, we feel that the existing
consensus-building mechanisms between the parties
should help to resolve those issues.
In more general terms, we believe that the
partnership between the Security Council and regional
institutions in the area of peace and security contains
the conceptual underpinnings of a productive
relationship based on the clear comparative advantages
derived from the Council’s mandate to maintain
international peace and security and the greater
knowledge and identification that regional institutions
tend to have regarding their own member countries.
That is why we applaud the growing tendency of
the Council — tacit, in some cases, and explicit in
others — to follow the guidance offered by the
regional entities, in contrast to the possible temptation
to try and dictate the path to follow from this Chamber
without consultations. Perhaps the best examples of the
results of this cooperation are the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the
African Union Mission in Somalia.
We also note that progress in the area of
cooperation has taken place both at the level of the
Secretariats of the United Nations and the African
Union and within the intergovernmental machinery. We
find that the yearly meetings of the Security Council
with the African Union Peace and Security Council are
of particular interest. We also applaud the
establishment in 2010 of the United Nations Office to
the African Union, which will bring greater
consistency to the relationship between the two
entities.
Naturally, cooperation between the United
Nations and regional institutions goes well beyond the
mandates of the Security Council. As is well known,
there are several agreements between the United
Nations and the African Union in the area of
development cooperation, all under the umbrella of the
framework agreement signed in 2006 between them,
which contain a 10-year capacity-building programme
which is not limited to the peace and security cluster.
We naturally support cooperation in the area of
development, in the spirit of the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development. That, too, can be perceived as a
conflict-prevention activity, under the broader aegis of
the General Assembly.
In summary, Guatemala, in its multilateral
vocation, has always been partial to combining the
presence of the United Nations with that of regional
and subregional institutions. That is valid for
development cooperation, the maintenance of
international peace and security, humanitarian
assistance and the promotion of human rights. It is
valid for our own continent — Latin America and the
Caribbean — and there is no reason to doubt that it is
equally so for Africa, where the African Union and a
host of subregional institutions have a solid and proven
track record of achievements. In the latter instance,
South Africa has played a leading role that merits our
recognition.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I want to
thank the Secretary-General for his presence and
remarks. I also welcome the Ministers present here, as
well as Commissioner Lamamra. At the outset, I want
especially to thank President Zuma for convening this
important and timely debate.
The relationship between the United Nations and
the African Union (AU) is important to both bodies. As
the AU approaches its tenth anniversary, the time is
ripe for considering what we have learned, where we
are going and what needs to be improved. Collective
African efforts at advancing peace and security on the
continent have indeed come a long way since the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) was founded, in
1963. Since 2002 in particular, when the African Union
succeeded the OAU, African Governments have shown
that, acting together, they can prevent conflict. The AU
marked a new beginning with its doctrine of non-
indifference. The AU charter recognizes that it might
be necessary to intervene in the affairs of a member
State “in respect of grave circumstances, namely: war
crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity”. Those
are brave and worthy words.
The African Union’s first major mission was in
Burundi, with initial deployment in April 2003. The
African Union then acted responsibly in Darfur, when
other international actors were still hesitant. The AU
Mission in the Sudan was operational in August 2004,
before any other force. The AU was also active early
on in pressing for peace between the Sudan and South
Sudan. President Mbeki’s efforts continue to be
valuable, and South Africa deserves praise for its
S/PV.6702
1512-20534
leadership and dedication to peace in both the Sudan
and Burundi. Above all, the African Union has taken
on a very tough mission in Somalia, where it has
deployed troops to advance peace since 2007. The
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia have come
a long way in developing their relationship and in
improving coordination. All of those missions were
undertaken with the collaboration of the international
community, notably the Security Council, and
sometimes with that of subregional organizations such
as the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD).
Recognizing the importance of the international
community’s engagement with the AU, the United
States Mission to the African Union was established in
2006; it has been significantly strengthened since 2009.
That is consistent with the Obama Administration’s
overall policy of intensified engagement with regional
organizations, including the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations and the Organization of
American States. The United Nations has likewise
strengthened its ties to regional organizations, notably
after the General Assembly established the United
Nations Office to the African Union, in 2010.
It is precisely because the relationship between
the United Nations and the AU, and between the
Security Council and the African Union’s Peace and
Security Council, is so important that we must confront
the challenges facing that relationship forthrightly and
honestly if we are to make progress. The United
Nations needs a strong African Union, and the African
Union needs a strong United Nations. Yet, African
Union member States have sometimes indicated that
they feel ignored or disregarded by the Council. At the
same time, some Security Council members feel that
African Union member States have not always
provided unified or consistent views on key issues, and
that the African Union has on occasion been slow to
act on urgent matters.
Beneath those perceptions and frustrations,
however, is a deeper issue, that is, who is on first?
Under the Charter, the Security Council has a unique,
universal and primary mandate to maintain
international peace and security. The Security Council
is not subordinate to other bodies, or to the schedules
or capacities of regional or subregional groups.
Nonetheless, the Security Council wants and needs to
cooperate closely with regional organizations, as
demonstrated by our growing collaboration with the
African Union over nearly a decade. Such
collaboration, however, needs to be based on the
exigencies of the issue at hand, and that cooperation
cannot be on the basis that the regional organization
independently decides the policy and that United
Nations Member States simply bless it and pay for it.
There can be no blank check, either politically or
financially. The Security Council should, and will, take
into account the views of regional and subregional
institutions, while recognizing that sometimes there is
disagreement among them.
For example, the positions of organizations such
as the Economic Community of Western African States
or IGAD on an issue in their subregion might not be
exactly the same as the consensus view of the 54
member States of the African Union. The United States
urges the Security Council to seize this opportunity to
define our relations with the African Union more
precisely, so that we can move forward together in
better meeting the urgent challenges that confront us
all.
In that vein, let us be candid. The periodic
African Union-Security Council consultations have
not, thus far, been altogether productive or satisfactory.
If they cannot be improved, they risk being jettisoned
by one side or the other as not useful or worse. To
make the United Nations-AU relationship more
effective, we must do more than consider formalizing
African Union-Security Council meetings. The
meetings must prove their worth. The meetings must
have set agendas and concrete priorities that lead to
tangible improvements, not only in how we work
together but in how our work helps people in Africa
and around the world. Nonetheless, the opportunities
for us to seize together are considerable.
The European Union has set an example in its
work to strengthen the AU’s Peace and Security
Architecture. In peacekeeping, the African Standby
Force is being improved and shows promise.
Bilaterally, the United States continues to train and
equip African militaries for deployment in multilateral
peacekeeping operations. The United Nations-AU Joint
Task Force on Peace and Security is a valuable forum
that can greatly contribute to better United Nations-AU
cooperation on peace and security. The United Nations
could assist further by standardizing training of
peacekeepers. It could go further still in offering
S/PV.6702
12-2053416
Department of Peacekeeping Operations guidance to
the AU, including through peacekeeping programmes
that give instruction on the rule of law, sexual- and
gender-based violence and the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. We would also welcome sustained
collaboration on lessons learned and best practices. It
is also time for a formal lessons learned exercise
concerning United Nations-AU joint operations so far,
including the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and AMISOM.
One lesson that the United States and others
learned in Bosnia is that joint command and control
operations, or so-called dual keys, do not typically
work well. Hybrid missions are very challenging at
best. We need to analyse our experience in the field,
discuss it and agree on optimal mission structures that
are linked to the objectives of the situation at hand.
Recent United Nations-AU coordination in fighting the
Lord’s Resistance Army provides one positive example
to consider. The United Nations, for its part, could be
more effective in Addis Ababa. The creation of the
United Nations Office to the African Union is a
positive step, but the annual review of the United
Nations agencies supporting the AU needs to improve.
At present, no single United Nations office is in charge
of United Nations efforts to assist the African Union.
That leads to unnecessary duplication. United Nations
officials on the ground need stronger backing to
streamline their own structures, to better aid the
African Union.
That is definitely, however, a two-way street. For
its part, the African Union should improve its internal
management in the areas of administration, accounting,
financial management and human resources.
Improvement in those areas would help to foster a
more productive relationship on the ground in Addis
Ababa and would energize progress on the United
Nations-AU 10-year capacity-building programme.
Key to that, as the African Union Chairperson
suggested in his report, is for the African Union to
identify priorities, and the United Nations should be
responsive to that. Since the programme was
established in 2006, far too little progress has been
achieved through United Nations delivering as one in
its engagement with the African Union and regional
economic communities. The African Union and the
United Nations have already agreed on a range of
actions to strengthen their operational relationship.
More must be done to galvanize improvements at the
programmatic and administrative levels.
South Africa has rightly emphasized conflict
prevention and mediation in envisioning the future of
AU peace and security policies. An atrocity-prevention
framework should also be developed, and African
Union mediation efforts should be expanded. The role
of women in conflict mediation has not advanced
nearly enough, and the African Union should consider
developing a regional action plan on women and peace
and security.
As we approach the African Union’s tenth
anniversary, we should seize this milestone to take
stock and consider where we are going. We all hope
that the peace and security challenges in Africa will
continue to lessen over time. Improved cooperation
between the Security Council and the African Union is
critical to that goal. I urge colleagues not only to laud
progress but to acknowledge frankly the challenges to
that cooperation and to devise concrete ways to match
reality to our shared aspirations.
I thank President Zuma again for convening this
discussion.
Ms. Pieper (Germany): I too would like to thank
you, President Zuma, for convening this important
debate today. Let me also thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, the Commissioner for Peace and Security of
the African Union, Mr. Lamamra, as well as the
Chairperson of the African Union Peace and Security
Council, Mr. Metangula, for their important
contributions.
The cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations envisaged in Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations is indispensable for
finding appropriate solutions to crises and conflicts and
for making optimal use of resources and capacities.
The partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU) is particularly well developed.
Their expanding involvement and achievements in past
years have made the African Union and the subregional
organizations into indispensable actors in resolving
crises in Africa. I would especially like to call attention
to the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) and the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM). That involvement deserves our
great respect.
S/PV.6702
1712-20534
Another important contribution by the AU to
solving humanitarian crises is its regional initiative in
the fight against the Lord’s Resistance Army. The
pragmatic cooperation between the United Nations and
the AU in resolving conflicts was recently illustrated
when their representatives in charge of issues relating
to the Lord’s Resistance Army jointly travelled to
South Sudan, the Central African Republic, Uganda
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In recent years, much has been accomplished in
promoting cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union at both the strategic and operational
levels. We especially welcome the regular meetings
between the members of the United Nations Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, as well as the work of the United
Nations Office to the African Union in Addis Ababa,
joint high-level meetings, more desk-to-desk meetings
and also the recent joint assessment mission to the
Sahel. More progress is possible. We must use both
formal and informal means to intensify cooperation.
Specifically, I would like to mention the following
areas.
At the strategic level, the dialogue between the
United Nations Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the AU should be strengthened.
The African Union’s position and that of subregional
organizations are important for the United Nations
Security Council when it deals with issues relating to
Africa. That does not mean that the positions will
always be the same and must always be so. In addition
to the annual meetings of the members of the United
Nations Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council, Germany supports inviting
representatives of the AU and subregional African
organizations to the meetings of the United Nations
Security Council on an ad hoc basis. At the same time,
we welcome the participation of United Nations
Special Envoys at meetings of the AU Peace and
Security Council.
More attention must be paid to conflict
prevention and mediation in the future. The AU,
subregional African organizations and the United
Nations Secretary-General’s special representatives are
already active in this field. In the future, they should
work together more systematically, both formally and
informally. Cooperation between the Peacebuilding
Commission and African organizations should also be
strengthened in order to support national and regional
efforts to consolidate peace.
At the operational level, we should constantly
analyze the experience gained in the various
partnerships between the United Nations and the AU in
the area of peacekeeping, especially the current
AMISOM and UNAMID missions, and put that
knowledge to use for further cooperation. Examples for
such study are providing and training troops and the
close integration of political mediation and the
presence of peace missions on the ground. Capacity-
building in the AU must continue to be pushed
forward. The 10-year capacity-building programme has
so far proven to be a useful instrument, but clearly
defined guidelines for implementing its aims could
make it more efficient.
Effective cooperation between the United Nations
and the AU on peace and security issues can also profit
from the efforts of others, such as the European Union
(EU) and bilateral partners. The European Union offers
considerable financial and logistical support for
African initiatives and capacity-building for the
African Union. Worthy of special mention in that
context are the joint Africa-EU Partnership on Peace
and Security and the African Peace Facility. Well-
known examples are the joint efforts of Operation
Atalanta, AMISOM and the United Nations Support
Office for AMISOM, as well as the EU’s support for
the AU’s efforts within that framework.
Those efforts are complemented by bilateral
support. Germany, for example, is currently supporting
construction of the peace and security building for the
AU Commission in Addis Ababa. We support the AU
programme for border management in Africa within the
framework of our joint efforts in conflict prevention.
We also support the reinforcement of African peace
and security structures, for example by training and
equipping African police officers for the African
Standby Force and for deployment in United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
Finally, I would like to express the support of my
delegation for the draft resolution to be voted on today.
Mr. Courtial (France) (spoke in French): Madam
President, I wish to thank you for having convened
today’s debate on cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) in the area of
peace and security. I welcome your presence here
today, which bears witness to the leadership role that
S/PV.6702
12-2053418
South Africa intends to play in the Security Council. I
wish also to extend my thanks to the Secretary-General
for his presentation and for his report (S/2011/805), as
well as to Commissioner Lamamra.
I should like to make several observations. As
you recalled, Madam President, almost two thirds of
the discussions held in the Security Council pertain to
Africa, and 80 per cent of all peacekeepers are
deployed on the African continent. It is against that
backdrop that the cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in the area of peace and
security has continued to grow.
The African Union provides the United Nations
with on-the-ground access. Its efforts in that respect
bear witness to the fact that the continent is
endeavouring to gradually shoulder responsibility for
its own security, in accordance with the San Francisco
Charter. For its part, the United Nations provides the
African Union with legitimacy in the framework of the
Charter as well as skills, resources and expertise that
can provide support to missions charged with conflict
prevention and management on the continent.
Today all our efforts are focused on ensuring that
that original partnership, which is fully in line with the
spirit of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, lasts and flourishes.
The Secretary-General’s report recalls that today
conflict prevention, peacekeeping — in the strict sense
of the word — and peacebuilding lie at the heart of the
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union. So as to ensure conflict prevention, the
United Nations has established regional offices in
Dakar and Libreville and has created partnerships with
African organizations.
The United Nations Office in West Africa is fully
engaged in initiatives in the area of mediation and good
offices, specifically in Guinea, the Niger and Benin, in
systematic coordination with the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States.
The new United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa, established in Libreville, is tasked with
a similar role. Moreover, the African Union is involved
in the assessment missions deployed on the ground by
the United Nations in the face of the new cross-cutting
threats, such as the recent ones in the Sahel region.
In addition to its presence on the ground, the
United Nations has strengthened the mediation
capacities of the African Union by supporting the
creation of a unit to that end within the African Union
Commission. That cooperation has increased the
capacities of the African Union, which today is
carrying out complex mediation missions, particularly
in Somalia and the Sudan, where the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel, led by Mr. Mbeki, is
addressing the settlement of pending disputes between
Khartoum and Juba.
In future, the challenge will be to better
coordinate the respective mediation efforts of the
United Nations and the African Union. The guidelines
in this respect that are currently being drawn up will
undoubtedly be useful in that context.
The United Nations and the African Union are
also cooperating in the conduct of peacekeeping
operations. The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur is playing a decisive role in the
stabilization of the security and humanitarian situation.
One of the challenges facing the mission is that it is
governed by a chain of command that is split between
the United Nations and the African Union. Experience
has shown that strengthening day-to-day cooperation
between the Secretariat and the AU Commission will
improve the effectiveness of military personnel on the
ground.
In Somalia, the United Nations is providing
significant logistical support to the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), which is tasked with
supporting the Transitional Federal Institutions and the
Somali security forces in the establishment of security
in the country and in the implementation of the process
of political transition. That technical cooperation is
crucial to enabling AMISOM to carry out its mission in
a particularly complex context and to counter the
challenges posed by Al-Shabaab fighters.
While the African Union is calling for increased
United Nations support, we should nevertheless ensure
that the options put forward not fall exclusively under
the domain of security. The progress made by troops on
the ground must be consolidated by the implementation
of the political strategy by the Transitional Federal
Government, backed by the international community,
as the Security Council has recalled in several
resolutions.
The conduct of peacekeeping operations is, of
course, interlinked with the issue of funding, in
particular in the current, very difficult budgetary
S/PV.6702
1912-20534
context. Along those lines, we must seek improved
operational effectiveness, in particular by
strengthening the chain of command in such operations
and by improving cooperation with troop-contributing
countries.
We also take note with interest of the efforts
made by the African Union to reform its management
methods and diversify its sources of funding for
peacekeeping operations. The African Peace Facility
provided by the European Union is an initial
appropriate step in response to the request by the
African Union for lasting and predictable funding for
its operations. It is crucial that new players step up to
the plate so as to guarantee the lasting nature of this
funding.
Peacebuilding should also be at the heart of
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union. In the Sahel, in West Africa and in the
Great Lakes region, we have seen an increasing
number of, and a growing interlinkage between, factors
of instability, terrorism, trafficking and rebel activity,
which undermine the security and integrity of States.
Such challenges must spur us to continue to support
security sector reform; disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration initiatives; and the promotion of the
rule of law.
Here I should like to underscore the importance
that France attaches to support for the holding of free,
fair and peaceful elections. In the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
South Sudan, the combined efforts of the United
Nations, through its peacekeeping operations in the
region and its Office in Libreville, and of the African
Union in combating the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA)
are yet another example of the cooperation between
these two organizations.
Regional participation is key to finding a lasting
solution in the face of that threat. The recent adoption
by the African Union of a strategy to combat the LRA
is most welcome.
Clearly, challenges to peace and security on the
African continent are far from being homogenous.
Thus increased cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union is essential. The
contacts and meetings promoted by the Secretary-
General between the Secretariat and the African Union
Commission, as well as between the Security Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council, fall within that
framework and will, in keeping with the spirit of the
Charter of the United Nations, guarantee the best
possible coordination between the African Union and
the United Nations. That is also the task of the new
United Nations Office to the African Union.
My country welcomes the progress made as a
result of the cooperation between the United Nations
and the AU and will continue to play an active role in
supporting United Nations peacekeeping, as well as the
African Union and subregional organizations in terms
of both funding and training.
As President Sarkozy stated during the Africa-
France summit held in Nice last year, Africa must be a
key player with respect to larger issues of peace,
security and global equilibrium. France has taken
action in that respect and hopes that in the framework
of the necessary reform of the Security Council, Africa
will assume its rightful place, including among the
permanent members.
Mr. Brites Pereira (Portugal): I would like to
start by thanking South Africa not only for giving us
the opportunity to discuss this important issue, but also
for President Jacob Zuma’s presiding over the meeting.
We are particularly honoured by this fact.
Portugal believes that a strong relation between
the United Nations and the African Union (AU) is
critical to peace and security on the African continent.
Portugal also strongly supports a greater role for the
African Union and African subregional organizations
in a context that embodies the principle of African
ownership when dealing with the major challenges of
the continent.
In that regard, I wish to thank the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kenya and Commissioner Lamamra
for their very useful statements. We are also grateful
for the report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/805),
which provides us with a very useful update on AU-
United Nations cooperation in the fields of peace and
security. It contains useful conclusions and lessons
learned, as well as recommendations on the way
forward. It shows us that we still have much to do
together to ensure that the existing mechanisms and
practices are used to their full potential.
The further development of the AU institutional
and political role is unstoppable. The reinforcement of
the United Nations presence in Addis Ababa is the
recognition of the AU’s progressive affirmation as a
S/PV.6702
12-2053420
leader organization and indispensable player in African
peace processes. It also represents a serious effort to
make United Nations interaction with the AU more
coherent and efficient. Let us not forget that roughly
two-thirds of the issues addressed by the Security
Council pertain to Africa. As such, the views of the
African Union should be adequately taken into
consideration in the decision-making process of the
Council.
In addition, the ongoing dialogue between the
Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council is critical in that regard. We need to
make sure that that dialogue is more substantive and
productive. We could achieve that by identifying more
clearly the issues of common concern to both bodies,
be they country situations or cross-cutting issues. Key
among those are human rights, democracy, the rule of
law, the defence of women and children in conflict and
post-conflict situations, and effectively addressing
sexual violence in armed conflicts, especially by
bringing the perpetrators to justice. We should also
look more carefully at how we can improve the
efficiency of our preventive diplomatic initiatives,
which should be geared towards more coordinated
action.
During its presidency of the Security Council last
November, Portugal promoted a debate on new
challenges to international peace and security (see
S/PV.6668), which feature regularly on the agendas of
both the Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council. The outcomes of such
discussions must be fed into the larger United Nations-
AU dialogue, as they will enhance our understanding
of and response to specific African security concerns.
Another important aspect of the United Nations-
AU relationship is the further development of the
African Union’s capacities, which should include the
areas of mediation and conflict prevention. The African
Union and subregional organizations are often much
closer to conflict situations on the continent than
anyone else and enjoy privileged access to local actors.
Those are clear advantages when trying to prevent
tensions from escalating into conflict. The United
Nations and other international partners, such as the
European Union, should thus continue to support the
capacities of the African Union. In that regard, the full
implementation of the 10-year capacity-building
programme is clearly a priority.
Portugal also strongly supports international
efforts aimed at strengthening the various dimensions
of the African Peace and Security Architecture.
Through our active participation in the Africa-
European Union Strategic Partnership, we have
consistently advocated European financial and
technical assistance for African initiatives in the peace
and security fields.
On that score, let me underline the important
contribution of regional arrangements to peacekeeping,
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter. We
strongly encourage enhanced cooperation between the
United Nations Office to the African Union and the
African Union when planning and conducting
peacekeeping operations in Africa, as well as on any
other initiatives that seek to improve the
interoperability between the United Nations and the
African Union. Accordingly, we welcome the recently
published AU report, detailing its strategic vision on
the partnership between the African Union and United
Nations in peace and security matters.
We note that the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) are two models of
concrete peacekeeping cooperation between the United
Nations and the AU. We have learned many lessons
from those two experiences, but there is still room for
improvement. Meetings such as yesterday’s on
AMISOM (see S/PV.6701), bringing together key
partners from the AU and the United Nations, as well
as representatives of countries that contribute troops to
AMISOM, are fundamental in that joint learning
process. In that way, we will ensure that the strategic
dialogue between the two Councils translates into
effective operational cooperation on the ground.
Finally, we underscore the fact that contradictory
signals from international actors are likely to prolong
conflict and delay peaceful solutions in Africa.
Stronger United Nations-AU cooperation and a better
use of existing channels between those two
organizations are clearly the only way to ensure
coherence and to avoid the duplication of efforts.
Indeed, they are the only way to ensure the effective
response of the international community to crises,
including when they occur on the African continent.
Let us all work together to make sure that that is so.
Mr. Liu Guijin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China appreciates the initiative of South Africa to hold
S/PV.6702
2112-20534
today’s high-level meeting on the United Nations-
African Union (AU) partnership. We are convinced that
this meeting will further strengthen the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the AU,
build consensus and bolster efforts to resolve conflicts
in Africa and to achieve peace and security on the
continent.
In June 2008, during its presidency of the
Council, South Africa convened a high-level meeting
on strengthening cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations, in particular the
African Union (see S/PV.5868), at which broad
consensus was reached on establishing a strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union. Over the past three years, thanks to the
concerted efforts of all parties, cooperation between
the United Nations and the AU has increased and
yielded effective results.
Various forms of exchange and cooperation
mechanisms have been established between the
Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council and between the United Nations Secretariat
and the AU Commission. With the assistance of the
United Nations, the AU has strengthened its internal
mechanism and capacity-building, and cooperation
between the two sides has led to progress on issues
such as Darfur and Somalia and enhanced peace and
security in Africa.
However, it should be noted that Africa remains
the continent with the highest number of conflicts and
the most fragile security situation. Faced with a
plethora of interconnected traditional and
non-traditional security threats, constrained by its
capacity and lack of resources, the AU finds itself
unable to cope with all the challenges alone. It is of
even greater concern that some AU peace efforts in
recent years have not received the timely and effective
support of the international community and failed to
achieve the anticipated results. That is detrimental to
the long-term development of the United Nations-AU
partnership.
The international situation is now undergoing
complex and profound changes. The prosperity and
future of countries have never been as closely
interlinked as today. Under such circumstances, peace
and security in Africa have a direct impact on the
interests and well-being of each and every member of
the international community. Helping Africa to deal
with global challenges is not only the unshirkable
responsibility of the international community, it is also
in the common interests of all parties. As the most
universal, representative and authoritative
intergovernmental organization in the world, the
United Nations has a unique role to play in supporting
and assisting Africa. It should work hand in hand with
the AU to build on the results of, and increase, the
existing cooperation in order to make a greater
contribution to peace and development in Africa. In
that connection, China wishes to make the following
proposals.
First, we should take full account of the
importance of Africa and continue to increase input in
the continent. In recent years, the United Nations and
the international community have increased their
investment in Africa, but it still falls short of the huge
demand from Africa. Against the backdrop of a bleak
global economy, with countries facing fiscal
contraction, it is becoming increasingly difficult for the
international community to increase assistance to
Africa. Nevertheless, we should still view Africa from
a strategic and long-term perspective and fully
understand the significant impact of African peace and
development on the prosperity and security of the
world as a whole. We need to address African issues
with a greater sense of urgency and continue to
increase input in Africa. The United Nations and the
international community should heed the views of
African countries and earnestly address their concerns.
The United Nations should continue to mobilize funds,
optimize the allocation of its resources and give
priority to efforts aimed at building peace and security
in Africa.
Secondly, African efforts to resolve African
issues should be strongly supported. In recent years,
African countries have actively engaged in settling
conflicts in Africa. The relevant African countries and
the AU have played their role in the settlement of the
Libyan crisis. China highly commends the leadership
of South Africa and of His Excellency President Zuma
in that regard. We believe that many African issues
have complicated causes and involve the interests of
many parties. As a regional organization built and led
by Africans, the AU has a better understanding of those
situations. Moreover, African parties are generally very
cautious about external interventions. They are more
likely to accept peace and mediation efforts from
fellow Africans. In that regard, the international
S/PV.6702
12-2053422
community should have faith in the wisdom and
experience of African people, take into full account the
opinions of the AU and provide all manner of support
to the AU in its efforts to carry out mediation, good
offices and peacekeeping missions. We encourage the
United Nations and the AU to increase communication
and coordination so as to give full play to their
comparative advantages.
Thirdly, we should assist the AU in strengthening
capacity-building. As a Chinese saying goes, it is better
to teach one the skill of fishing than to offer him fish.
In the long run, peace and development in Africa
mainly relies on the efforts of the AU and African
countries themselves. The AU, however, is constrained
by insufficient capacity in human resources, material
and financing. The UN and the international
community should respond sincerely to the legitimate
requests of the AU and strengthen cooperation with the
AU in personnel training, institutional development,
the sharing of information and experience, the
management of resources, logistic support and other
areas. In the meantime, the United Nations should
enlist other countries in providing assistance. In recent
years, the United Nations has undertaken some active
exploration and gained positive experience in
providing assistance to the African Union Mission in
Somalia and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur. Such exploration and experience
merit timely study, assessment and dissemination.
China highly values its friendly relations and
cooperation with the AU. The development of our
friendly relations has gained momentum in recent
years. China appreciates and fully supports what the
AU has done to resolve hotspot issues in Africa, and
has provided financial and material assistance to the
AU. China will continue to work with the international
community to support the close strategic and
cooperative relationship between the United Nations
and the AU, and make its contribution to African peace
and security.
Mr. Esaw (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like
to join the Secretary-General and previous speakers in
thanking the South African presidency of the Security
Council for the organization of this debate on the
important issue of the cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) in the
maintenance of international peace and security. I also
welcome the presence in the Chamber of His
Excellency President Jacob Zuma of South Africa to
preside personally over this debate, thereby illustrating
his country’s adherence to the principles of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
especially the African Union. The presence here today
of representatives of the African Union and subregional
economic communities is testament to the high degree
of attention that such cooperation enjoys in the daily
management of United Nations and African Union
affairs.
The latest comprehensive and very informative
report (S/2011/805) of the Secretary-General on that
cooperation, which is rooted in Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, should be commended.
My delegation welcomes it. The report addresses the
crucial issues on which that cooperation is based,
namely, ensuring peace and security through
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations; security
sector reform; the protection of civilians; humanitarian
efforts; and human rights. More than just cooperation,
as the report repeatedly highlights, this is about a
partnership. The report also indicates that the two
organizations acknowledge a shared responsibility in
the maintenance of international peace and security on
the African continent, even as it is understood that, in
accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter, the
primary responsibility in that regard falls above all on
the United Nations and, in particular, the Security
Council.
That partnership has taken root throughout the
years, with joint efforts having been undertaken that
have produced conclusive results. The establishment,
in July 2010, of the United Nations Office to the
African Union was aimed at strengthening cooperation
and coordination between the two organizations in the
area of peace and security. The establishment, on
25 September 2010, of an AU-United Nations working
group on peace and security reflected the desire to
strengthen the strategic partnership covering various
areas, including the protection of civilians and human
rights. The coordination that took place at the highest
levels last year on the situations in Côte d’Ivoire,
Libya, the Sudan, South Sudan and Somalia, which
continues today, illustrates the desire of the United
Nations, in cooperation with the African Union, to find
peaceful ways to resolve many crises and conflicts on
the African continent, which makes up more than
60 per cent of the issues on the agenda of the Security
Council.
S/PV.6702
2312-20534
It is by drawing lessons learned from past
experience and from the cooperation between the two
organizations with regard to peacekeeping operations
on the African continent, as was the case with the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), that this strategic partnership takes
on its full significance.
Indeed, with respect to AMISOM, the frequent
lack of coordination, delays in mobilizing logistical
support and inadequate financial resources have long
been at the very heart of the Mission’s mixed results.
Although the situation may have changed, it remains
true that AMISOM continues to experience all sorts of
difficulties.
My country believes that one aspect of the United
Nations-AU partnership that should be a priority is
cooperation in conflict prevention and mediation. In
presidential statement S/PRST/2010/14, adopted
following the open debate of 16 July 2010 (S/PV.6360)
organized by the Nigerian presidency on the
instruments of preventive diplomacy, notably in Africa,
the Security Council deemed it necessary to make
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in Africa closer and
more operational in order to create regional and
national capacities to use the instruments of preventive
diplomacy, including mediation, data collection and
analysis, early warning mechanisms, prevention and
peacemaking.
From a subregional perspective, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) has
long made prevention, mediation and the peaceful
settlement of disputes a pillar of its policy. The
adoption in 2001 of an additional protocol on
democracy and good governance was part and parcel of
such efforts. We welcome the active role being played
by the United Nations Office for West Africa in that
initiative, pursuant to its mandate. In the final analysis,
preventive diplomacy remains by far the most cost-
effective of all peacekeeping activities because it is
less expensive and allows the use of weapons to be
avoided. It should therefore be favoured.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General
on the activities of the Office (S/2011/811) notes its
many activities, organized jointly with ECOWAS, on
matters as diverse as drug trafficking, piracy at sea,
organized crime and the proliferation of all manner of
weapons, in particular in the Sahel. The United Nations
has developed improved cooperation with the African
Union and subregional organizations in these areas in
recent years. The fight against these scourges must be
stepped up.
My country welcomes the establishment of a
similar office in Central Africa on 1 January 2011. The
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
became operational on 2 March of that year. The
security problems encountered in that region require
the United Nations ongoing presence.
Another important aspect of United Nations-AU
cooperation is the protection of civilians. In helping the
African Union to develop guidelines in that field, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations has shown
that peacekeeping operations have made such
protection a priority. The training of troops in the
implementation of the guidelines should be extended
and supported financially.
As we have seen, there are many areas in which
cooperation exists between the United Nations and the
AU. Progress has been made, but much remains to be
done. The United Nations and the African Union have
therefore agreed to create a series of mechanisms,
including the joint support and coordination
mechanism within the framework of UNAMID.
Despite such efforts to coordinate the activities of
both organizations in order to allow them to manage
crises more efficiently, certain shortcomings remain in
United Nations-AU cooperation. The management of
the Ivorian and Libyan crises last year demonstrated
the dysfunction between the two organizations, and in
particular the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council. The prevarication concerning the
action to be undertaken in those crises was very
harmful to the populations involved. Decisions must be
taken jointly and responsibilities defined in serious
situations.
Clearly, the need for the participation of regional
and subregional organizations in the settlement of
conflicts is irrefutable. Regional actors play a crucial
role, because subregional organizations have their own
conflict-settlement mechanisms based on the cultural
and social particularities of the countries and regions in
crisis. The rules they establish for conflict prevention
must be observed on a priority basis.
S/PV.6702
12-2053424
My country firmly believes that the opinions of
regional and subregional actors must guide the joint
action of the AU Peace and Security Council and the
Security Council. Our organ, which has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, must be attuned to the needs of the
regional and subregional organizations, including
regional economic communities, and avoid getting
bogged down in speculation, which is harmful not only
to the Council’s authority, but also to the lives and
security of people in distress.
Another problem facing United Nations-AU
cooperation is the lack of sufficient resources to
support the peace operations established by the African
Union. AMISOM is often cited as one example of that.
While Somalia has experienced an unprecedented
situation for the past 20 years, the efforts of the
international community still fall short of what is
needed to resolve that lengthy conflict. The
displacement of people within that country and the
thousands of refugees in neighbouring countries are the
result of the crisis. Wishing to solve the problem of
refugees and the hungry without settling the basic
conflict could be considered the equivalent of trying to
cauterize a wooden leg.
In the light of all these observations, we need to
strengthen the partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union, especially with respect to the
challenges raised by new threats to international peace
and security. I refer in particular to terrorism and
transnational organized crime in the Sahel, and to
piracy at sea, which threatens the peace and security of
the countries of West Africa and on the Gulf of Guinea.
In both cases, capacity-building and the allocation of
financial resources are crucial challenges to be
addressed by the partnership between the United
Nations and the AU and subregional organizations.
We also believe that a clear definition of
complementarity and subsidiarity, as well as the
predictable allocation of resources, would help to make
the partnership between the two organizations more
effective. Togo sincerely hopes that today’s debate will
be an opportunity for the Security Council to
strengthen and promote the bases of its necessary
cooperation with the African Union Peace and Security
Council with a view to taking more effective,
coordinated and swift action in peacekeeping and the
management of crises on the continent.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank you, Madam, for scheduling the discussion on
relations between the United Nations and regional
organizations. President Zuma’s presence earlier,
together with that of the Secretary-General,
Commissioner Lamamra and other honourable
ministers, underlines the importance of the issue. I
believe that it is also one of the most important
strategic challenges facing the Security Council.
Since the Security Council last debated this topic,
the United Nations and regional organizations have
worked increasingly closely on matters of peace and
security. While mindful of the Security Council’s
primary responsibility, the United Kingdom supports
efforts to further enhance relations between the
Council and regional organizations on peace and
security.
That is not always straightforward. We have seen
in the past 12 months major differences of substance
between the League of Arab States and the African
Union, two separate regional organizations, on Libya.
There have also been differences of approach between
subregional and regional organizations, such as
between the Economic Community of West African
States and the African Union on Côte d’Ivoire and
between the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and some members of the African Union
on Eritrea. Such complexities cannot be swept under
the carpet.
The relationship also needs to be taken forward in
a manner consistent with the Charter of the United
Nations. Efforts should make the most of the
complementarities between the United Nations and
individual regional organizations. Such organizations
often have comparative strengths, such as their
knowledge of social, ethnic, historical and political
issues in their regions and their ability to convene
regional States. That is particular true for subregional
organizations.
The situation surrounding issues of peace and
security are diverse. Each needs to be dealt with on a
case-by-case basis, which calls for an emphasis on
timely communication and consultation and the
avoidance of procedures that are inflexible in the face
of varied and urgent challenges.
While underlining the importance that the United
Kingdom attaches to the United Nations relationship
with all regional organizations — including, of course,
S/PV.6702
2512-20534
the European Union — I would like to concentrate
today on the United Nations relationship with the
African Union, a relationship that the United Kingdom
has sought to encourage.
We believe that good progress has been made.
The African Union and Africa’s subregional
organizations have been among the most active in
pursuing peace and security. The United Nations and
the African Union have together worked effectively in
many countries across the continent. But, equally, there
have been cases, such as that of the Sudan, where
managing the complexities of the United
Nations/African Union relationship has proved
challenging.
The United Nations/African Union relationship is
becoming deeper and more productive. We have seen
increasing cooperation on the institutional relationship,
capacity-building and peacekeeping. I would like to
comment briefly on each of those areas in turn.
On the institutional relationship, I welcome the
intensified cooperation between the Secretariat and the
African Union Commission. I also welcome the annual
meeting between the Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council. As Ambassador Rice has
pointed out, those meetings have not always been easy,
but it is right that they should be a forum for
substantive discussion, enabling us to be aware of each
other’s perspectives. I encourage the two presidencies
and Secretariats to ensure that such meetings are well
prepared.
Capacity-building needs to be at the heart of the
relationship between the United Nations and the
African Union and its subregional organizations. That
is essential if those organizations are to deliver on the
responsibilities they have assumed for peace and
security on the continent and to build on the progress
that has been made in developing the African Peace
and Security Architecture. In that context, I reaffirm
the United Kingdom’s commitment to support the 10-
year capacity-building programme.
Finally, let me turn to peacekeeping led by the
African Union. Yesterday, we heard a briefing from
African Union Commissioner Lamamra on the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), a mission that
plays a critical role in efforts to establish peace and
stability in Somalia. The United Kingdom is grateful
for the efforts and the courage of the AMISOM troops.
We look forward to the Secretary-General’s
recommendations on AMISOM later this month, and
we are ready to lead a constructive Security Council
response to those recommendations.
Peacekeeping missions such as AMISOM have
benefited from developments in the relationship
between the United Nations and the African Union. By
linking operational support and capacity-building, the
United Nations Office to the African Union has
provided assistance in real time that will also deliver in
the long term. The European Union and bilateral
donors have made very significant contributions in that
regard, including supporting the development of the
African Standby Force. The first operational
deployment by the Eastern African Standby Force has
been made in support of AMISOM and is being closely
supported by the United Kingdom.
Looking ahead, I would like to conclude with
three recommendations. First, a one-size-fits-all
approach to the institutional relationship is unrealistic.
The relationship developed with one regional
organization should not set a precedent for relations
with others. The first step would be for the Security
Council to give a fuller consideration to all the issues
involved at a Security Council retreat.
Secondly, we would like to see greater
cooperation on early warning and rapid preventive
diplomacy between the United Nations and the African
Union and other organizations, such as the European
Union and the Arab League. With their unique
geographical insight, regional organizations have a key
role to play in early warning and mitigating the risks of
conflict through preventive diplomacy. Greater donor
coordination of capacity-building support will facilitate
regional organizations’ efforts in those areas.
Finally, while noting that regional organizations
have primary responsibility for securing human,
financial, logistical and other resources for their
organizations, the United Kingdom would like to
encourage international partners to enhance the
predictability, sustainability and flexibility of financing
regional organizations when they undertake
peacekeeping under a United Nations mandate. In
offering that support, our focus should be on improving
effectiveness and efficiency and on building a culture
of accountability, transparency and professionalism.
The United Kingdom supports the draft resolution
to be adopted at the end of today’s debate (S/2012/25).
We have, however, concerns about some of the
S/PV.6702
12-2053426
ambiguities in the text as a result of the somewhat
hurried negotiation process. I shall be making an
explanation of vote to clarify our position on those
points.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Madam President, we are pleased to welcome
you as you preside over today’s meeting of the Security
Council. We welcome the participation at today’s
meeting of President Jacob Zuma, Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, African Union (AU) Commissioner
Ramtane Lamamra, and the Chair of the AU Peace and
Security Council, Mr. Moses Wetangula.
The African Union and subregional organizations
in Africa are playing an increasingly active role in the
settlement of conflicts and crises on the continent,
demonstrating the preparedness and ability to shoulder
responsibility for resolving their issues. We are pleased
to note that they attach great importance to the political
and diplomatic settlement of conflicts. In many cases,
that has won significant results. In particular, many
mediation efforts undertaken by retired and active
African politicians have proven their effectiveness. In
other cases, very useful and constructive proposals
have been put forward, but by no fault of African
partners have not been acted upon.
The effectiveness of multilateral approaches to
settling contemporary crises should logically lead the
United Nations to develop a partnership with the
African Union. Such cooperation must be underpinned,
first and foremost, by Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter, which assigns to the Security Council
the primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security, while underlining the
complementarity of United Nations efforts and those of
regional organizations, and encouraging each to draw
on its own comparative advantages. We are convinced
that scaling up such partnerships will significantly
bolster the global capacity to respond to crises and
promote peace on the African continent through, inter
alia, early warning of crises, their timely settlement
and post-conflict rebuilding.
We believe it important to further and actively
step up the African Union’s initiatives on the continent
in preventive diplomacy and the peaceful settlement of
disputes. Of particular relevance in that regard is the
implementation of the 10-year capacity-building
programme for the African Union. We hope for
tangible, practical results, from the establishment of a
continental system of early warning and the African
Standby Force, which would be able to react swiftly to
emerging crises in African countries, with the
participation, if necessary, of the Security Council. It is
important to provide dynamic assistance in bolstering
the African peacekeeping toolkit and establishing a
pan-African security architecture so as to ensure that
mechanisms of conflict settlement and prevention on
the continent are fully exploited.
Russia supports the growing independent role of
African organizations in maintaining peace on the
continent and has consistently called for the steps taken
by the African Union in that regard to be backed by the
authority of the Council. Against that backdrop, it is
encouraging to note the consistently evolving forum of
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union.
Hybrid peacekeeping forces in Darfur are
effectively operating under the auspices of the United
Nations and the AU. Active efforts are being made to
move the Darfur peace process forward and overcome
the issues between the Sudan and South Sudan. A
cooperation mechanism to resolve the situation in
Somalia has been launched. Those are examples of
innovative models of cooperation, which can and must
be drawn upon in the future, provided that the
necessary improvements are made.
We support the Secretary-General’s proposal for
the United Nations Secretariat and the AU Commission
to prepare joint assessments and recommendations,
which would be used in taking decisions on crises in
Africa, as was the case, for example, with the Council-
mandated African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur.
An important component of coordination could
be the United Nations Office at the AU headquarters in
Addis Ababa. Given the unique purview of the Security
Council, which under the United Nations Charter is
tasked with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and security, we advocate the
further development of practical cooperation between
the United Nations Security Council and AU Peace and
Security Council so that targeted solutions can be
identified. Those solutions would frame that
cooperative relationship and ensure that emerging
military and political crises on the continent are met
with swift, agreed and effective responses.
S/PV.6702
2712-20534
As a permanent member of the Security Council,
Russia works to improve strategies for the settlement
of African conflicts and plays an active role in drawing
up and implementing international cooperation and
assistance programmes in Africa, including the
preparation and training of African peacekeepers in
Russian institutions.
We stand ready to continue to provide assistance
to African peacekeepers and multifaceted aid as part of
efforts to resolve African issues on the basis of an
open, equitable and mutually beneficial partnership
that does not involve a supervisory mentality,
ideological stereotypes or nationally biased
approaches.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. Given
the lateness of the hour, however, I intend, with the
concurrence of Council members, to suspend the
meeting until 3.30 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.25 p.m.

United Nations S/PV.6702(Resumption 1)
Security Council
Sixty-seventh year
6702ndmeeting
Thursday, 12 January 2012, 3.30 p.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.
12-20579 (E)
*1220579*
President: Ms. Nkoana-Mashabane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (South Africa)
Members: Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mammadyarov
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Liu Guijin
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Osorio
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Bonne
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Eick
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Rodas Melgar
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Loulichki
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Haroon
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Moraes Cabral
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Zhukov
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Esaw
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . Mr. Parham
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. DiCarlo
Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
Strengthening the relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations, in particular the African Union, in the maintenance of
international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on United Nations-African Union cooperation
in peace and security (S/2011/805)
Letter dated 4 January 2012 from the Permanent Representative of South
Africa to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2012/13)
Letter dated 9 January 2012 from the Permanent Representative of South
Africa to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2012/20)
S/PV.6702 (Resumption 1)
12-205792
The meeting resumed at 3.45 p.m.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Pakistan’s delegation
warmly welcomes you, Madam President, to the
Security Council. As we wish you and your delegation
a productive visit, we warmly congratulate South
Africa and the African National Congress on its one-
hundredth anniversary. In that light, it is befitting that
President Zuma’s statement compels attention as a
veritable tour de force in Africa. His role in the African
Union should be viewed as historically
groundbreaking. We also thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his rightfully vast report (S/2011/805) and
for his briefing on Africa. We also thank the Foreign
Ministers of Azerbaijan, Colombia, Guatemala and
Kenya, as well as the African Union Commissioner, for
their participation and for their important statements.
We also welcome the representatives who have come
from China, France, Germany, Portugal and Togo to
take part in today’s debate.
Africa continuously defies its detractors, not only
by progressing but by committing itself to the
challenges of peace and security, including the building
of bridges with the international and regional comity of
nations. We commend the timely epoch-building
initiative of South Africa to hold a debate on the
African Union (AU)-United Nations relationship. The
high-level participation is a necessary reflection of the
close attention being paid to those linkages by the
leadership of Africa. After all, this is the nation that
gave the world the concept of transitional law, and that
then peacefully upheld the rule of law in a manner that
humankind can learn from.
This forum’s venture today would not be
complete without invoking the great example of
President Nelson Mandela and Archbishop Desmond
Tutu. That is world-class leadership.
Asia and Africa are bound by strong interlinkages
of history and friendship. The early twentieth century
witnessed mutually inspiring independence movements
in the South Asian subcontinent and the freedom
struggle in Africa. Pakistan’s strong support for
Africa’s decolonization struggle is well known. Today
the two continents are partners in their respective peace
and development and in the prosperity of their people.
With 70 per cent of world trade binding our shores in
the future, the world shall have to take note.
I salute African wisdom and sagacity, because
while most regional organizations are based solely on
trade and economic considerations, Africa has made
significant strides to conceive the challenge of peace
and security as a collective responsibility. The African
Union is an embodiment of that pioneering spirit.
Within a decade of its foundation, the African
Union has created a solid edifice for peace in Africa, in
the form of African Peace and Security Architecture.
The Architecture stands on institutions like the AU
Peace and Security Council, the Panel of the Wise, the
African Standby Force and the Post-Conflict
Reconstruction and Development Framework. A set of
subregional organizations further strengthens the
Architecture.
The AU has evolved tangible remedial measures
for the entire spectrum of a conflict cycle. From
preventive diplomacy and mediation efforts to active
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and catalysing political
processes, the continent is using a wide range of
instruments in the international toolkit for peace and
security. The world can learn from that. The Africa of
today has sagaciously resorted to the vast spectrum of
modalities for peaceful settlement of disputes, as
envisaged in Chapter VI of the United Nations
Charter — a practice that merits emulation by the
Council.
The cooperation between the AU and the United
Nations in peace and security adds value to the work of
both organizations, particularly in matters of peace and
security. The AU Peace and Security Council and the
United Nations Security Council define the AU-United
Nations relationship at a strategic level. The AU
Commission and the United Nations Secretariat
provide the administrative foundation for that
partnership. It is worthwhile noting that Africa’s
consensual and united position for enhanced
representation at the Security Council, which is a
legitimate demand, will also eventually strengthen the
cooperation between the two bodies.
Contacts between the AU and the United Nations,
particularly between their two Councils, are too slowly
evolving into a common strategic vision in areas of
prevention and management, and manifest themselves
in a lack of resolution of conflicts. That vision should
forge enhanced political coherence to address the
challenges of peace and security. While coordinating
the evolution of a common strategic vision will be
S/PV.6702 (Resumption 1)
312-20579
incremental, we believe that an expressly targeted
focus on three key areas will further enhance
cooperation between the two bodies.
First, efforts should be made to ensure that the
annual consultative mechanism between the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council
translates into formulating cohesive positions and
strategies. The two Councils can do so by holding more
frequent and informal exchanges, especially among
their respective presidencies. Such exchanges need to
be replicated between the AU Commission and the
Secretariat, as well as among other relevant bodies in
the AU and United Nations systems, namely, the
Peacebuilding Commission and its five country
configurations, which are all related to Africa.
Secondly, regular interaction with subregional
organizations in Africa will be critical to developing
commonalities in respective decisions relating to peace
and security, thereby ensuring their smooth
implementation. In this regard, the Security Council
has already expressed clear intentions in its
presidential statement of 13 January 2010
(S/PRST/2010/1). The challenge is to translate the
intent into action.
Finally, AU-United Nations cooperation — as
noted by President Zuma as well — can be optimized
by strict prioritization in areas of building local
capacities. Considering that most of the AU’s work on
peace and security is based on Chapter VI provisions
related to the pacific settlement of disputes, the two
organizations can identify relevant areas for capacity-
building cooperation in mediation, arbitration and other
measures relating to preventive diplomacy.
Another avenue of cooperation could be security
sector reform (SSR). The AU has developed an
elaborate SSR policy framework for implementation,
which must be supported by the United Nations. It
would also be important to widen the discourse of
AU-United Nations cooperation beyond the work of
the Security Council to include issues such as fair trade
practices, food and environmental security, and
investment in governance institutions.
Let me conclude by stating that Pakistan, as an
observer State of the AU and a country in search of
peace and stability in its own neighbourhood, identifies
closely with the theme of today’s debate. Out of nearly
10,000 Pakistani peacekeepers in the United Nations
missions around the world, 9,000 are performing duties
in Africa. In the peace and stability of Africa, we see
their safety and eventual safe return home. In the
economic progress of Africa, we see opportunities for
the whole global South, including Pakistan.
We hope that today’s debate and high-level
participation, together with the draft resolution to be
adopted later (S/2012/25) will further concretize the
modalities of AU-United Nations cooperation and pave
the way of constructive collaboration. Pakistan is today
a proud co-sponsor of the important draft resolution
before the Council.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank the South African delegation for
organizing today’s debate. I also want to put on record
my sincere personal thanks to you, Madam President,
and to President Jacob Zuma for presiding over this
meeting. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General and the representatives of the African Union
(AU) and the subregional organizations for their
valuable statements. The presence of so many high-
level dignitaries from the capitals testifies to the
importance of today’s discussion.
We appreciate the initiative of the South African
delegation to organize a workshop of the interested
stakeholders in preparation for today’s meeting. It put
in clear terms the steps that are required for enhanced
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union. These are also reflected in the draft
resolution that is before the Council for adoption today
(S/2012/25), which we have the privilege of
co-sponsoring.
A much as two-thirds of the active items on the
Council’s agenda concern Africa. About three-fourths
of the Council’s time is spent on African issues. It
would therefore be no exaggeration to say that the
success of the efforts of this Council in Africa will
determine in significant measure its overall
effectiveness in the implementation of its Charter-
mandated role as the principal organ of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international peace and
security.
In this connection, it is important for us to listen
to Africa and its organizations so that the Council’s
activities will not only be based on Africa’s needs, but
will also complement those of African countries and
S/PV.6702 (Resumption 1)
12-205794
organizations. Cooperation with Africa will also enable
the Council to act with better understanding of the
situation on the ground, which would establish Africa’s
ownership of the solutions and promote lasting peace
and security on the African continent.
Indeed, Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter recognizes the importance of regional
organizations and their role in matters relating to
international peace and security. The Charter also
provides a broad framework for the Council’s
cooperation with regional organizations. We therefore
support the strengthening of partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union.
We think that this partnership should be based on
long-term strategic and operational perspectives, taking
into consideration the complementarity of the strengths
that the two organizations possess. Focus should be on
capacity-building of the African Peace and Security
Architecture so that the AU becomes a more effective
and capable partner of the United Nations system. In
this connection, we welcome the establishment of the
United Nations Office to the African Union, which
should facilitate systematic and broad-based
cooperation between the two organizations. We expect
the Office to expeditiously establish formalized
structures of interaction with different AU bodies and
subregional organizations. Other steps, such as the
annual dialogue between the Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council, the Secretary-General’s 10-year
capacity-building programme for the AU, linkages
between the United Nations and AU Secretariats, inter
alia, are also welcome and should facilitate regular
consultation.
The African Union has already proven beyond
any doubt its ability to address African problems. The
AU High-level Implementation Panel for the Sudan has
facilitated dialogue between the parties to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. We continue to
support its efforts for peace and security in Darfur
through the Darfur political process. Similarly, the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) is the
mainstay of international efforts to stabilize the
situation in Somalia. The African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur has greatly helped
in the improvement of the situation there, including
through community welfare programmes.
If these missions are to succeed and other joint
missions undertaken in the future, it is necessary that
there be better understanding between the United
Nations and the AU at the strategic and operational
levels. The Council should be more forthcoming in
extending support to the AU in the critical areas of
financial resources, force multipliers and force
enablers, as may be required by the missions.
If cooperation between the United Nations and
the AU is to be effective and enduring, it is necessary
that the Council not adopt a selective approach to this
cooperation. Partnership should not be restricted only
to the areas of the Council’s convenience, but also
extended to areas where there may be differences, and
be based on mutual respect. This requires a mindset
change in approach and demands the expansion of the
permanent membership to make the Council reflective
of contemporary realities and increased representation
of developing countries, including those of Africa. This
will not only make the Council more representative,
but also enhance its ability to successfully address the
challenges that the international community faces
today.
Conscious of the AU’s role in handling African
issues, not only those concerning peace and security
but also those related to social and development
matters, India has institutionalized its cooperation with
the African Union. I would like to recall here the
historic visit of Prime Minister Manmohan Singh to
Addis Ababa in May 2011 to participate in the second
Africa-India Forum Summit, signifying the importance
of our relations with African States. Given the
similarity of our objectives with those of the African
Union, the Summit further deepened the India-AU
development partnership, as well as peace and security
cooperation.
India has contributed $2 million for AMISOM
operations — $1.5 million through the AU — without
any caveats. India is also providing credit lines of
$5 billion for the next three years to help Africa
achieve its development goals. India will provide an
additional $700 million for the establishment of new
institutions and training programmes, in consultation
with the African Union and its institutions. India is also
offering 22,000 scholarships in various areas of
capacity-building to African nationals during the three
year period from 2011 to 2014.
All those activities will enhance the AU’s
institutional capacity, and help the Council as well in
S/PV.6702 (Resumption 1)
512-20579
dealing with African issues, in partnership with the
AU.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express our gratitude to you,
Madam President, for convening this meeting. Let me
also thank His Excellency Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his presence and effective participation
during this morning’s deliberations.
Morocco, a founding member of the Organization
of African Unity, has placed stability and development
on the African continent at the heart of its foreign
policy priorities, while adopting an approach of
cooperation and solidarity in addressing the economic,
social, political and security challenges that hamper
comprehensive development in Africa. Since acceding
to membership of the United Nations, Morocco has
also been committed to contributing to the achievement
of the purposes and principles of the United Nations,
both in the area of the maintenance of international
peace and security and in cooperating to achieve
sustainable development and ensure the advancement
of, and respect for, human rights.
In line with that long and ongoing commitment at
the continental and international levels, Morocco has
made serious contributions to every genuine effort
aimed at heightening cooperation between the United
Nations and the African continent, in full respect for
the jurisdiction and specificities of both partners. In
that context, Morocco has made a positive contribution
to international and regional efforts to resolve
numerous conflicts. Morocco has always contributed to
United Nations peacekeeping operations, especially in
Africa. Based on the same conviction, the Kingdom of
Morocco has supported democratic transformation in
many African States. And we have contributed to
consolidating stability in those countries through
effective cooperation in crucial areas related to
sustainable development. Given the interdependence
between economic development and achieving peace
and security, Morocco has supported development in
Africa by strengthening trade relations and economic
investment and efforts at creating promising projects.
No one doubts the crucial role of subregional
organizations and groupings in achieving continental
and regional aspirations, in particular in Africa. That is
the reason for our commitment to the greater Maghreb
project and our ongoing readiness to operationalize it
as soon as possible in order to contribute to the
stability and prosperity of the five States that comprise
it.
Based on our belief in the need to develop and
promote forums for cooperation and coordination
among African States, Morocco, in cooperation with
other brotherly African States, has established the
22-member Ministerial Conference on Fisheries
Cooperation among African States Bordering the
Atlantic Ocean. The goal of the Conference is to work
together to share expertise in various areas, including
human and sustainable development and combating
organized crime.
Achieving the shared objectives of the United
Nations and regional organizations, in particular in the
area of international peace and security, must take into
consideration the following aspects.
First, there must be a clear understanding and
vision and respect for the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations and the charters of regional
organizations.
Secondly, with regard to the primary
responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Charter of the United Nations calls on the Council to
encourage the peaceful resolution of local conflicts
through regional organizations, on the basis of requests
by the States concerned or through a referral by the
Council, in full respect with other provisions of the
Charter.
Thirdly, there should be joint assessments and
consultations between parties in order to avoid any
competition likely to hamper or delay the ending of a
conflict and the resolution of a dispute.
Fourthly, the United Nations and regional
organizations must pre-empt conflicts and disputes and
prevent them from escalating.
Fifthly, the root causes of conflict should be
addressed, in particular on the economic, political and
security levels. In addition, any trends towards
cessation, instability and terrorism must be combated.
The United Nations, including its entire membership
and all its agencies, should strengthen its support for
efforts to achieve comprehensive development, as well
as to contribute to encouraging reform, democratic
transformation and good governance.
S/PV.6702 (Resumption 1)
12-205796
Sixthly, in cases that concern more than one
regional organization, experience has demonstrated the
need for consultation among such organizations, as
well as with the United Nations. That would help to
avoid the duplication of effort and potential
competition, as well as to identify the most qualified
organization to address a given situation.
The African Maghreb, proud of its strong historic
relations with its brothers on the continent, is fully
prepared to support every United Nations effort to
strengthen the security and stability of African States,
in full respect for their sovereignty, independence,
national unity and territorial integrity. We are also
prepared to participate effectively in any effort to
combat terrorism, piracy and the scourge of drugs,
which threaten the safety and security of our brothers
in the Sahel and the Horn of Africa.
Finally, I would like to draw the attention of the
Council and the Secretariat to the Arabic text of the
draft resolution before the Council. It has many
shortcomings; including misspellings and parts that
appear to be truncated. I would like that to be
addressed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia in her capacity as the Chair
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
Ms. Sinegiorgis (Ethiopia): At the outset, I wish
to express our appreciation to the Republic of South
Africa for organizing this open debate on the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU), as well as for providing the
concept note (S/2012/20) and for making it possible for
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) to participate in this very important debate.
In the same vein, I would like to commend the
Secretariat for the report of the Secretary-General on
United Nations-African Union cooperation in peace
and security (S/2011/805).
I also wish to seize this opportunity to commend
the African Union Peace and Security Council for
organizing a debate on the same subject at the
beginning of the week in Addis Ababa, and the African
Union Commission for issuing a comprehensive report
concerning this critical partnership. The meeting in
Addis Ababa was indeed a very important event, which
gave us the opportunity to redouble our resolve to
strengthen the African Union’s partnership with the
United Nations, based on the principles enshrined in
the United Nations Charter, as well as the principles of
complementarity, subsidiarity, burden-sharing,
comparative advantages and flexibility.
I also wish to associate myself and, indeed, fully
subscribe to the statements delivered by Commissioner
Lamamra and Mr. Moses Wetangula.
In our view, this debate has come at the right
time — a time when Africa is making tremendous
efforts to address the peace and security deficit, at the
continental and subregional levels, through the African
Peace and Security Architecture.
IGAD is encouraged by the level of cooperation
that exists between the United Nations, on the one
hand, and the African Union and African subregional
organizations, such as IGAD, on the other. We also
welcome the intention to consider further steps to
promote closer cooperation. We note with appreciation
that, in the past few years, significant strides have been
made in conflict resolution, peacekeeping and
post-conflict peacebuilding and reconstruction. That is
indeed in consonance with the overriding objective of
the African Union’s peace and security agenda, which
is to create an enabling momentum for a more
integrated, peaceful and prosperous Africa.
In this regard, the signing and implementation of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in the Sudan, the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur and the African Union Mission in Somalia are
illustrative examples of cooperation based on
flexibility and making best use of the comparative
advantages of the African Union, subregional
organizations such as IGAD and the United Nations in
the areas of effective mediation, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding strategies.
In IGAD, we always emphasize the overriding
role of the African Union in matters of continental
peace and security. It is because of this unwavering
commitment that we make every effort to coordinate
subregional efforts with our continental organization. It
must be underlined that no meeting of IGAD, at any
level whatsoever and no matter how sensitive the issue
on the agenda, takes place without the presence of the
African Union. We have no doubt that, by acting
together, we have the potential to produce results
beyond the sum of the constituent parts.
S/PV.6702 (Resumption 1)
712-20579
Despite many positive developments, the
challenges of clarity of mandate, capacity deficit and
predictable, flexible and timely financing remain issues
of concern. Therefore, it is vital that all parties
concerned continue their engagements in activities
aimed at reaching innovative and feasible solutions to
those important elements of a comprehensive and
effective implementation of this strategic partnership.
While emphasizing the need to consolidate these
gains, we believe that the African Union, and through it
subregional organizations like IGAD, should be
supported by the Security Council, based on the
principles of complementarity and subsidiarity, as
enunciated in Chapter VIII of United Nations Charter.
We are of the view that those continental and
subregional organizations are better placed in terms of
geographical proximity, political and cultural
familiarity with local conditions, and shared
experiences with regard to regional peace and security
initiatives. Hence, without prejudice to the global
mandate of the Security Council for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the international
community will benefit by lending the requisite
support to those institutions for the maintenance of
regional peace and security.
In this regard, greater efforts are required to
ensure that the cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union is more effective, including
through joint planning and joint assessments for peace
operations on the continent. Those efforts must be
guided by respect for each organization’s mandate and
responsibilities, seeking the best division of labour
among them.
The mandate of the Security Council is clear. It is
the body that has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, but it
should not be too difficult to apply Chapter VIII with
flexibility and wisdom, the goal being to address a
common challenge. Indeed, the results IGAD has
achieved, in partnership with the AU, in the Sudan,
Somalia and other areas of regional security concern
are illustrative of what can be achieved in this regard.
Thus, we would like to emphasize the need for the
United Nations to intensify such regional initiatives
and to accelerate its efforts to implement the United
Nations 10-year capacity-building programme for the
African Union. More strident efforts are also required
to fully operationalize the African Union’s African
Peace and Security Architecture, including the African
Standby Force and the continental early warning
system.
Furthermore, the enhancement of cooperation
between the Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council, including the annual
consultations, is vital for reaching those objectives. It
is our considered view that those meetings should
result in concrete action on the modalities and means
for the development of strategic partnerships when
addressing specific issues of mutual interest and
concern. In this regard, concrete steps should also be
taken to strengthen the policy-level coordination
between those two important entities to avoid not only
conflicting positions but also duplication of efforts.
At the operational level, the Secretariat and the
African Union Commission need to ensure the
complementarities of their efforts, as well as realistic
benchmarks and timelines. Strengthening the efforts of
the African Union and its institutional capacity to
effectively plan, deploy and manage peacekeeping
operations is a key prerequisite for their success. It is
also of high importance that the African Union ensure
leadership and ownership of the process. That will
require greater partnerships, inclusiveness and
purposeful leadership. We believe that there is scope in
the cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union to incorporate those vital elements.
Our best intentions, however, will amount to
nothing if we fail to provide adequate, flexible and
predictable funding for peacekeeping operations in
Africa. It is also necessary to coordinate efforts
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
IGAD strongly supports closer collaboration between
the United Nations and the African Union and
subregional organizations. To stimulate a more
comprehensive engagement of regional organizations,
we must replace old habits and institutional
protectionism with an open and flexible approach,
adapted to the particular situation at hand.
Allow me to conclude by expressing our
congratulations to the new members of the Council and
our immense gratitude to Gabon and Nigeria for having
represented Africa in such an excellent manner.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria in her capacity as Chair of the
Economic Community of West African States.
S/PV.6702 (Resumption 1)
12-205798
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): Allow me to convey
Nigeria’s profound appreciation to the Republic of
South Africa for having convened this high-level
meeting in continuation of the dialogue on
strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU). Let me affirm
Nigeria’s unalloyed support for that laudable initiative.
President Goodluck Jonathan, in his capacity as Chair
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), greatly appreciates the invitation extended
to him to participate in today’s debate.
I would also like to express my appreciation to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his leadership and
commitment to peace and security in Africa. His
comprehensive report (S/2011/805), which
appropriately sets the tone for today’s debate, is
pertinent for its concrete proposals for improving the
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union. We owe a great debt to the Kenyan
Foreign Minister, Chair of the Peace and Security
Council (PSC) of the African Union, and
Commissioner Lamamra for their illuminating
perspectives and important insights.
In Africa’s increasingly dynamic and complex
security environment, the need to strengthen the
partnership between the United Nations and the AU,
two organizations whose efforts have proven critical in
addressing peace and security challenges, cannot be
overemphasized. We therefore welcome the important
milestones that have been achieved in the relationship
between the two bodies over the past two decades. We
appreciate, in particular, the increasingly horizontal
and vertical cooperation between the two organizations
and their key organs and institutions.
The launching of the United Nations-AU Joint
Task Force on Peace and Security on 25 September
2010, the establishment of the United Nations Office to
the African Union in Addis Ababa and the regular
desk-to-desk meetings have all borne fruit and
significantly enhanced the cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations Secretariat
and the AU Commission. It is encouraging that the
meetings of the Task Force have provided valuable
opportunities for both organs to seek lasting solutions
to the conflict situations in Somalia, Côte d’Ivoire, the
Sudan and Libya.
For the partnership to be viable, sustainable and
strategic, it must be underpinned by clarity of
guidance. Indeed, we share the Secretary-General’s
view that the partnership should be based on
comparative advantages, the complementarity of
mandates and optimal use of resources and capacities.
It must be stated that cooperation between the
Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council is of singular importance to the growing
partnership between the United Nations as a whole and
the AU. As a current member of the AU Peace and
Security Council, having just concluded our tenure in
the Security Council, we are fully cognizant of the
central role that both organs play in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Regular consultative
meetings between them are, therefore, not only
desirable but imperative.
In July 2010, under Nigeria’s presidency of the
Security Council, both organs, meeting in New York,
agreed to a specific format and modalities for their
annual consultative meetings. That is a good step
forward. We expect qualitative progress on that
understanding and more vigorous discussion of
substantive, not just procedural, issues at future
consultative meetings.
Peacekeeping in Africa is an integral and vital
part of the maintenance of international peace and
security, for which the Council has primary
responsibility. Undoubtedly, it is the core area of
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU
and, conversely, the area bearing the greatest and most
significant challenge.
When the AU undertakes a United Nations-
mandated peacekeeping operation, it faces multiple
financing, equipping and mission support challenges.
Those demands often outweigh its resources and
capacities to effectively respond. The lessons learned
from the workshop of November 2010 between the
United Nations and the AU reinforces our view that a
great deal still needs to be done on mission planning,
the development of doctrines and policies and the
operationalization of the African Standby Force.
On Somalia, while we welcome the United
Nations effort to augment its footprint with the
establishment of the United Nations office in
Mogadishu, we also believe that the full provision of
both light and heavy support packages for the African
Union Mission in Somalia will be a realistic way to
underpin recent security gains. Ultimately, a full and
robust United Nations peacekeeping operation will be
S/PV.6702 (Resumption 1)
912-20579
the panacea to the relentless insecurity, piracy and
humanitarian challenges in the country.
With respect to Darfur, the signing of the Doha
agreement provides the impetus for the Security
Council to give its consent to the convening of the
Darfur political process, as called for by the African
Union.
In their statements this morning, several
delegations aptly acknowledged that the success of any
peacekeeping operation is largely dependent on
adequate and timely financial and logistical resources.
Yet, financing AU peacekeeping operations remains a
daunting challenge. Indeed, as the Prodi panel report
notes, “financing options are not difficult to identify”
(S/2008/813, paragraph 7).
The problem persists because we, the
stakeholders, have failed to adopt the far-reaching and
creative alternatives required. Existing frameworks
have so far not been found conducive to building
sustainable strategies for peacekeeping partnership.
The Council must consider endorsing a financing
option that guarantees the predictability, sustainability
and flexibility of funding for AU peacekeeping
operations. In that regard, Nigeria welcomes the
establishment of the AU High-Level Panel on
Alternative Sources of Funding, set up in July 2011
under the chairmanship of former President Olusegun
Obasanjo of Nigeria, and hopes that the Panel would be
supported in achieving its critical mandate. Greater
progress is also required in the implementation of the
Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme.
Looking ahead to a more strategic partnership,
both organizations must intensify their investment in
conflict prevention, mediation and peacebuilding.
Nigeria believes that preventive diplomacy strategies,
such as early warning systems and mediation, are
pivotal to the attainment of peace and security on the
continent. Indeed, for that reason we sought to address
the issue of conflict prevention during our presidency
of the Security Council in July 2010 (see S/PV.6360).
The AU has worked assiduously over the past
decade to build a viable framework for prevention and
response, not least through the Panel of the Wise and
the AU Peace and Security Council. ECOWAS has also
made great strides in that area, primarily through the
steady implementation of its conflict prevention
framework, including its council of elders, fact-finding
and electoral support missions and early warning
systems.
Even more significant, both organizations have
developed robust peacekeeping mechanisms. Such
seminal work at the regional and subregional levels
must be supported by decisions taken within the United
Nations. That is why Nigeria welcomes the effort by
both the United Nations and the AU secretariat to
develop common guidelines that are delineated in the
framework for mediation in Africa from lessons
learned in Kenya, Darfur, Somalia and Guinea-Bissau.
We take this opportunity to call for increased
collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union in the drafting of resolutions that would
not only address our inherent challenges, but also
propel us towards meeting our shared aspirations for a
more peaceful world. That is, indeed, an achievable
objective if it is underpinned by a closer partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
particularly the African Union and ECOWAS.
The President: It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft
resolution before it, contained in document S/2012/25.
I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Azerbaijan, China, Colombia, France, Germany,
Guatemala, India, Morocco, Pakistan, Portugal,
Russian Federation, South Africa, Togo, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2033 (2012).
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom has just voted in favour of resolution 2033
(2012) because we are convinced of the important role
that regional organizations can play in the pursuit of
peace and security in Africa and elsewhere. The United
Kingdom recognizes in particular the contribution that
the African Union is making to preventing and
managing conflict in Africa, and commends the
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union in that regard.
S/PV.6702 (Resumption 1)
12-2057910
However, we do not believe that that cooperation,
however welcome in principle, should come at the
expense either of the Security Council’s primacy in
respect of the maintenance of international peace and
security or of its practical capacity to respond speedily
and effectively to any threat to international peace and
security.
We regret that the hurried manner in which the
text of the resolution was negotiated has left in place
some potential ambiguities on those issues. I would
like therefore to clarify the United Kingdom’s position.
In particular, the text refers in paragraph 6 to
coordination between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council. In those
instances where we consider coordination to be
appropriate, it can occur only in the context of the
primacy of the Security Council regarding the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Effective cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations calls for an emphasis on timely
communication and consultation and the avoidance of
prescribed procedures that are inflexible in the face of
varied and urgent challenges.
The United Kingdom supports efforts further to
enhance relations between the Council and regional
and subregional organizations in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations.
The President: There are no further names
inscribed on the list of speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.

