This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).
*1446489*
14-46489 (E)
United Nations S/PV.7216
asdfSecurity Council
Sixty-ninth year
7216thmeeting
Monday, 14 July 2014, noon
New York
Provisional
President: Mr. Gasana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Rwanda)
Members: Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Perceval
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Quinlan
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Cherif
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Barros Melet
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Liu Jieyi
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Araud
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein
Lithuania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Baublys
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Lucas
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Ogwu
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Oh Joon
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Churkin
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . Sir Mark Lyall Grant
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Power
Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
2/15 14-46489
S/PV.7216 The situation in the Middle East 14/07/2014
The meeting was called to order at 12.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2014/490, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Australia, Chad, Chile, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea,
Rwanda, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Chad, Chile, China, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, Republic
of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2165 (2014).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan)
(spoke in Arabic): Jordan welcomes the Council’s
unanimous adoption of resolution 2165 (2014). We are
proud to have been one of the sponsors and drafters of
the resolution, along with Australia and Luxembourg.
We negotiated the text of the draft resolution with the
other members of the Council, trying our best to come
up with the highest degree of consensus thereon. In
that regard, we would like thank all members of the
Council — permanent and elected — for their good
intentions and profound understanding of the goals and
motives of the text. We appreciate the unified position
taken by the Council.
The resolution is a response to the non-compliance
of Syrian parties, particularly the Syrian authorities,
with resolution 2139 (2014). That non-compliance has
been confirmed in the past four reports of the Secretary-
General, in which he has stated that the humanitarian
situation in Syria has deterioriated further and that
humanitarian assistance has been on the decline.
The resolution is an operational text and should
be read in concert with resolution 2139 (2014). It is
designed to guarantee the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to all those in need, wherever they are in
Syria and through the most direct routes, without delay
or discrimination. In that regard, I note that, along with
sponsors Australia and Luxembourg, we have been in
constant contact and coordination with the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, headed by
Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos, and her team
dealing with the Syrian dossier, with a view to arriving
at the most efficient means to extend humanitarian
assistance on the ground.
In conclusion, Jordan hopes that the Council will
take measures against any Syrian that does not abide by
resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014), adopted today.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): The
unanimous adoption of resolution 2165 (2014) by the
Security Council today is a glimmer of hope in the
distressing picture of the conflict ravaging Syria.
The conflict has created unimaginable suffering. A
year ago we mourned the deaths of 100,000 people; that
number has probably doubled since then. Some 3 million
refugees have fled Syria, and their numbers are growing
with every passing day. According to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, 10.8 million
people in Syria — half of them children — are in urgent
need of humanitarian assistance. Some 6.4 million
individuals have been internally displaced in Syria,
and more than 4.5 million live in areas difficult or
impossible to access for humanitarian workers. Among
the crimes perpetrated daily, in particular by the Syrian
armed forces, I note the bombing of hospitals and
schools, intentional attacks on health staff, attacks on
humanitarian convoys, the indiscriminate use of barrel
bombs, and starvation as a weapon of war so as to bring
besieged populations to their knees.
In order to protect civilians caught in the cross-
hairs of this war, the Security Council has repeatedly
called on parties to the conflict to respect international
humanitarian law. That was the thrust of presidential
14-46489 3/15
14/07/2014 The situation in the Middle East S/PV.7216
who have hitherto been inaccessible to humanitarian
workers.
The consent of the Syrian authorities will no longer
be necessary. The monitoring mechanism, established
under the auspices of the Secretary-General for an
initial period of six months, provides for a simple
notification system. Resolution 2165 (2014) also
affirms that the United Nations and its partners are
authorized to use routes that cross conflict lines so as
to bring aid through the most direct channels to those
who are in need. The United Nations and its partners
can distribute medical and surgical supplies without
interference from Damascus.
The delivery of humanitarian assistance should
begin immediately and without hindrance throughout
Syria on the basis of needs assessed by the United
Nations, rather than by Damascus. Resolution 2165
(2014) is an operational, specific and innovative
document. We sincerely hope that it will facilitate a true
breakthrough on the ground. If resolution 2165 (2014) is
not complied with and resolution 2139 (2014) continues
to suffer the same fate, the Security Council has clearly
affirmed that supplementary measures will be taken.
In voting today, the Security Council has prioritized
shared humanity and the common concern for the
interests and vital needs of the Syrian people. We are
proud to have actively contributed to this, alongside our
Australian and Jordanian colleagues. The humanitarian
distaster will nevertheless persist and continue to have
a serious impact on neighbouring countries so long as
a political solution to the Syrian conflict is not found.
I should therefore like to conclude by expressing the
hope that the Security Council’s newfound unanimity
and the appointment on 10 July of Mr. Staffan De
Mistura as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria will breathe new life into the search for a political
solution.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Obviously, we welcome
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2165 (2014) by
the Council today, and thank our co-authors, Jordan
and Luxembourg, for the work done in bringing it
to fruition. Decisively, the Council has been united
today in recognizing that the humanitarian situation in
Syria — already the greatest humanitarian crisis of this
century — has become even more desperate, and that
immediate action is necessary to meet the humanitarian
needs of the Syrian people.
statement S/PRST/2013/15 that the Council adopted on
2 October 2013, as well as the direct intention behind
resolution 2139 (2014), adopted four months ago with a
view to improving humanitarian access to the affected
populations. It was also the idea behind draft resolution
S/2014/348, blocked by a double veto two months
ago, which sought to refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court.
Since the adoption of resolution 2139 (2014), the
humanitarian situation in Syria has only deteriorated. In
his latest report on the implementation of the resolution
(S/2014/427), the Secretary-General is forced to note
that the primary obstacle to humanitarian access is
the deliberate decision of the Syrian authorities to
systematically prohibit the delivery of vital supplies.
Month after month, the Syrian authorities have
confiscated medication and surgical equipment intended
for the most vulnerable sector of the population living
in areas controlled by the opposition. Month after
month, the Syrian authorities have continued to block
humanitarian convoys at crossing points identified by
the United Nations as priorities. As a result, month after
month the number of Syrians deprived of humanitarian
assistance has only grown.
Given all this, as well as Syria’s blatant
non-compliance with resolution 2139 (2014), the
sponsors of resolution 2165 (2014) — Australia, Jordan
and Luxembourg — were forced to seek other ways
and means to ensure that humanitarian assistance
reaches more Syrians wherever they may live, be it in
areas controlled by the Syrian Government or by the
opposition, and that humanitarian assistance is not
instrumentalized by the Syrian authorities to political
and military ends. That is the basic goal of the new
resolution.
The provisions of resolution 2165 (2014) are clear
and legally binding. They are based on the observation
that the ongoing deterioration of the humanitarian
situation threatens peace and security in the region. In
adopting resolution 2165 (2014), the Security Council
has taken decisions that leave no room for ambiguity or
uncertainty. The United Nations humanitarian bodies
and their partners are authorized to transport aid to Syria
through four additional crossing points in neighbouring
countries — two on the border with Turkey, one on the
border with Iraq and one on the border with Jordan. The
use of those additional border crossings should allow
assistance to reach between 1.4 and 2 million people
4/15 14-46489
S/PV.7216 The situation in the Middle East 14/07/2014
1.3 million Syrians to be reached — and perhaps as
many as 2 million if successfully utilized.
The Syrian parties are obliged to ensure that
immediate and unhindered assistance reaches those in
need, including by allowing aid across conflict lines.
They must now cooperate with the United Nations
humanitarian agencies and their implementing partners
to ensure that happens.
Both this resolution and resolution 2139 (2014),
which of course remains fully in force, must be
implemented in full. We are under no illusions as
to how hard that will be, and even more so as the
situation deteriorates every day and the scale of what
is needed substantially increases every day. The
Council has affirmed again today that there will be real
consequences and measures for non-compliance.
The resolution also reaffirms that the only
sustainable solution to the Syrian crisis is through
a political process. The appointment of Mr. Staffan
de Mistura as the Secretary-General’s new Special
Envoy for Syria is a positive step towards resuming
negotiations towards a political solution. The Syrian
parties, in particular the Syrian Government, must now
move to cooperate closely with Mr. de Mistura and
make genuine and urgent efforts towards bringing an
end to this conflict, which has so devastated Syria, its
people and the region.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2165 (2014) and applauds Luxembourg,
Australia and Jordan for their efforts in making the
resolution a reality.
Today the Council has taken steps to ensure
that humanitarian aid reaches those most in need in
Syria. It is deeply regrettable that this new resolution
proved necessary. In February, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2139 (2014), which
should have enabled the widespread delivery of
humanitarian aid to people in Syria. Instead, the Syrian
regime continued its use of barrel bombs, siege and
starvation tactics and its blocking of delivery of aid to
its own people. Millions of people were left suffering,
while supplies of food and medicines were left waiting
if only access were granted.
Since the adoption of resolution 2139 (2014), in
February, the Syrian humanitarian crisis has worsened
significantly. A further 1.5 million people are in need,
While the adoption of the resolution is clearly
welcome, it should not have been necessary. Resolution
2139 (2014) set out very clearly in February the
Council’s expectations of what the Syrian parties need
to do in order to relieve the terrible suffering of the
Syrian people, including allowing humanitarian aid to
be delivered across borders and conflict lines. However,
as the Secretary-General has advised us four times,
each month since its adoption in February, resolution
2139 (2014) has been ignored.
As a result, the humanitarian situation in Syria
has actually worsened. Since February, the number of
people in need of assistance has increased by 1.5 million,
from 9.3 to 10.8 million — half the population — and
the number of those in areas out of reach of assistance
has grown by more than 1 million, to 4.7 million. Only
1 per cent of people in besieged areas are being reached;
only 12 per cent of those in hard-to-reach areas are
receiving aid, and the amount of this meagre assistance
has actually declined each month since February. Six
to seven thousand new refugees are generated every
day, and at least one family in Syria becomes displaced
every minute.
The Security Council was forced to act today
because of the failure by the Syrian parties to implement
resolution 2139 (2014). It was also forced to act because
of the cynical manipulation of humanitarian aid by the
regime as part of its military strategy — a strategy
that continues to include the outrageous use of aerial
bombardment and barrel bombs to deliberately target
and kill Syrian civilians, in defiance of the Council
and of international humanitarian law. Damascus
has pursued a calculated policy of arbitrary denial of
desperately needed humanitarian relief. It prohibits
the delivery of specific life-saving medical supplies
as a matter of policy; medical supplies are routinely
removed from World Health Organization convoys.
The resolution adopted today reaffirms the
Council’s determination that the Syrian Government
and other parties to the conflict must transform their
approach to humanitarian access and delivery. It is
time for the Syrian parties to put the interests of Syria’s
citizens first. Life-saving assistance must be delivered
through the most direct routes, including across
borders and conflict lines, to reach people in need as
the United Nations determies. The United Nations has
advised that the four border crossing points identified
in today’s resolution will allow at least an additional
14-46489 5/15
14/07/2014 The situation in the Middle East S/PV.7216
international humanitarian law and international
human rights.
Resolution 2165 (2014) also expresses deep concern
about the increasing terrorist activity, which serves to
hang a sword of Damocles over Syria today. Increasingly
violent and senseless terrorist attacks are being carried
out by the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, Jabhat
Al-Nusra and the Islamic Front. On 9 July, the village
of Khattab, in the governorate of Hama, was attacked.
There were no military or economic targets there of
interest to the armed opposition. The killers beheaded
14 people, including seven women and a girl. A similar
attack was carried out in the village of Taksis on 10 July,
during which women were violently murdered.
As underscored in today’s resolution, it is absolutely
clear that the humanitarian situation in Syria continues
to deteriorate in the absence of a political settlement.
In those circumstances, the Security Council found it
necessary to carefully consider the requests made by
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) with regard to possible steps to alleviate the
suffering of Syrian civilians in areas controlled by the
opposition.
The Russiam federation participated actively in the
negotiation of this resolution, given the need to improve
the humanitarian situation in Syria, alleviate the plight
of the civilian population in the country and improve
conditions for the work of humanitarian agencies. We
were able to support the resolution after sponsors took
into account our key priorities.
Resolution 2165 (2014), adopted today, reflects the
main elements of the arrangement for humanitarian
access that we drew up with OCHA and the Syrian
side. It reaffirms the need to adhere to the United
Nations guiding principles for the provision of
emergency humanitarian assistance, as well as a strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Syria. It also stresses that the
provision of humanitarian aid should not be politically
motivated.
A monitoring mechanism under the Secretary-
General is to be put in place at the border crossings. It
will be responsible for inspecting humanitarian convoys
going into Syria under United Nations auspices. The
functions of the mechanism are carefully spelled out
and time-bound. The Security Council will assess the
effectiveness of the mechanism again in 180 days.
with an additional 1.2 million in hard-to-reach areas.
Resolution 2165 (2014) is designed to reverse that trend.
We are determined to ensure that it has a real impact on
the ground.
Today’s resolution authorizes the United Nations
to use four additional border crossings to deliver
life-saving humanitarian aid to some of the hardest-
to-reach areas, without any opportunity for the Syrian
regime to obstruct, impede or delay that assistance.
That means that an additional 1.3 million people can
be immediately reached. As such, it marks a major
step forward in the international community’s efforts
to respond to the horrendous suffering in Syria. It
addresses the Syrian regime’s appalling neglect of the
human suffering of its own people.
We call on the Secretary-General to swiftly deploy
the monitoring mission so that aid can flow through
the additional border crossings, and to implement
the operation in coordination with the existing
non-governmental organizations that are already
playing a vital role in getting aid to people in need.
The number of individuals engulfed in the tragedy of
the Syrian crisis is staggering. Over 170,000 people are
dead. Hundreds of thousands more have been injured.
More than 10.8 million people are in need — 4.7 million
of them in hard-to-reach areas, and 2.9 million refugees.
Today the Council has demonstrated that it is possible
to work together to alleviate some of that suffering. But
this resolution is just one step in addressing the world’s
worst humanitarian crisis. The only lasting solution to
the crisis in Syria is through a political solution. The
United Kingdom urges all parties to work cooperatively
with the new United Nations Special Envoy, Mr. de
Mistura, towars a Syrian-led political transition that
truly reflects the will of the people.
This is a strong resolution that is practical and
operational and that will save millions of people’s lives.
But much more is needed to bring an end to the tragedy
taking place every day in Syria. The United Kingdom
will continue to work for an end to hostilities and to
empower the United Nations to deliver life-saving aid.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today the Security Council has adopted a
resolution that once again reminds the Syrian parties of
the need to stop the violence and immediately implement
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and
requires them to complly with their obligations under
6/15 14-46489
S/PV.7216 The situation in the Middle East 14/07/2014
has not been effective. In that regard, we underscore
the need for an early resumption of the inter-Syrian
dialogue on the basis of the Geneva communiqué of
30 June 2012. We hope that the United Nations Special
Envoy, Mr. Staffan De Mistura, will swiftly engage the
stakeholder parties in communication on that issue.
The Russian Federation underscores its readiness
to work with international and regional partners. Only
a collective — and not a unilateral — course of action
will be effective, as demonstrated by the process of
eliminating Syria’s chemical weapons. We hope that
such a constructive and responsible approach, as well
as the consensus of the Security Council, will continue
throughout the ongoing work on the Russian proposal
with regard to the drafting of a presidential statement
on the inadmissibility of any attempt to undermine
State sovereignty over the oil industry in Syria and
Iraq, in particular by terrorist groups.
Ms. Power (United States of America): As we sit
here today, nearly 11 million Syrians are struggling to
survive the worst humanitarian crisis in the world. I
met with some of them last month when I visited the
massive and ever-expanding refugee camps along
Syria’s border with Turkey. One family after another
shared harrowing stories of their communities being
bombarded from the air by the Al-Assad regime and
their families being deliberately denied humanitarian
aid simply because they lived in areas controlled by
the opposition. I met children whose parents had fled
with them to Turkey because those kids were gravely
malnourished, inhumanly denied food and medicine by
the Syrian regime.
The Al-Assad regime has until now refused to allow
United Nations humanitarian assistance to flow through
border crossings it does not control — something
members of the Security Council address with resolution
2165 (2014). By adopting that resolution, the Council has
opened four crossings to United Nations humanitarian
agencies and their implementing partners without the
need for approval from the regime. Those humanitarian
agencies will increase the supply of life-saving aid,
including food to eat and medicine to care for the sick
and injured. If implemented fully, the resolution will
allow critical aid to reach up to 2 million Syrians who
have been denied adequate assistance for the past year
and suffered immeasurably as a result. The resolution
also authorizes the United Nations to cross conflict
lines between regime and opposition forces to deliver
aid, and the Syrian regime, which is systematically
In that connection, we underscore that the resolution
does not provide for an automatic authorization of
enforcement measures. Any additional steps must be
considered under a separate review process by the
Security Council on the implementation of the resolution
on the basis of convincing evidence with regard to the
activities of any party to the Syrian conflict.
Progress in agreeing on the resolution was achieved
as a result of the mutual consideration of the parties’
concerns and interests, which made it possible to reach
a compromise. In that regard, we note the constructive
position of the Syrian authorities, who, on the practical
level, have already taken a number of measures to
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance
to people in need. The resolution stipulates that the
monitoring of the humanitarian convoys will be carried
out in accordance with the United Nations guiding
principles of humanitarian emergency assistance,
which will ensure that the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Syria will be rigorously
respected.
We expect that, through its activities, the United
Nations monitoring mission will interact with the Syrian
Government and work objectively and impartially,
and that its composition will be established based on
the principle of equitable geographical representation
and be acceptable to the parties involved. The United
Nations monitors should ensure, as set forth in the
resolution, the effective monitoring of the transportation
into Syria of exclusively humanitarian consignments.
We expect the reports to the Security Council on the
work of the United Nations to be objective and based
on verified information and to cover the activities of all
parties, including those of the armed opposition. There
is a need to ensure that armed opposition groups also
comply with the resolution, which applies equally to all
parties.
The resolution adopted today underscores once
again the importance of consensus with regard to local
ceasefires, which have demonstrated their effectiveness
in ensuring food security and saving lives. They also
demonstrate that, without outside intervention or
attempts to impose solutions or assign victories to
either side, Syrian parties are able to agree on saving
lives and putting an end to the violence.
More broadly, the situation in Syria, including the
humanitarian problem, can be resolved only through a
political and diplomatic solution. Experience has shown
that the piecemeal approach to the situation in Syria
14-46489 7/15
14/07/2014 The situation in the Middle East S/PV.7216
have shown again today that we can come together and
take action to address the horrific crisis in Syria.
In September of last year, we stood together in
demanding that the Al-Assad regime end its use of
chemical weapons against the Syrian people. Today,
100 per cent of declared chemical weapons in Syria
have been removed from the country. In February, we
stood together in calling on the Syrian regime to allow
free and unfettered access for humanitarian assistance
and to end the systematic besieging of civilian areas,
yet that resolution went largely unheeded.
Today, we are taking steps to ensure that our
resolution 2139 (2014) from February has a real impact
on the ground, unlocking the impediments that stand
in the way of cross-border assistance. There is other
unfinished work from that resolution, including ending
the systematic targeting of medical facilities and schools
and the monstrous use of barrel bombs against civilian
areas. The Council must now take the cooperation
and unity we have shown today and bring it to bear
in ensuring the end of the horrors being perpetrated
against the Syrian people.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
has been closely following the situation in Syria. Over
the past three years, the escalating conflict in Syria
has brought untold suffering to the Syrian people and
resulted in the worsening of the humanitarian situation
in parts of the country.
China is deeply concerned about the suffering of
the population and has made ongoing efforts to improve
the humanitarian situation in the country. On many
occasions, China has provided significant amounts of
humanitarian assistance to Syria and its neighbours
through various channels. In June, Chinese President
Xi Jinping announced a new round of humanitarian
assistance to the Syrian refugees in Jordan, Lebanon
and other countries, which is being acted upon. China
has actively participated in the assistance actions within
the United Nations framework and has contributed to
the United Nations Syria Humanitarian Assistance
Response Plan. We will continue to do our utmost to
help improve the humanitarian situation of the Syrians.
China supports the efforts of the international
community, in particular the United Nations, to ease the
humanitarian situation in Syria. We support the due role
of the Council in that process. Resolution 2165 (2014),
which we have just adopted unanimously, once again
demonstrates that, as long as all parties put the interests
denying cross-line humanitarian assistance, must heed
that obligation.
In addition, the resolution adopted today establishes
a United Nations monitoring mechanism, under the
authority of the Secretary-General and with the consent
of Syria’s neighbours, to monitor the United Nations
aid consignments in order to confirm that they indeed
contain humanitarian aid. The mechanism conforms
with the Secretary-General’s proposal and the resolution
stipulates that the inspections will occur at loading
facilities in neighbouring countries. We are grateful
to Syria’s neighbours for their crucial cooperation in
this effort and their tremendous generosity in helping
respond to the massive humanitarian crisis.
Yet even as we recognize the promise this resolution
holds for reaching more people in need, we must not
forget that it should have never required a Security
Council resolution for a Government to allow food
and medicine to reach millions of families whose lives
have been hanging in the balance. Yet when the United
Nations has requested such permission over the past
year, its letters have gone unanswered and its requests
have been rejected.
The Al-Assad regime has seized every opportunity
to make it more, and not less, difficult to provide such
crucial assistance to civilians in dire need. Instead of
opening paths for aid, it has deliberately closed them;
rather than providing free and unfettered humanitarian
access to all Syrians, it has used the denial of aid and
the starvation, sickness and misery it imposes as yet
another weapon in its cruel and devastating arsenal
against opposition-held areas.
The effectiveness of today’s resolution will depend
on the efforts and cooperation of many parties. Those
parties include the United Nations and international
humanitarian agencies, which have made clear their
interest in using those crossings. They also include us,
as members of the Security Council, who must ensure
that the resolution is fully enforced. The Council must
be prepared to take decisive action should the parties to
the conflict, particularly the Al-Assad regime, fail to
comply with it.
To that end, I would remind the Syrian regime that,
under Article 25 of the Charter of the United Nations,
Syria is obligated to accept and carry out the decisions
made by the Security Council in the resolution. At a
time when many are raising questions about the ability
of the Council to fulfil its purpose regarding Syria, we
8/15 14-46489
S/PV.7216 The situation in the Middle East 14/07/2014
a comprehensive, lasting and proper solution of the
Syrian issue as soon as possible.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the delegations of Australia, Jordan and
Luxembourg for having submitted resolution 2165
(2014), which Chile co-sponsored and which was adopted
unanimously today. However, as has been said, we must
not forget that it is a resolution that would not have been
necessary if all parties to the conflict had implemented
presidential statement S/PRST/2013/15 of 2 October
2013 and resolution 2139 (2014). It is unacceptable that,
following the implementation of resolution 2139 (2014),
the humanitarian situation has deteriorated even further.
Chile supported that resolution because it is a clear call
to all parties to respect international humanitarian law
and human rights, ensure the protection of civilians and
allow humanitarian access to the affected population.
None of those are happening today.
The resolution adopted today seeks to propose
specific measures to improve humanitarian access,
reiterating elements contained in both the presidential
statement and resolution 2139 (2014). It therefore
complements those documents. We appreciate the
inclusion of the reference to the accountability before
the law of those who have committed human rights
violations and abuses. That is essential in order to put
an end to the prevailing culture of impunity in the
conflict today.
Chile is aware that the resolution establishes certain
procedures and new mechanisms, whose subsequent
use in other humanitarian situations should be
rigorously assessed case by case. Notwithstanding the
above, we believe that, given the negative experience
since resolution 2139 (2014) was adopted in February,
the bureaucratic obstacles and the bias to which the
distribution of such aid has been subject, and the extent
of the crisis, those mechanisms reflect the urgent need
for specific action on the ground.
In conclusion, we would like to recall the appeal
of the Secretary-General in his six points on Syria of
20 June with regard to the fact that the international
community must do its utmost to protect the people
and their human rights, human dignity and security.
Furthermore, we also agree that there should be an end
to the militarization of the conflict, including the flow
of weapons from abroad to all parties. We hope that
the consensus shown by the Security Council today,
reflected in the clear message that we are send to all
actors, is heard.
of the Syrian people first and meet each other half
way, the Council’s consensus on the Syrian issue and
robust actions are possible. The unanimous support for
resolution 2165 (2014) reflects the important consensus
of the Council and the international community on the
question of Syria’s humanitarian issue. China calls on
all parties in Syria to implement in practice resolution
2165 (2014) and other relevant Security Council
resolutions and presidential statements and to actively
cooperate with the United Nations and the international
community in their humanitarian efforts.
Syria’s neighbours should actively support the
work of United Nations and other humanitarian
agencies so as to ensure the prompt deployment of the
monitoring mechanism and the unimpeded delivery
of humanitarian supplies. In providing humanitarian
relief, United Nations and other humanitarian agencies
should act strictly in accordance with the resolution’s
mandate. They should respect Syria’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity, follow
the guiding principles of United Nations humanitarian
assistance set out in relevant General Assembly
resolutions, and try to ensure the understanding,
support and cooperation of the country concerned. The
international community should uphold the neutral and
impartial nature of humanitarian assistance and should
avoid the politicization of humanitarian issues and the
militarization of humanitarian actions.
A political solution is the only way out of the Syrian
problem. It is also the right way to resolve all matters,
including the humanitarian issue. The international
community should stay the course of a political
solution, continue to engage in coordination and
cooperation and step up its efforts in that regard. China
calls on all parties in Syria to effectively implement the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), launch an
inclusive political transition and find a middle way that
takes into account the country’s specific conditions and
accommodates the interests of all parties concerned
in order to achieve a political settlement of the Syrian
issue.
China has consistently supported the good offices
of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on the issue of
Syria and welcomes his appointment of Mr. De Mistura
as the new Joint Special Representative for Syria. We
believe that that appointment will give new momentum
to the political efforts. As a permanent member of the
Council and a responsible member of the international
community, China will continue to actively work for
14-46489 9/15
14/07/2014 The situation in the Middle East S/PV.7216
The adoption of resolution 2139 (2014) last February
was a very important event. At that time, the Security
Council unanimously sent a clear message to all of the
parties without exception recalling their obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, and requiring that they ensure rapid,
safe and unhindered humanitarian access to those in
need.
At that time, we all trusted that, unlike what
happened with respect to the presidential statement
adopted on 2 October 2013 (S/PRST/2013/15), the voice
of a united Council would be heeded and lead to a
change in the trend of the accelerated deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in Syria.
Unfortunately, despite the adoption of several
measures, almost five months later that trend has,
in many aspects, not changed, but, rather, worsened.
The four consecutive reports of the Secretary-General
confirmed unambiguously that the parties to the
conflict continue to overlook and systematically violate
international law, and that the delivery of assistance to
areas controlled by the Government as well as by the
opposition has diminished instead of expanding.
That is why Argentina voted in favour of the
resolution, upholding the pledge made in resolution
2139 (2014) to take additional measures in case of
non-compliance. We did so convinced that with its
adoption, the Council is once again shouldering its
responsibilities and strengthening its determination
to protect civilians and ensure the provision of
humanitarian assistance, while reaffirming its
commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Syria.
At the same time, we would like to acknowledge the
fact that our concerns and proposals have been taken
into account and incorporated into the adopted text.
Today the Council has determined that the humanitarian
agencies of the United Nations can deliver assistance to
the millions of people who find themselves in certain
zones and regions that thus far have been inaccessible
or difficult to access. It is important to underscore that
many of those areas are controlled by armed opposition
groups, which have the duty to ensure that humanitarian
workers are able to carry out their work in a safe and
unhindered manner. We take this opportunity to pay
tribute to those who daily risk their lives to deliver
assistance to those who require it the most.
Any effort of the Council to address the
humanitarian situation will be insufficient if a political
solution is not achieved. That is why we value the
fact that, despite all the difficulties and the negative
outlook, we continue to insist on that. As the resolution
points out, the only sustainable solution to the crisis is
an inclusive political process led by the Syrians, with
a view to fully implementing the Geneva communiqué
of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex). While thanking
Mr. Brahimi for his efforts in pursuit of peace, we now
give our support to the appointment of Mr. Staffan
de Mistura as Joint Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Syria.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): The Republic of
Korea welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution
2165 (2014). We greatly appreciate the hard work of the
authors of resolution 2165 (2014) — Australia, Jordan
and Luxembourg — during the past several weeks.
The resolution that we have adopted today is crafted in
an operationally focused manner so as to address the
current ineffectiveness of humanitarian access into and
within Syria. The Republic of Korea co-sponsored and
voted in favour of the resolution in the expectation of
the full and immediate implementation of the measures
provided for therein.
More than four months have passed since the
Council adopted resolution 2139 (2014), which remains
far from having been implemented.
Syria continues to be devastated by the never-
ending violence, and civilians, including women and
children, continue to bear the brunt of the war.
Under the circumstances, it is critical for the
Council to see to it that this new resolution actually
makes a difference in the humanitarian situation on the
ground. We urge all parties in Syria, particularly the
Syrian Government, to fully comply with the provisions
of resolution 2165 (2014) and the Council’s presidential
statement of 2 October 2013 (S/PRST/2013/15).
For its part, the Security Council should live up
to its promise that it will take further measures in the
event of non-compliance by any party.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like to begin by quoting a leader whom we
frequently honour, Nelson Mandela, who said that the
Geneva Conventions continue to remind us strongly
of the obligation that we all have to take care of one
another.
10/15 14-46489
S/PV.7216 The situation in the Middle East 14/07/2014
resolution finds its legal ground and ethical aim in
relieving and preventing human suffering and in
ensuring that those people and communities living in
conditions of extreme vulnerability can have access to
humanitarian assistance, not to live better but simply in
order not to die of hunger, thirst or disease.
That is why Argentina reaffirms its position and
conviction that military means will not resolve this
deep-rooted crisis. We sincerely hope that the step we
are taking today with this humanitarian resolution will
help to achieve that objective, which will help to pave
to way for a political solution and relieve the suffering
of millions of people.
Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): Lithuania welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2165 (2014). More
should be done to put an end to the suffering of the
millions of civilians trapped in the vicious Syrian civil
war. There is no higher value than human life. We all
must act in order to guarantee that aid is delivered in
a prompt and efficient manner through the most direct
routes, across all relevant border-crossing points.
We commend the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and all humanitarian partners for
their work.
It is the responsibility of the parties to the conflict,
under international law, particularly international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
to protect the civilian population and unconditionally
guarantee to those in need unhindered and immediate
access to aid.
When a Government is no longer in a position to
guarantee the safety and basic needs of its citizens
then it must not stand in the way of international relief
organizations to do so. Over the past three years, the
crucial principle has been repeatedly violated by all
parties to the conflict in Syria. However, the primary
responsibility lies with the Syrian Government.
Today we are witnessing in Syria massive and
brutal violations of human rights, some of which can
be characterized as war crimes and crimes against
humanity. Aerial bombings of civilian areas and
starvation have become weapons in a war without
rules or restraints. Denying essential medical and
surgical supplies has become tactics. Every conceivable
abuse occurs daily in Syria. Children, women, the
elderly, Palestinian refugees, every religious or ethnic
minority — nobody is safe. Whole generations of
Syrians are at risk of being lost.
We fully agree with the statement that the full
implementation of the Council’s requirements could
change the lives of millions of people within Syria
and contribute to alleviating the heavy burden that
neighbouring countries have, with deep solidarity, been
bearing.
But we must be clear. We cannot fall into the trap
of thinking that simply with the appropriate measures
and robust humanitarian action to assist refugees and
displaced persons, it will be possible not only to save
lives but also to contain the crisis within the confines
of Syrian territory and the immediate region. That is
because even in the unlikely event that all necessary
funding is provided, and if we could ensure unrestricted
access for assistance, it is clear that the consequences
of the conflict are measured not only in the number of
deaths, the destruction of the country and the millions
of people who require food, medicine and shelter. Its
impact is also reflected in the destabilizing effects of
the unbridled growth of sectarian tensions that we see
throughout the Middle East. This is reflected in the
expansion of extremist ideologies and terrorist acts
throughout the region and beyond, through the actions
of young people from different corners of the planet
who join the struggle in Syria only to then return,
inspired by violence and intolerance, to their places
of origin. It is clear, therefore, that all this cannot be
contained if the crisis is not resolved.
That is why the resolution we are adopting today
clearly reaffirms that the humanitarian situation will
continue to deteriorate in the absence of a solution that
emerges from an inclusive political dialogue led by the
Syrians themselves.
We thus reiterate our call on all parties to resume
in good faith the negotiations begun in January and on
regional and international players to help to generate
the appropriate conditions for this to take place. As we
step up our efforts to deliver humanitarian assistance to
Syria, we must come up with ways to put an end to the
flow of arms and to the actions of foreign combatants,
which fuel the conflict, and ways to enable the Council to
be instrumental in contributing to a political solution to
the crisis, thus strongly backing the Secretary-General
and his new Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, whom we fully support.
A humanitarian resolution is a decision that is
neither based on nor legitimizes the struggle for power
or for competing geopolitical interests. A humanitarian
14-46489 11/15
14/07/2014 The situation in the Middle East S/PV.7216
assistance must be delivered by the most direct routes,
be it through the front lines or across borders from
neighbouring countries.
But the resolution goes further. It opens four
border crossing points from neighbouring countries
that have been closed until now. That provision, based
on the requests of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, could be decisive in reaching
nearly 2 million additional people. Finally, the
resolution innovates by introducing a convoy inspection
mechanism so that the Syrian regime will no longer be
able to object to the work of humanitarian actors on its
territory.
The resolution is a further step in the efforts of
the Council to improve the conditions and efficiency
of the work of humanitarian actors. That being said,
it does not complement or replace resolution 2139
(2014), all of whose requirements remain valid. In
that regard, we recall that the Syrian authorities are
using barrel bombs on a mass scale, which is a direct
and indisputable violation of resolution 2139 (2014).
The resolution has the practical, short-term goal of
improving humanitarian work, but also emphasizes that
the political transition that should allow for a response
to the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people has
still not taken place.
Finally, the resolution welcomes the appointment
of a new Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, whom France will support in
his efforts to promote a solution based on the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): Chad
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2165
(2014). Chad thanks and commends the authors of the
resolution — Australia, Jordan and Luxembourg — for
having initiating the resolution and for having strongly
contributed to its adoption.
Chad hopes that the adoption of the resolution will
contribute to improving the humanitarian situation
in Syria, howsoever modestly, and to alleviating the
suffering of Syrian civilians. Chad calls on all parties
to the conflict to respect international humanitarian
law and to facilitate unhindered access of needy
civilian populations to humanitarian aid. Chad hopes
that resolution 2165 (2014) will prove to be more than
just one additional document, but that it will put an
end to the deliberate obstacles made to the delivery of
humanitarian aid.
The Syrians are waiting for our help. We commend
neighbouring States, in particular Lebanon and Jordan,
for keeping their borders open for Syrian refugees,
including Palestinians. Resolution 2165 (2014) is only
a partial and temporary measure. The ultimate goal
remains a peaceful settlement of conflict through
political process. We welcome the appointment of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura. We hope that peace will be restored in Syria.
Peace is the only hope for the people of Syria.
The Syrian conflict is no longer a regional problem.
It has become a global threat to international peace
and security. The Council must not fail to take Article
41 measures in the event of non-compliance with
resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014) by any Syrian
party, including by referring the situation in Syria to
the International Criminal Court.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): The Council
has just unanimously adopted a new resolution on
humanitarian access in Syria (resolution 2165 (2014)).
I thank Australia, Jordan and Luxembourg for their
efforts in preparing that text.
The adoption of a new resolution was needed
because the provisions of presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/15 of 2 October 2013 and the provisions
of resolution 2139 (2014) have not been implemented
by the Syrian regime, as the successive reports of the
Secretary-General have noted. It was needed because
the tragedy continues in Syria, with a record that has
progressively deteriorated for more than three years,
claiming more than 170,000 victims, and causing more
than 10 million Syrians to flee the violence or to require
assistance. It was needed because the United Nations
humanitarian agencies and their implementing partners
could do more and better if the Syrian regime did not
arbitrarily close its borders, set up an ever-increasing
number of bureaucratic obstacles to the distribution
of humanitarian aid, or restrict the flow of assistance
to prevent it from reaching areas controlled by the
opposition.
Resolution 2165 (2014) will allow for all of that to
change, concretely, at least for some of those who do not
receive the assistance they could and should receive. It
reiterates some fundamental principles of humanitarian
action, including the principle that assistance must be
distributed without prejudice and without political
motivation. It reiterates one of the main demands
contained in resolution 2139 (2014), which is that
12/15 14-46489
S/PV.7216 The situation in the Middle East 14/07/2014
Rwanda welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2165 (2014), on the humanitarian situation
in Syria. We commend the delegations of Australia,
Jordan and Luxembourg for introducing the resolution
and for their unwavering commitment to humanitarian
assistance in Syria. We believe that resolution 2165
(2014), which is a follow-up to resolution 2139 (2014),
includes important measures to ease humanitarian
access to people in need, as it provides for the opening
of four critical border crossings. That will enable
humanitarian actors to reach up to 2 million people who
are in hard-to-reach areas.
To conclude, Rwanda calls on the Syrian
Government, the opposition groups and all other
stakeholders to fully implement resolution 2165 (2014),
as adopted by the Council. But above all, Rwanda
believes that only a political solution will truly end
the humanitarian crisis in Syria. In that regard, we
welcome the appointment of the new Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura. We hope that all actors will accord him the
necessary support in his mission. Meanwhile, we urge
those States that have influence on the parties to help
in re-animating the Geneva process, so as to find a
sustainable solution to the Syrian crisis.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I wish you
continued success.
I would like to begin my statement by condemning
the ongoing savage Israeli aggression against Gaza and
the Palestinian people and the ongoing political and
humanitarian indifference with regard to the tragedy of
the Palestinian people, which has lasted for more than
66 years. That tragedy has taken the lives of hundreds
of thousands of Palestinians, destroyed their hopes and
dreams and serve to cast aside all the promises and
resolutions adopted by the Council to do justice to the
Palestinian people.
The humanitarian element constitutes one of
the main aspects of the crisis in Syria. It is clear that
there are those who work with unrivalled dedication
to use creative terrorism as a tool to exacerbate the
Chad requests all parties to the conflict to
scrupulously respect the provisions of resolutions 2139
(2014) and 2165 (2014). The Security Council must
ensure their effective implementation by all parties to
the conflict. In order to put a final end to the suffering
of the Syrian people, the international community must
redouble its efforts to bring the parties to the conflict to
resume negotiations in order to find a lasting political
solution to the crisis.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): Nigeria view the crisis in
Syria as an internal conflict that requires a political
solution. However, as the fighting remains brutal and
intractable and assumes a new dimension with the
involvement of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
the attendant humanitarian situation calls for concerted
international action for effective address.
Resolution 2165 (2014) seeks to accomplish that
objective. Nigeria voted in favour of the resolution in
the collective search for a remedy for the protracted
situation being endured by the Syrian people. The
resolution authorizes the United Nations and its
implementing partners to deliver humanitarian
assistance across borders and conflict lines and to
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian supplies to those
in need. It also establishes a monitoring mechanism
to ensure that the contents of aid convoys are indeed
intended for humanitarian use.
The adoption of resolution 2165 (2014) today is a
demonstration of the unrelenting commitment of the
Security Council to work assiduously in the higher
interests of the Syrian people. We expect that this
resolute effort will continue to serve as a model in the
Council’s future efforts. We reiterate the imperative
for a political solution to the Syrian crisis and we urge
all parties to work towards the implementation of the
30 June 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
It is in that regard that we welcome the appointment
of Mr. Staffan de Mistura as the new Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Syria, and urge the parties
to utilize his good offices and wealth of experience
towards the attainment of an amicable solution to the
impasse.
I would like to thank the delegations of Australia,
Jordan and Luxembourg for their leadership in driving
the negotiation process, which culminated in today’s
remarkable, unanimous resolution.
The President: I shall now make a very brief
statement in my capacity as the representative of Rwanda.
14-46489 13/15
14/07/2014 The situation in the Middle East S/PV.7216
the suffering of the Syrian people. That is consistent
with the statement made by international jurist Carla
Del Ponte in pointing out that the Syrian people’s
tragedy was growing because of foreign mercenaries
and groups like ISIS and the Al-Nusra Front. In that
regard, we reiterate that we will be able to put an end to
terrorism only by bringing immediate pressure to bear
on the Governments of the countries that are financing,
arming and training terrorist elements and those
securing, harbouring and facilitating their passage into
the Syrian territory. In order to fully abide by Security
Council resolutions on countering terrorism, it is high
time for this international Organization to take a bold
stand in the face of the Saudi, Qatari and Turkish
practices of supporting terrorism. The irresponsible
and frantic quest to destabilize Syria and Iraq using
immoral methods is the main reason for the fuelling
and spreading of terrorism in the entire region.
It is not enough for a State to claim that it is against
terrorism and to place an entity linked to Al-Qaida on
its list of terrorists in order that it can claim innocence
with regard to being involved in propagating and
supporting terrorism. It is also not enough to make
statements to the media about the spread of terrorism
and terrorist acts in order to spare civilians the scourge
of terror. We must stop the politicized media coverage,
truly put an end to the various forms of support for
those terrorist groups and hold fully accountable those
who violate the resolutions on counter-terrorism. It is
highly ironic to classify an organization as a terrorist
group while at the same time supporting its terrorist
activities and enabling it to obtain various forms of
assistance, including lethal weapons. Regrettably, in
their statements some of my colleagues have described
those terrorist groups as the Syrian “opposition”.
As evidence of what I have mentioned, I have a
letter dated 17 January from the so-called head of the
Free Syrian Army, the fugitive terrorist Salim Idriss,
addressed to the leaders of the so-called revolutionary
military councils in eastern Syria, which states the
following.
“I would like to report that the ammunition sent by
the command staff to the leaders of the revolutionary
military councils in the eastern region is to be
divided up in accordance with the agreement: two
thirds to warlord leaders of Jabhat Al-Nusra and
one third to be equally divided among the military
and the revolutionary elements in order to fight the
ISIS gangs. We would appreciate it if you would
humanitarian situation in Syria, with the aim of
exploiting it to exert political pressure on the Syrian
Government and to implement interventionist agendas.
The Syrian Government, based on its constitutional
responsibilities and national duties towards its people,
who are political and humanitarian targets, was aware
of this matter early on and worked hard to protect
its citizens to the best of its ability and to meet their
humanitarian needs in the different regions of Syria
without discrimination.
With the increase in humanitarian needs as a
result of the escalation of terrorist acts, the Syrian
Government welcomed and adopted new initiatives
and means to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. It welcomed every sincere effort to help it
alleviate the humanitarian burden on its people. This
approach was demonstrated by the Government’s
eagerness to cooperate constructively with the United
Nations and its agencies working on the humanitarian
sphere, including the granting of licenses to 96 Syrian
and 16 international non-governmental organizations
to work in Syria. All of that was in accordance with the
guidelines established in General Assembly resolution
46/182, foremost among which is the principle of respect
for the national sovereignty of States while providing
humanitarian assistance.
That commitment led to the signing of six
humanitarian response plans between the Syrian
Government and the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) to the benefit of
millions of Syrian citizens. It is self-evident that all
measures, regardless of their scope or effectiveness,
will be to not avail unless the root causes underlying the
humanitarian needs are addressed, that is, the activities
of armed terrorist groups, including those affiliated
with Al-Qaida. Among other things, those terrorist
activities include the destruction of infrastructure,
the depletion of the country’s resources, the forced
displacement of innocent civilians — depriving them
of a safe and decent livelihoods — and the cutting off of
water to the city of Aleppo, thereby depriving 3 million
Syrian citizens of drinking water.
The flight of millions of refugees and displaced
Iraqis because of the terrorism carried out by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) confirms
what we have been saying — that the existence of
refugees and displaced persons in Syria is due to
the same reason: terrorism sponsored from abroad.
Ending terrorism is therefore a prerequisite for ending
14/15 14-46489
S/PV.7216 The situation in the Middle East 14/07/2014
The Syrian Government relies on the impartial,
effective and responsible role of the United Nations
in dealing with the humanitarian situation in Syria, in
particular with regard to respect for Syrian sovereignty,
not to mention the cooperation and commitment of the
Syrian Government in the humanitarian area, ensuring
the non-politicization of humanitarian assistance and
refraining from the manipulation of border crossings
by some actors to allow the entry of weapons and
terrorists. We underscore the need for certain senior
United Nations officials to fully comply with their
mandates, in accordance with Article 100 of the Charter
of the United Nations, and to refrain from pursuing the
agendas of their national Governments.
In conclusion, one cannot support terrorism while
claiming to seek to put an end to the humanitarian
suffering in Syria. The stubborness of some
Governments in denying their huge strategic mistakes
in Syria cannot be seen as political maturity or a sense
of responsibility towards the humanitarian crisis.
After all that has taken place, we have not heard any
apology from the officials of those countries that
have supported terrorism in Syria and Iraq, while
remaining suspiciously silent with regard to declaring
a state of terrorism. Instead, we still hear the shameful
description of those insurgents as freedom fighters,
jihadists and armed opposition. A very important book,
entitled Syria: Why the West was Wrong, was recently
published in Paris. In the preface, the author wrote:
“How could the West have been so wrong about
Syria? It is the result of a mixture of historical
ignorance, political Manichaeism and diplomatic
wishful thinking.”
The Syrian people need the Governments of those
States to consider the sins that they have committed
towards the Syrian people and to strive to make amends
for them before the flame of that terrorism reaches their
own territories. In order to improve the humanitarian
situation in Syria, it is first and foremost necessary
to put an end to terrorism and to support the path of
national reconciliation, which has significantly helped
improve the humanitarian situation in those areas where
that has happened. A Syrian-led national dialogue and
the choice of the Syrian people and their aspirations
must be supported.
I would like to mention that the presidential
election that recently took place in Syria, with multiple
candidates, proved that the first and last choice in
deciding Syria’s future lies in the hands of the Syrian
send us the delivery receipts for the total amount of
the ammunition, in terms of quantity and quality,
with the personal signatures of the leaders and
warlords so that the receipts can be given to the
Turkish and French partners.”
Two thirds of the ammunition reached the so-called
moderate opposition, the leaders of Jabhat Al-Nusra,
who are classified by the Council as a terrorist entity
affiliated with Al-Qaida.
Furthermore, how is it possible that some
permanent members of the Security Council talk about
providing lethal weapons to the so-called moderate
military opposition, even though the President of one
of those countries has acknowledged that one cannot
rely on the opposition. Everyone knows that the label is
only a cover to conceal terrorist groups affiliated with
Al-Qaida, such as ISIS, Jabhat Al-Nusra and others.
In addition to the activities of the terrorist groups,
there are other factors that hamper the improvement of
the humanitarian situation in Syria. The necessary steps
to deal with such elements should be taken. In short, the
most important of those factors are as follows.
First, the negative impact on Syrian citizens as a
result of the unilateral and coercive measures imposed
on them by the Governments of States that support
terrorism. Those States are by definition contributing
to the humanitarian crisis, not to a solution.
Secondly, the targeting and repeated plundering
of humanitarian convoys by terrorist groups and
their killing and detention of Syrian Red Crescent
humanitarian workers — 33 of whom have to died to
date at the hands of such groups — prevent the delivery
of humanitarian assistance to many areas throughout
Syria. The fundamental problems facing the delivery of
humanitarian assistance occur primarily in areas where
terrorist groups are active, according to the report of
OCHA itself.
Thirdly, despite the boastful scenes and deceptive
pledges made at donor conferences, funding for the
2014 Syria Humanitarian Assistance Response Plan has
barely reached 29 per cent of the required amount. The
choice of some countries to spend vast amounts of their
people’s money to finance arms deals to the benefit of
terrorists and to facilitate the entry of extremists into
Syria, rather than to allocate those resources to funding
the Response Plan, shows their hypocrisy and exposes
their false claims of being concerned about improving
the humanitarian situation in Syria.
14-46489 15/15
14/07/2014 The situation in the Middle East S/PV.7216
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.
people, not a group of States that wrongly puts itself
forward as the custodian of the destiny of the world’s
nations. The election also showed that the Syrian
people were united in the face of pressure and that
no one, however powerful, could separate the Syrian
people from their rights, as has been the case in other
countries.
