United Nations S/PV.3377
94-85651 (E) This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of
speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the
signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Verbatim
Reporting Section, room C-178 and incorporated in a copy of the record.
Security Council Provisional
Forty-ninth Year
3377th Meeting
Monday, 16 May 1994, 11.10 p.m.
New York
President: Mr. Gambari . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nigeria)
Members: Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Cardenas
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Valle
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Li Zhaoxing
Czech Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Kovanda
Djibouti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Olhaye
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mérimée
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Keating
Oman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Al-Khussaiby
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Niaz
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Vorontsov
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Bicamumpaka
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Yañez Barnuevo
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . Sir David Hannay
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Inderfurth
Agenda
The situation concerning Rwanda
Report of the Secretary-General (S/1994/565)
1
Security Council 3377th meeting
Forty-ninth year 16 May 1994
The meeting was called to order at 12.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Rwanda.
Report of the Secretary-General (S/1994/565)
The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on the agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Rwanda,
document S/1994/565.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1994/571, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by the Czech Republic, France, the
Russian Federation, Spain, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America. I should like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to the following revisions to be
made to the text of the draft resolution contained in
document S/1994/571, in its provisional form: Operative
paragraph 7 should now read as follows:
"Further requests the Secretary-General to report
as soon as possible on the next phase of UNAMIR’s
deployment, including inter alia on the cooperation of
the parties, progress towards a cease-fire, availability
of resources and the proposed duration of the
mandate, for further review and action, as required, by
the Council".
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents:
- S/1994/527,letter dated 2 May 1994 from the
Chargé d’affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of
the United Republic of Tanzania to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council;
S/1994/552, letter dated 9 May 1994 from the
representatives of Uganda and the United States of America
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council; S/1994/553, letter dated 10 May 1994
from the Chargé d’affaires ad interim of the Permanent
Mission of Uganda to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council; and S/1994/562, letter
dated 12 May 1994 from the Permanent Representative of
Burkina Faso to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council.
A separate vote on section B of the draft resolution
contained in document S/1994/571 has been requested.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall first put section B of
the draft resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
Thereafter, I shall put the rest of the draft resolution
contained in document S/1994/571 to the vote.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall proceed
accordingly.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Bicamumpaka (Rwanda) (interpretation from
French): First of all, Sir, I should like to congratulate
you on your assuming the presidency of the Council for
the month of May and on your admirable handling of our
work. It is an honour for me to be able to address this
august body, which bears the heavy burden of watching
over the destiny of the world to preserve it from the
catastrophes of war.
I speak to you in order to invite you to look more
deeply into the tragic events that are currently besetting
my country, Rwanda. Many people learned of these
events as they happened, unaware of their historical
background and origin, or of the motives behind them.
However, many have asked why there was so much
hatred and cruelty. Some would answer naively that it
was the fault of the Rwandese army or of the Rwandese
Government. Yet the actual reality is different, more
complex, less easy to grasp from the outside. It is deeply
rooted in the subconscious of every Rwandese and in the
collective memory of an entire people.
The Rwandese tragedy derives from the age-old
history of the nation of Rwanda. The hatred that is
erupting now was forged over four centuries of cruel and
ruthless domination of the Hutu majority by the haughty
and domineering Tutsi minority. The hatred was
cultivated by four centuries of cultural indoctrination
designed to bring about the mental enslavement of an
entire people. But too much hatred and too much
2
Security Council 3377th meeting
Forty-ninth year 16 May 1994
contempt, too much enslavement, inevitably bring rebellion.
That is what happened in Rwanda in 1959, when the
Hutu overthrew the feudal monarchy and replaced it with
a democratic republic.
The feudal lords did not accept the verdict of history
and of the ballot box. But the result of the referendum
organized in September 1961 by the United Nations was
beyond doubt: no more monarchy in Rwanda, but rather a
democratic republic. That was and remains the will of the
people of Rwanda.
The feudal lords preferred exile to being governed by
the former commoners, the children of slaves. They chose
exile and counter-revolution. From 1962 to 1967, Rwanda
had therefore to cope with interminable wars fomented in
particular by Uganda. There were many innocent victims,
either assassinated directly by the invaders or in reprisal by
the Hutu population against the Tutsi who had remained in
the country.
Several years of tranquility passed. Some said that
ethnic hatred had died down, that national reconciliation
had been achieved. Deep friendships developed between
the Hutu and Tutsi peasants and among the elites on both
sides, and mixed marriages were celebrated, many modest
but some with great ceremony.
The illusion was perfect, but it was still only an
illusion, for then came the invasion of 1 October 1990,
f o m e n t e d b y t h e C h i e f s o f S t a f f o f
President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni of Uganda. The wound
that we thought had healed was reopened.
Many lost their lives simply because they were Hutu.
The invaders, the Rwandese Patriotic Front (RPF), had
taken the name Inkotanyi, that is, implacable killers - an
expression taken from one of the 19th-century royal militias
notorious for its cruelty. They destroyed everything that
could symbolize republican power - roads, bridges, clinics,
hospitals, schools and so on.
And yet, they claim to have taken up arms in order to
restore democracy and the prosperity of Rwanda. What
kind of democracy accepts the systematic killing of its
people? What democracy can tolerate the forced
displacement of more than a million people?
Fortunately, the army and the Rwandese people
together were able to stop the revenge-seeking invaders,
despite the strong-arm intervention of the Ugandan soldiers,
whose notorious Simba battalion was disgraced in the
attempt to take the town of Ruhengeri in north-west
Rwanda, only 25 kilometres from the frontier with
Uganda.
The invaders were forced to negotiate because they
were unable to attain their objective of seizing power in
Kigali in under three days, the target they had set for
themselves.
Here I would like to pay tribute to the tireless efforts
of the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, and the outstanding work of
his Special Representative in Kigali, to restore peace to
Rwanda.
I would also pay a well-deserved tribute to
Mr. Ali Hassan Mwinyi, President of the United Republic
of Tanzania who, with his wisdom and far-sightedness,
was able, as facilitator, to ensure the successful outcome
of the Arusha negotiations.
I take the opportunity of commending the tireless
efforts of the Organization of African Unity which,
working with successive Presidents and the Secretary-
General, has made intense diplomatic efforts to restore
peace to Rwanda.
Our thanks go to Marshal Mobutu Sese Seko,
President of the Republic of Zaire, the first mediator to be
able to bring together the fraternal enemies so that they
could agree on a cease-fire, which was concluded at
Nsele-Kinshasa on 29 March 1991.
Finally, I should like to thank all the observers at the
negotiations, who spared no effort to get the two parties
to sign the Arusha Peace Accords.
The people of Rwanda, and particularly those
displaced in the fighting, had legitimate hopes for those
agreements. Everybody came together in saying: long
live peace in Rwanda.
But alas, how disappointed we were when the
moment came to implement the Accords, which had been
negotiated with such difficulty. The Rwandese Patriotic
Front, the political organ of the invaders, showed its true
colours. It wanted power during the transitional period,
and at any price.
Indeed, the transitional period was to determine the
political future of Rwanda. It was during that period that
3
Security Council 3377th meeting
Forty-ninth year 16 May 1994
we were to prepare the constitution, the electoral laws and
the other laws to establish the post-electoral political
system.
The RPF, the political organization representing the
Tutsi minority - about 10 per cent of the Rwandese
population - wanted to be able to win the future elections
or simply to avoid them by introducing into Rwanda the
bizarre system of a non-party democracy so dear to
President Museveni of Uganda.
This approach by the RPF was not, however, able to
resist the commitment of our people and the political
parties to the democratic process, which had already begun.
This was the moment of truth. The leaders of the
RPF, with their ultra-conservative ideology based on the
arrogance of their ancestors, were not able to accept the
contradiction facing them. Unable to persuade, they began
to threaten - clear threats that the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and even the international community
were not able to stand up against.
It was then that the tragic, cruel and inhuman moment
arrived. On 6 April 1994 the Head of State of Rwanda,
Major-General Juvénal Habyarimana, was brutally
assassinated along with his Burundi counterpart, His
Excellency Cyprien Ntaryamira. Two Heads of State died
that night at the same time, burned to ashes in the wreckage
of their plane, shot down by a ground-to-air missile.
"Good riddance" said one Head of State in the region,
whose unconditional support led the RPF to bring the
apocalypse to Rwanda. The RPF took advantage of this
moment of shock and grief to send its battalions, reinforced
by soldiers of the Ugandan regular army, against the capital
of Rwanda and against all the other positions of the
Rwandese Armed Forces.
Once again, as in March-April 1992 and February-
March 1993, the RPF chose to violate agreements
concluded with the Government of Rwanda. It has never
been said often enough, but it was common knowledge, that
as soon as the Arusha Agreement was signed, on 4 August
1993, the RPF began to prepare for war by recruiting and
by infiltrating its fighters throughout the country, and
particularly into the capital. There were about 4,000 RPF
fighters on 6 April 1994, not the 600 accepted in the
Arusha Agreement.
The assassination of the Head of State of Rwanda on
6 April 1994 and the simultaneous resumption of war were
not mere coincidence. These events were part of a
carefully prepared plan to seize power in Kigali. That
plan was coordinated with the Ugandan authorities, who
themselves had carried out a concealed demobilization to
make soldiers available to send to the front in Rwanda.
The resumption of hostilities by the RPF, along with
large-scale massacres of Hutu civilians, was the straw that
broke the camel’s back, unleashing repressed hatreds and
a festering desire for revenge.
The apocalypse came in the form of an inter-ethnic
war of unbelievable cruelty. Long-repressed hatred and
bottled-up feelings resulting from constant provocation
erupted. All of these events, one after the other,
unleashed the animal instinct of a people afraid of being
enslaved once again. Animal instinct or instinct to
survive? This is the explanation of the inter-ethnic
violence that followed the tragic death of President
Habyarimana and the immediate resumption of war by the
RPF.
The Government of Rwanda has condemned every
massacre, no matter who the perpetrators were. Those
perpetrators must be identified and punished. But this
applies to the entire duration of the war, that is, since
1 October 1990.
The RPF, strongly supported by Uganda, has taken
responsibility for killing the Head of State of Rwanda -
high treason in any civilized country - and has resumed
the war, a war more savage than the one that began on
1 October 1990. It has carried out systematic, selective
massacres of civilians.
The RPF shamelessly accepted responsibility for its
heinous crimes because it was certain that it could
continue to mislead the world and convince the world it
was innocent. But can we believe in its innocence? Can
we agree that all of these crimes should simply be
disregarded because of an unprecedented media campaign
to absolve the assassins and assign them the hero’s role?
Yet even before the crimes of April 1994 the RPF
had been guilty of abominable crimes that did not move
the world and that the media cavalierly ignored. Since
the beginning of the war the RPF has massacred more
than 100,000 people in the district of Byumba, in
October-November 1990; more than 150,000 in the
districts of Ruhengeri and Byumba in February-
March 1993; and about 1,000 after the signing of the
Arusha Agreement, including some 30 in Kinihira, 20 in
Mutura and a number of others in the demilitarized zone.
4
Security Council 3377th meeting
Forty-ninth year 16 May 1994
More recently, after the assassination of President
Habyarimana, the RPF ruthlessly massacred Hutu peasants
in the north of the country and in the district of Kibungo.
Thousands of people perished, and several areas of the
capital were plunged into mourning by the RPF, which
pitilessly killed men, women, children and old people
simply because they were Hutu and against its hegemonic
designs.
Now the people of Rwanda have been driven into
exile, without any hope of returning, for the RPF is
preparing to destroy all that they owned. Indeed, the head
of the RPF himself gave the order to march on the capital,
saying that men and animals, small and large, should stay
out of the way or be killed. Where will they go - these
men and these animals? Did not some RPF leaders say at
the beginning of the war that the Hutu should go into exile
for at least 30 years and leave the country to the Tutsi?
That is not the solution. The solution to the tragedy
of Rwanda is not to impose exile on the Hutu, who
constitute 90 per cent of the population. The solution is not
to let the Tutsi minority - 10 per cent of the population -
seize power. The problem of Rwanda has to be understood
so that it can be destroyed at its roots. The people of
Rwanda carried out a social revolution in 1959 against the
autocratic power of the Tutsi minority and the stifling
feudal yoke. No people, however docile, can agree to be
slaves once again.
What the people of Rwanda need now is peace,
through an end to war and through national reconciliation.
This means that there has to be a candid dialogue between
the Rwandese Government and the Rwandese Patriotic
Front. It goes without saying that military hostilities and
inter-ethnic violence must first cease.
One of the prime tasks of the Government of Rwanda
is to ensure peace and security for its people. That is why
as soon as it took power it appealed to the RPF to accept
a cease-fire. The Government also took strong measures to
stop inter-ethnic violence which was spreading throughout
the country. Messages calling for peace were broadcast
over the radio. The President of the Republic, the Prime
Minister and members of the Government criss-crossed the
country, holding meetings calling for peace.
It is true that the killing has now stopped in those
areas where there is no fighting, but not in areas where the
fighting continues. Indeed, the RPF turned down offers of
a cease-fire, including offers by the Facilitator, the
President of Tanzania, His Excellency Mr. Ali Hassan
Mwinyi.
Seizing power by force has become an obsession for
the RPF, which is systematically massacring people,
particularly Hutus, who refuse to support it. The areas it
has infiltrated have become killing fields. The people of
the districts of Byumba and Kibungo have fled en masse
to escape the merciless massacres of the RPF. More than
250,000 have found refuge in Tanzania, and there would
have been more had the RPF not blocked the bridge over
the river at the border.
The fate of those who did not flee is well-known.
They were gathered together and collectively massacred
by machine gun or grenade, as is the custom of the RPF.
It is said that some RPF fighters eat the hearts of men
they have killed in order to become invincible.
Can the RPF exile more than 6 million Hutu? Of
course not. But there will be a catastrophe if the RPF
does not abandon its logic of war and if it does not agree
to enter into dialogue with the Rwandese Government, the
sole legitimate representative of the Rwandese people,
who fully support it.
Faced with this intransigence, the international
community - especially the Security Council - must
shoulder its responsibilities by compelling the RPF to
enter into dialogue with the Government so as to bring
about an immediate cease-fire.
The Rwandese Government is willing to conclude a
cease-fire agreement with the RPF immediately. Such an
agreement, guaranteed by the international community,
and especially the United Nations, should make it possible
for the two armies to resume the positions they held
before 6 April 1994.
Moreover, the RPF battalion that was in Kigali to
protect its leaders should not be reconstituted. For one
thing, its leaders have returned to Mulindi, the
headquarters of the Inkotanyi; and for another, it has been
shown that the battalion participated in the war and in
massacring the civilian population of the city of Kigali.
The Rwandese Government believes that the only
way of ensuring respect for a cease-fire is the
establishment in Rwanda of an international buffer force
made up of troops from truly neutral countries and
excluding Rwanda’s neighbours. Such a force would be
created by expanding the mandate of the United Nations
5
Security Council 3377th meeting
Forty-ninth year 16 May 1994
Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) and
strengthening its means. The Rwandese Government
believes that the Security Council should seriously consider
this approach in establishing such a buffer force. The
Rwandese Government nonetheless welcomes the consensus
achieved on certain points relating to the expansion of
UNAMIR to allow it to contribute to the security and
protection of the civilian population and deliveries of
humanitarian assistance.
The Rwandese Government is convinced that the
cease-fire will not be respected nor the Rwandese conflict
resolved until Uganda ends its aggression against Rwanda
and stops supplying war matériel and troops to the RPF.
The Security Council should ensure that this occurs.
In this connection, the Rwandese Government has
conveyed to the Council documents clearly showing
Uganda’s involvement in the Rwandese conflict. To
prevent that country once and for all from destabilizing
Rwanda and other countries of the region, it is urgent that
an arms embargo be imposed upon it. It is upon Uganda
that a military embargo must be imposed, and not upon
Rwanda. It is not the victim who should be punished but
the aggressor. The embargo against Rwanda would be
tantamount to direct support for Ugandan aggression. The
RPF would continue to receive its weapons and would not
stop massacring civilians until it had come to power by
force. But what good what it serve to take power against
the will of the Rwandese people? An embargo against
Rwanda would violate the Charter of the United Nations,
which enshrines the principle of self-defence. Thus, the
embargo should be considered against the aggressor when
the question of Ugandan aggression against Rwanda is
considered.
No one is more tired of the war than the people of
Rwanda, but neither is anyone more devoted to freedom
and democracy than this people victimized by nearly four
years of externally-imposed war. It is to offer relief to this
people in its misery and to build a better future that the
Rwandese Government remains committed and determined
to resume dialogue with the RPF on the basis of the Arusha
Peace Agreement, which is the point of departure for
reaching a lasting peace and national reconciliation.
In this connection, the international community will
continue to play a central role, either at the level of the
Agreement and compliance with it or at the level of
humanitarian assistance and national reconstruction. I take
this opportunity to reiterate the sincere thanks of the
Government of Rwanda to all friendly countries,
international organizations, non-governmental
organizations and all people devoted to peace and justice
who have given their all to help the Rwandese people
find peace once again and who have spared no effort, at
the risk of their own lives, to ease the suffering of the
many refugees and those displaced by war. I should like
here to pay a particular tribute to the International
Committee of the Red Cross, which deemed it necessary
to remain with the Rwandese people. I say "thank you"
to them and urge them to stay to continue to do even
more, because our needs are immense, faced as we are
with over 2 million people on the road to exile because of
this absurd and senseless war.
That is the message of the battered and torn people
of Rwanda, which desires peace and national and
reconciliation and rejects war and enslavement.
The President: I thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Rwanda for his kind words
addressed to me.
Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): My delegation has
already congratulated you in the Council’s informal
consultations, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
for this month. I assure you of my delegation’s fullest
cooperation and support in order to facilitate your task.
I would like to express our gratitude to the
Permanent Representative of New Zealand for the way he
steered our work last month.
Regarding the item currently under discussion, my
delegation has already expressed its profound regret over
the tragic incident that claimed the lives of two African
Presidents - the President of Rwanda and the President of
Burundi - on 6 April 1994, and the subsequent events of
gruesome killings and massacres taking place in Rwanda
on a large scale to this date.
It is regrettable that all efforts undertaken by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, the Force Commander of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR), the
Organization of African Unity and the neighbouring
States to bring about a cease-fire agreement between the
parties have been of no avail.
In this context, my delegation would like to stress
that the achievement of peace in Rwanda lies in the hands
of the Rwandese parties themselves. Hence, my
delegation believes that it is crucial for both conflicting
6
Security Council 3377th meeting
Forty-ninth year 16 May 1994
parties in Rwanda to demonstrate political will and a
sincere desire to achieve a cease-fire and, moreover, in
continuation of a dialogue in order to implement the Arusha
Peace Agreement, which constitutes the most suitable
framework for bringing the ongoing conflict in Rwanda to
an end.
The current crisis, which is in itself a human tragedy,
has unfortunately resulted in the killings of thousands of
innocent civilians, including women, children and elderly
people, and has caused the internal displacement of a huge
number of people, not to mention the mass exodus of
refugees to neighbouring countries. My delegation is
therefore of the view that the most urgent measures to be
taken at this juncture are to extend all forms of urgent
humanitarian assistance, particularly food and medical aid,
to the displaced people and refugees, and to all those who
are in need in Rwanda.
My delegation also stresses the importance of
coordinating these efforts with the Organization of African
Unity and the necessity of ensuring full cooperation from
both parties to the conflict in establishing Kigali Airport as
a neutral zone and keeping it open at all times for
humanitarian relief.
The United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda
(UNAMIR) has exerted strenuous efforts in the most
difficult conditions in order to help the people of Rwanda
through this crisis. Despite our hesitation to involve
peace-keeping forces in internal disputes, and in view of
our desire to see a more successful UNAMIR, we support
its expansion and the amendment of its mandate in order to
enable it to contribute to the security and protection of
civilians in Rwanda, as well as the safeguarding of the
distribution of relief supplies and of the humanitarian relief
operations.
While believing that the notion of the arms embargo
and military assistance would not bring the satisfactory
results expected of it at this stage or in the foreseeable
future, my delegation fully supports this endeavour and
considers it an important step in the right direction to
contain the conflict and to halt its proliferation to other
areas.
In view of the above, my delegation will vote in
favour of section B of the draft resolution and of the draft
resolution as a whole.
The President: I thank the representative of Oman
for his kind words addressed to my predecessor and to me.
Mr. Niaz (Pakistan): It is a source of great pride
for my delegation to see you, Sir, representative of a
brotherly non-aligned country, presiding over the affairs
of the Security Council with such aplomb and ability.
The Pakistan delegation will continue to extend to you its
unwavering support.
Let me also avail myself of this opportunity to
express our appreciation for the skill and dedication with
which the Permanent Representative of New Zealand, His
Excellency Ambassador Colin Keating, steered the
Security Council during the month of April.
After the horrific and gruesome violence and killings
that erupted in Rwanda in the aftermath of the tragic
deaths of the Presidents of Rwanda and Burundi in an air
crash on 6 April 1994, the reaction of the Security
Council was to cut down the strength of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) in
that country. Thus it was by no means easy to arrive at
the draft resolution before us, which envisages the
expansion of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Rwanda to a force level of 5,500 troops.
It is our sincere hope that personnel for the increased
force will be offered and dispatched to their areas of duty
within a matter of days. The carnage let loose in Rwanda
and the humanitarian nightmare which that country has
become cannot brook any delay. At the same time, we
also appeal to the parties in Rwanda to heed the
international calls for restraint and reason. There is no
doubt that without the cooperation of the warring parties
as well as the people of Rwanda the enhanced UNAMIR
will not be able to achieve much.
The situation into which the contributing countries
will be sending their troops is indeed highly dangerous.
It is therefore essential not only that UNAMIR be
adequately equipped in terms of armaments, but also that
it be given clear-cut rules of engagement under which its
troops can effectively defend themselves or those they are
required to protect.
The draft resolution before us is quite clear on the
mandate for the revamped UNAMIR, and we hope that
there will be no confusion in this regard. The restriction
being placed on the supply of arms and ammunition to
Rwanda is also very timely. We hope that it will be
scrupulously observed.
My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us in the hope that the strengthened
7
Security Council 3377th meeting
Forty-ninth year 16 May 1994
UNAMIR will be able to help stabilize the situation in
Rwanda and that the international and regional efforts at
securing a cease-fire and the reinstitution of a peaceful
political process in that country will soon bear fruit. The
pressure to withdraw UNAMIR could, however, mount
once again if the Rwandese parties fail to bring the
hostilities and killings to an end within a reasonable period.
That would mean abandoning the people of Rwanda to
chaos and mayhem, the entire responsibility for which will
lie with the leaders of Rwanda.
The President: I thank the representative of Pakistan
for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): If there is a positive
development in the relentless Rwandan tragedy, it is the
apparently universal recognition that in some significant
way the international community must now become directly
involved. The approach of letting events run their course
while diplomatic attempts were intensified to bring the
Rwanda Government and the Patriotic Front to the
negotiating table has, in the light of the seemingly
diametrically opposed positions held by the combatants,
proved fruitless. The resulting level of violence, death and
displacement now qualifies as perhaps the greatest human
tragedy in so short a time period in our century. The
combined efforts of non-governmental organizations,
surrounding States and the United Nations system to
provide humanitarian relief fail to match the rising needs
created by this catastrophe. It clearly constitutes, as the
draft resolution before us maintains, a serious threat to
peace and security in the region, which must be addressed.
The Secretary-General’s aide-mémoire of 9 May
underscores the rapidly deteriorating situation in Rwanda,
which, he states, it is imperative to stop. The heavy
fighting, combined with the effects of a serious drought,
has produced a catastrophic food shortage along with the
other consequences of the war. Based upon a set of
assumptions, the Secretary-General correctly recommends
a revision in the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) and an upward adjustment
in its numerical composition. The draft resolution before
us, however, only partially addresses this requirement, with
the hope that the whole spectrum of deployment will have
been taken care of shortly after the next report of the
Secretary-General.
In the mean time, the job of the United Nations will
be to remove the innocent from harm’s way and protect
them during this process, while responding forcefully only
to direct attacks upon itself or the relief efforts. The
mandate will not authorize the use of force to stop ethnic
massacres and bloodshed.
My delegation would like to agree with this scenario
but, in truth, finds it difficult to accept. We believe the
warring parties are of a mind to continue hostilities until
there is a significant destruction of the opponent and his
capability. As it presently appears, it may be a
considerable period of time before we arrive at such a
point, until when we can expect the level of destruction
and death to continue at unacceptable levels.
Certainly the heaviest burden for this undertaking
must be assumed by the countries of Africa, which we
feel is possible with the cooperation and assistance of
other Member States on an urgent basis. It is indeed a
sad reflection on the state of collective security if this
capability does not exist and cannot be expeditiously
mobilized in the face of such relentless destruction and
death. Without these measures, we believe the fighting
will continue until little is left, possibly with contagious
consequences for neighbouring countries. The fighting
must be stopped and law and order in this tiny country
restored before there is really no country left.
We fully support the call of the draft resolution on
Member States to restrict the sale of arms and related
material to any of the Rwanda parties. Halting such
shipments will be crucial to the overall success of
UNAMIR, whatever that may be.
Although, as is clear, my delegation would like to
see a stronger mandate for UNAMIR, time is crucial at
the moment. It is critical that we take immediate steps to
halt the progression of fighting, aid those innocent
civilians displaced by the war and control vital geographic
assets in Rwanda, as the draft resolution proposes.
Should the Secretary-General find that the measures
called for are insufficient, it may be possible in the near
future to upgrade UNAMIR’s mandate to include more
authority to halt the fighting.
With some reluctance, therefore, and in the hope of
immediate measures being taken, my delegation supports
this draft resolution on Rwanda.
8
Security Council 3377th meeting
Forty-ninth year 16 May 1994
Mr. Li Zhaoxing (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): On 4 August 1993 the Rwanda Government and
the Rwandese Patriotic Front signed a Peace Agreement in
Arusha, and following this development the Security
Council adopted resolution 872 (1993) on the establishment
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda
(UNAMIR), which reflected the support of the international
community for the peace process of Rwanda. For a time
after that the situation in Rwanda witnessed some positive
developments.
Unfortunately, since the death of His Excellency
Major-General Habyarimana, President of the Rwandese
Republic, and Mr. Ntaryamira, President of the Republic of
Burundi, the situation in Rwanda has worsened quickly,
with civil war engulfing the whole country and its people
being plunged into an abyss of misery, creating a huge
exodus of refugees into neighbouring countries. The
humanitarian situation in the country is getting increasingly
grave. The Chinese delegation is greatly concerned with
these developments.
Yet the international community has not forgotten the
sufferings of the Rwandese people. The United Nations,
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the States
neighbouring Rwanda have made various efforts to help the
two Rwandese sides to achieve a cease-fire and resume,
through negotiations, the peace process initiated by the
Arusha Peace Agreement. Meanwhile, humanitarian relief
supplies are being delivered to the refugees in a steady
flow. Based on humanitarian considerations, the Security
Council has agreed, after repeated consultations, to expand
the mandate of UNAMIR and increase the number of its
personnel with a view to improving the humanitarian
situation and the security environment in Rwanda, and
alleviating the people’s suffering. This is a reflection of the
international community’s good will and its sincere desire
to create conditions for the early restoration of peace and
security in that country.
From the start, we have followed closely the
development of the situation in Rwanda, and we sincerely
hope that the civil war will be brought to an early end and
that peace and stability will be restored, thus enabling
Rwanda to embark on the road of political stability and
economic development.
In order to realize the objective of the draft resolution
and the final goal of national peace in Rwanda, we hold the
following views:
First, the conflicting Rwandese parties should cease
forthwith massacring each other and agree to an effective
and lasting cease-fire so as to create the conditions
necessary for an improvement in the humanitarian
situation and the settlement of the conflict through
negotiations.
Secondly, the Arusha Peace Agreement is the
framework and bridge agreed by the two Rwandese sides
for the peaceful settlement of the conflict in Rwanda.
The two sides should accept the futility of resolving the
question of Rwanda by military means and should
understand that national reconciliation can be achieved
only when swords are genuinely turned to ploughshares
after a cease-fire and when they recommit themselves to
resuming the peace process initiated by Arusha Peace
Agreement.
Thirdly, the two sides should closely cooperate with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, with
UNAMIR and with the international community’s peace
endeavour. At the same time, they should adopt every
possible measure to ensure the safety of United Nations
personnel and of those engaged in humanitarian relief
activities.
Fourthly, in the course of settling the crisis in
Rwanda, attention should continue to be given to the role
of the OAU and the countries neighbouring Rwanda.
They should be encouraged to exert positive political
influence and urge the parties to make further
contributions to the achievement of a cease-fire and to the
resumption of the peace process in Rwanda.
Mr. Vorontsov (Russian Federation) (interpretation
from Russian): We in the Russian Federation are deeply
concerned at the scope and intensity of the tragedy in
Rwanda, which has already taken the lives of tens of
thousands of peaceful, defenceless people. The tragedy
is all the worse in the light of the difficult situation of the
nearly 2 million displaced persons and refugees, many of
whom have been forced to leave the country and seek
refuge in neighbouring States.
We share the view of the Secretary-General that the
carnage in Rwanda, which has brought that country’s
people unspeakable suffering, is a humanitarian
catastrophe of unprecedented scope. Hence, the Security
Council was correct to focus its attention on resolving this
urgent aspect of the problem of Rwanda.
9
Security Council 3377th meeting
Forty-ninth year 16 May 1994
Because of the urgent need for United Nations action
to deal with this severe humanitarian crisis and to save
thousands of lives, and taking account of the positions of
the other members of the Security Council, the Russian
delegation participated actively in drafting the text before
the Council, and is among its sponsors. At the same time,
during the Council’s preparation of the draft resolution, we
did not conceal our concern that the decision to expand the
United Nations operation in Rwanda was being taken
without due account for a number of basic criteria for
carrying out peace-keeping operations, criteria confirmed in
the course of United Nations activities and approved by the
Council in the statement issued by its President on 3 May
1994. In that connection, we are particularly pleased by
today’s changes and additions to the draft resolution, which
go towards addressing the concerns we had expressed.
In that context, we must affirm that, in our view, a
most important factor for ensuring the success of the
operation is the unconditional cooperation of both
Rwandese parties, as stressed in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/1994/565). We are pleased that this aspect is
reflected in the text of the draft resolution.
We proceed from the premise that the central element
of the forthcoming operation is the establishment of secure
humanitarian areas, primarily in Rwanda’s border areas, for
the protection of refugees and displaced persons and of
members of the civilian population under threat. In that
connection, we note that the report of the Secretary-General
refers to the provision of assistance to those requiring it in
the interior of the country - not instead of but in addition to
the establishment of these secure humanitarian areas. The
concept of these secure humanitarian areas will undoubtedly
make it easier to establish them fairly quickly and will not
require such a large United Nations force.
We also view as particularly important the draft
resolution’s provision with respect to the imposition of an
arms embargo on Rwanda; this is critical in the absence of
a cease-fire. Here, special responsibility for effective
implementation will lie with neighbouring African States,
particularly with respect to not permitting the sale or
delivery of weapons and not permitting the transit of
weapons through their territory.
In the light of the urgent humanitarian nature of this
United Nations operation, I wish to stress particularly that
it must be carried out quickly and efficiently so that it can
be successfully concluded in a short time. If during that
time the conditions necessary for continuing the peace-
keeping operation do not come about in Rwanda, and if
there is no progress towards a political settlement, the
Security Council will have to give serious thought to what
further action it should take. In that connection, we think
it important that in the draft resolution the Council
requests the Secretary-General to submit a report before
we move to the next phase of the operation so that the
Security Council can take the appropriate decision in the
light of developments.
We also draw special attention to the need to ensure
that the operation is carried out economically.
We are thoroughly convinced of the need for close
coordination between the efforts of the Secretary-General
and those of the Organization of African Unity and the
neighbours of Rwanda - which in our view have far from
exhausted the opportunities to bring influence to bear on
the Rwandese parties with a view to a swift end to the
senseless carnage, a settlement of the conflict, and the
restoration of the peace process in Rwanda.
Russia strongly condemns efforts to resolve the
conflict in Rwanda by force, and advocates an immediate
end to the violence and the fighting in that country. We
are willing closely to coordinate our activities in the
Security Council and our bilateral activities with the
efforts of all members of the world community, the
Organization of African Unity and African States, with a
view to dealing with this grave crisis in Rwanda. We
intend to do everything possible to ensure that peace and
concord will reign there once more.
In that connection, I wish to announce that the
Government of the Russian Federation has decided to
make available through the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees in Tanzania a transport
unit in Mwanza to provide emergency humanitarian
assistance for refugees from Rwanda.
The President: I shall now put to the vote
section B of the draft resolution contained in document
S/1994/571.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Brazil, China, Czech Republic, Djibouti,
France, New Zealand, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
10
Security Council 3377th meeting
Forty-ninth year 16 May 1994
Against:
Rwanda
The President: There were 14 votes in favour and
one against. Section B of the draft resolution has been
adopted.
I shall now put the rest of the draft resolution to the
vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Brazil, China, Czech Republic, Djibouti,
France, New Zealand, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Spain, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
rest of the draft resolution contained in document
S/1994/571 has been adopted unanimously.
Since all the sections of the draft resolution contained
in document S/1994/571, as orally revised in its provisional
form, have been adopted, may I take it that the draft
resolution as a whole has been adopted?
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The text of the draft resolution contained in document
S/1994/571, as orally revised in its provisional form, has
been adopted as resolution 918 (1994).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements following the voting.
Mr. Mérimée (France) (interpretation from French):
Rwanda is experiencing one of the most tragic periods in
its history. Tens of thousands, perhaps hundreds of
thousands, of civilians have been massacred. None of the
traditional safe havens - churches, hospitals or headquarters
of humanitarian organizations - have been spared in this
unleashing of violence. Faced with a humanitarian
catastrophe of such magnitude the international community
could not fail to react.
The Security Council had been compelled to make
troop reductions in the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Rwanda (UNAMIR), which had been prevented from
fulfilling its mandate. My delegation took that decision
reluctantly and underscored at the time that it was a
temporary measure.
By voting today in favour of resolution 918 (1994),
which decides to expand UNAMIR up to 5,500 troops,
my delegation is expressing its will to help the Rwandese
people to find peace and security once again. The
objective is first of all humanitarian. It is a question of
ensuring the protection of the civilian population and
allowing the delivery of humanitarian assistance. The
longer-term objective of the United Nations is, however,
political. The United Nations is determined to contribute,
in due course, to the resumption of the peace process
within the framework of the Arusha Agreement, which
remains the only way to resolve the crisis in Rwanda.
France pays tribute to the peace efforts being made
by the countries of the region and especially the
Tanzanian Facilitator.
My delegation also pays tribute to the courage and
determination of the UNAMIR troops, who, under the
authority of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and of the Force Commander, have endeavoured
to protect the civilian populations, to obtain a cease-fire
agreement and to contribute to the resumption of dialogue
between the parties.
France urgently appeals for an end to the massacres.
It urges the parties to conclude a cease-fire and to
cooperate with UNAMIR to restore peace to the country.
Mr. Keating (New Zealand): I need to begin, I
regret, by saying that in the view of my delegation the
first speaker in our debate should not have spoken. I say
this for two reasons. First, in the view of my delegation
he does not represent a State. He has no legitimacy and
is merely the mouthpiece of a faction. He should not
have been seated in a privileged position at this table.
Secondly, he has, in the view of my delegation, given us
a shameful distortion of the truth.
My delegation voted in favour of resolution
918 (1994), but I cannot conceal its disappointment that
the resolution only approves a very modest first phase of
the expanded United Nations presence which we believe
is essential in Rwanda.
True, there are some very important and positive
elements in this resolution. It contains a commitment to
go back to Rwanda with a new mandate to protect
civilians at risk and to provide security for humanitarian
relief operations. It also signals quite clearly that the
11
Security Council 3377th meeting
Forty-ninth year 16 May 1994
United Nations presence should be sufficiently robust and
that force will be used if necessary against those who
threaten protected sites and populations. It imposes a
mandatory arms embargo on Rwanda, and it requests a
report as soon as possible from the Secretary-General on
the investigation of war crimes and genocide committed in
Rwanda over the past four weeks. But the resolution stops
short of what is really necessary.
Ten days ago my delegation proposed a draft
resolution which envisaged all of the elements in this text,
but which contained, in addition, one further key element:
the commitment of the Council to an operation that would
make a start on the task of protecting civilians at risk in
various locations in the interior of Rwanda. No one can
seriously expect the United Nations to provide support for
every civilian at risk in Rwanda. Even if the force were
fully deployed as we would like, it will take time and it
will be difficult to cover all of the country. We all know
that any operation can only do what is possible within
available resources.
But, in our view, there is no need for the Council to
condition its agreement by a requirement for further reports
and further review. New Zealand would be the first to
agree that there needs to be a detailed, hands-on process of
interaction between the Council and the Secretariat to
update and fine-tune the operational concept as planning is
finalized in the period prior to deployment. Indeed, we
would like to see institutional arrangements within the
Council for a more hands-on approach to all of the complex
operations supervised by the Council. But there was no
need in this case to condition the deployment as has been
done in operative paragraph 6.
We urge that the Secretary-General’s report, under
operative paragraph 6, be submitted as soon as possible and
we also urge that the second phase deployment of the
expanded UNAMIR be undertaken quickly. The burden
now falls on the Council to make this work, and we will be
looking to all members of the Council to live up to the
expectations that have been created.
Sir David Hannay (United Kingdom): I would like to
say that my delegation, too, regrets the tone and the content
of the first statement that was made to the Council this
evening in the name of the Government of Rwanda. We
would have wished to see a condemnation of the atrocities
that have taken place, many of them in parts of the country
controlled by that Government, in a less perfunctory
manner than was done.
The world has been appalled by the scale of the
tragedy which has occurred in Rwanda. It is not a tragedy
to which there is any easy international response. The
United Nations cannot impose an end to the bloodshed.
But neither can it stand idly by. The Force Commander
of UNAMIR and its personnel have been doing a
tremendous job in the most difficult of circumstances. It
is right that new tasks should now be added to
UNAMIR’s mandate to help the civilian population. The
priority now must be to ensure the early deployment of
the troops needed for these tasks.
The focus of this expanded United Nations operation
will rightly be humanitarian. It is essential to ensure the
rapid and effective delivery of sufficient humanitarian aid
both to those displaced within Rwanda and to the
refugees in the neighbouring countries. We hope that all
donors will contribute generously to this programme. My
own Government has given some $5 million since the
beginning of last month to humanitarian relief in and
around Rwanda.
We must not lose sight of the need to achieve a
cease-fire between the parties and to get the peace process
back on track. The Arusha Agreement remains the only
viable basis for national reconciliation in Rwanda. We
welcome in this context the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative and of
the OAU and neighbouring States, and encourage them to
continue to work constructively towards this goal.
In the meantime, both sides to the dispute must
cooperate with the United Nations in the implementation
of the mandate which this Council has just given to
UNAMIR. The parties cannot escape their responsibility
for events in the areas which they control. Those
controlling the areas in which the massacres have
occurred must act, and act now, to stop the bloodshed.
The Council’s message on this, in its statement of
30th April and in the present resolution, has been
absolutely clear cut and it needs to be heeded.
Mr. Inderfurth (United States): The cries of the
victims in Rwanda have been heard calling upon the
Security Council to act. The sheer magnitude of the
humanitarian disaster in that tragic country demands
action. This Council has struggled to formulate a
response that is both appropriate and effective. To do so
we went to extraordinary lengths today for two reasons.
First, the United States wants the United Nations to
succeed in Rwanda, and in all its peace-keeping
12
Security Council 3377th meeting
Forty-ninth year 16 May 1994
operations. To ensure its success, we want to bring the
ends and means of the Council’s resolutions into balance.
Secondly, we believe that the guidelines outlined in
this Council’s presidential statement of 3 May are the right
way to evaluate the viability of a mission, and we want to
make sure that, to the extent possible, we follow that
process in our deliberations.
That is why, in the next report of the Secretary-
General on Rwanda, I would expect the following factors
to be closely examined: a well defined concept of
operations; availability of resources; consent of the parties;
progress towards a cease-fire; and the duration of the
mandate.
With this resolution, my Government believes the
Council has taken the right steps to begin to bring aid and
hope to the innocent victims. But whatever efforts the
United Nations may undertake, the true key to the problems
in Rwanda is in the hands of the Rwandese people. In
Rwanda, this means that the killing - by all parties - must
stop. The killing must stop, not only between armed
combatants, but especially the massacres of unarmed
civilians in which tens of thousands have already been
killed. Further, the parties must consent to unimpeded
United Nations operations providing humanitarian assistance
to and protection for displaced persons, and refugees. In
this regard, it is critical that all parties respect absolutely
the inviolability of United Nations personnel and
peacekeepers. If the parties can demonstrate their
willingness and ability to meet these simple but vital
requirements for an effective United Nations peacekeeping
operation, then the international community will be willing
and able to help.
The situation in Rwanda is horrifying, difficult and
very much in flux. The resolution we have adopted today
recognizes the necessity for both a rapid and continually
refined response to best deal with the situation in the
country. We hope the Council’s action will be the impetus
to convince the parties to end the bloodshed immediately.
If not, we will look to further reports of the Secretary-
General on how best to carry out today’s decision. In this
spirit of hope measured with concern, the United States
supports today’s actions of the Council.
Mr. Valle (Brazil): Since the beginning of April,
events in Rwanda have been evolving tragically.
Thousands of innocent civilians have been killed, and more
than a million people have been displaced by the ensuing
violence. We are witnessing an appalling humanitarian
crisis of gigantic proportions. The Security Council has
been seized of the matter since the resumption of the
conflict, and has been continuously addressing the
situation in order to be able to respond though concrete
action.
Unfortunately, the commendable efforts undertaken
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the UNAMIR Force Commander, as well as those by
the Organization of African Unity, to bring about a cease-
fire agreement between the parties have yet to bear fruit.
In view of the prevailing conditions, we agree with
the Secretary-General’s view that it is essential that the
United Nations consider what measures it can adopt even
before a cease-fire is achieved. For this reason, my
Government has voted in favour of resolution 918 (1994)
to expand UNAMIR’s mandate so that it can contribute
to the security and protection of displaced persons,
refugees and civilians at risk in Rwanda.
Furthermore, UNAMIR will be mandated to provide
security to and support for the distribution of relief
supplies and humanitarian relief operations. It is clear
that UNAMIR will be dedicated to ensuring means for the
provision of emergency relief aid to those in need in
Rwanda as a priority task. This, however, should not be
the sole objective of its presence in that beleaguered
country. UNAMIR should also continue to act as an
intermediary between the parties, so that not only can an
immediate cease-fire be reached, but also the peace
process under the Arusha Peace Agreement can be
promptly resumed.
My delegation supports the expeditious deployment
of the expanded force of UNAMIR as essential for the
successful implementation of its mandate, which has been
broadened by the resolution this Council has just adopted.
Brazil has supported the adoption of resolution
918 (1994), inspired by the expectation that renewed
UNAMIR efforts will be able to relieve the plight of
millions in Rwanda and to respond to the urgent need to
restore conditions for the resumption of the peace process.
Mr. Cardenas (Argentina) (interpretation from
Spanish): Since the events of 6 April 1994, with the
violence and the atrocious, systematic massacres that were
unleashed, Rwanda has been submerged in a humanitarian
crisis of enormous proportions. The detailed report that
the Secretary-General has submitted to us in connection
with the situation in Rwanda tells us that almost 2 million
13
Security Council 3377th meeting
Forty-ninth year 16 May 1994
persons have been displaced and that 300,000 more have
sought refuge in neighbouring countries.
Some sources estimate the deaths at approximately
200,000 persons. This horrifying situation - for which there
can be no justification whatsoever, regardless of those that
have been put forward this evening - has made it absolutely
essential for the Security Council to consider the adoption
of measures to be implemented immediately in order to
meet the most urgent needs of the civilians at risk in
Rwanda, including the many refugees and displaced
persons, contributing to their protection and security and
providing support and aid in the delivery of humanitarian
assistance.
It is in this humanitarian context that the Security
Council has decided to expand the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) under
resolution 912 (1994) and to expand the force up to a level
of 5,500 troops through a progressive deployment, to be
carried out stage by stage. We stress the importance of
UNAMIR’s having the cooperation of the parties in the
fulfilment of its mandate and especially in the task of
ensuring the unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance
to those in need.
In addition, the parties must show absolute respect for
the security of the personnel of UNAMIR and of those who
are carrying out tasks of a humanitarian nature in Rwanda.
This solution is aimed only at alleviating the
humanitarian tragedy to which we have referred. It is up
to the parties to the conflict to rechannel the Arusha peace
process in search of reconciliation, which, though difficult,
is not impossible. This is why we consider it essential that
efforts be made towards a cease-fire, and that in this
context the Security Council establish a mandatory arms
embargo on Rwanda and call on international organizations
to comply strictly with it.
We hope that the systematic violations of humanitarian
law in Rwanda as well as all the brutal violations of the
right to life and property, which have astounded the whole
world, will be fully investigated. In this respect, we
commend the efforts by the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Ambassador José Ayala Lasso, in the important area
which is the raison d’être of his responsibilities.
Before concluding, I also want to emphasize the
initiatives that have been taken by the Organization of
African Unity with a view to putting an end to the conflict,
and to note the courage of UNAMIR troops. Given the
gravity of the events, we also appeal to the entire
international community to generously step up its
humanitarian assistance to the people of Rwanda.
Mr. Yañez Barnuevo (Spain) (interpretation from
Spanish): The delegation of Spain is gratified by the
adoption of resolution 918 (1994), co-sponsored by the
delegation of Spain. Based upon a proposal by the
Secretary-General, the resolution expands the mandate
and the size of UNAMIR in order to contribute to the
safety and protection of displaced persons, refugees and
civilians at risk in Rwanda, and aims at providing support
and security for the supply of emergency assistance and
humanitarian aid.
Like the Council’s declaration of 30 April, the
resolution just adopted is the result of intensive debates in
informal consultations that have shown the concern of the
members of the Council at the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in Rwanda and the importance that
we all attach to finding effective ways of alleviating the
crisis of enormous dimensions that is afflicting that
country.
It is necessary to emphasize the international
community’s repudiation of the violence that has afflicted
Rwanda subsequent to the air crash that took the lives of
the Presidents of Rwanda and Burundi. We strongly
condemn the numerous killings of civilians that have
taken place in Rwanda and that are still being committed
with impunity.
The Government of Spain, which has made the
protection of human rights one of the fundamental
principles of its foreign policy, is horrified by the reports
that have come from many non-governmental
organizations and from the communications media of the
systematic, generalized and manifest violations of
international humanitarian law in Rwanda. That is why
we associate ourselves with all the other members of the
Council in recalling that the killing of members of an
ethnic group with the intention of destroying that group
in whole or in part constitutes a crime which is
punishable under international law. Furthermore, any
public and direct incitement to violence with the intention
of destroying a racial or ethnic group constitutes in and of
itself a crime of that nature. This is why the Council has
made an urgent appeal to the parties to cease immediately
such acts of a grave nature, including incitements to
violence that have been made through broadcasts that are
known to all.
14
Security Council 3377th meeting
Forty-ninth year 16 May 1994
Like other members of the Council, we also regret that
we have had to hear today, in the Council, reasoning which
comes too close to an attempt to justify acts that we
consider to be altogether unjustifiable.
The Spanish delegation will be closely following the
evolution of events in Rwanda and in particular the
humanitarian situation and the continued risks to the
civilian population.
We therefore welcome the recent visit to the region by
the High Commissioner of the United Nations for Human
Rights, Ambassador Ayala Lasso, and we are awaiting with
great interest the report that the Council has requested of
the Secretary-General on the grave violations of
international humanitarian law which have occurred
throughout this conflict in Rwanda.
I also want to point out that the Foreign Ministers of
the European Union have just adopted in Brussels a
declaration which urges the parties immediately to put an
end to the killing and to respect the Arusha Agreement,
which remains the best basis for national reconciliation.
The European Ministers also reaffirm their commitment to
the provision of humanitarian assistance to all the
population which is in need, and in this respect they have
decided to send a high-level mission to the region.
The resolution which we have just adopted is just a
first step in the search for a lasting solution to the conflict
in Rwanda. Estimates of approximately 200,000 persons
killed and approximately 2 million refugees will leave
traces that will be hard to erase. It is time to appeal for
common sense so that the parties may agree to a cease-fire
and resume negotiations that will make it possible to get the
peace process under way once again.
The stage-by-stage deployment of an expanded
UNAMIR, with the active cooperation of the African
countries and the remainder of the international community,
will make it possible for the United Nations to fulfil its
mandate with the utmost efficiency and will ensure the
provision of humanitarian assistance to displaced persons,
refugees and civilians at risk. The Rwandese parties must
understand that the full implementation of the UNAMIR
mission depends, in the final analysis, on their support and
cooperation and on their full respect for the security and
freedom of movement of the members of UNAMIR and of
humanitarian organizations.
Lastly, the imposition of a military embargo on
Rwanda reaffirms the international community’s resolve to
contain the hostilities and to avoid an intensification of
the conflict, a conflict which, if not controlled in time,
could spread beyond the borders of that country,
destabilizing neighbouring countries and having a highly
negative impact on the entire region.
Therefore, everyone must work towards a political
settlement of the conflict through the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, together
with the Secretary-General of the Organization of African
Unity and the countries of the region, in particular the
President of Tanzania as the facilitator of the peace
process.
It is our hope that the Rwandese parties, heeding the
appeals of the international community, will cooperate in
good faith with those efforts by concluding a cease-fire
and resuming the Arusha peace process. If they do not
do so, they will be assuming enormous responsibility
vis-à-vis their people and the entire international
community.
Mr. Kovanda (Czech Republic): The crocodiles in
the Kagera river and the vultures over Rwanda have
seldom had it so good. They are feeding on the bodies of
the thousands upon thousands of children and women,
hundreds of whom were pregnant, and men who have
been hacked to death during the past six weeks by what
has turned out to be a most vicious regime.
The massacres include 4,000 killed in Kibeho; 5,500
butchered in Cyahinda; 800 assassinated in Kiziguru; 500
slain in Rukira; 2,500 slaughtered in Kibungo; another
4,000 have been murdered in Shangi, a parish in
Cyangugu, and 2,000 in Mibirizi, also in Cyangugu. This
is the same Cyangugu where many thousands have
apparently been trapped for weeks on end in a stadium
without any relief. Surely one wonders whether the dead
are not better off than the living.
These are just some of the massacres which we
know of, thanks mostly to human rights organizations and
the Catholic Church. One can only extrapolate the total
number of victims. The Secretary-General has offered the
estimate of 200,000 dead.
All reports indicate that these atrocities have been
committed by Hutu cutthroats - and seldom has this word
been so literally the right one - against their Tutsi
neighbours. Now, there are those who would apportion
blame "evenly"; those who would argue that there must
also have been Tutsi atrocities against Hutus in this past
15
Security Council 3377th meeting
Forty-ninth year 16 May 1994
month. And indeed, human rights organizations have
assiduously sought direct evidence of massacres in
territories controlled by the largely Tutsi Rwandese Patriotic
Front (RPF). So far, they have found very little such
evidence.
So we have some 200,000 Tutsi lives lost, out of a
total population of about 1 million - 20 per cent of all of
Rwanda’s Tutsis. Each of us can figure out how many
lives such a percentage would represent in his own country
for his own people. This situation is being described as a
humanitarian crisis as though it were a famine or perhaps
a natural disaster. In the view of my delegation, the proper
description is genocide.
Now, as is well known, a civil war has been raging in
Rwanda as well since 1990. But even a civil war, however
awful by itself, is no excuse - never mind justification - for
genocide. And, civil war or not, the hundreds of thousands
of civilians who have fallen victim to the butchers were not
at the front lines but far in the hinterland, with no visible
connection to the RPF except for their ethnic background.
Hence the real innocence of those whom we all too
automatically describe as "innocent civilians".
The Arusha agreements of 1993 pointed a way to
resolving the civil conflict. As a consequence of the
Arusha Agreement, the Government controlled by President
Habyarimana was expanded to include noted personalities
who had opposed him politically. Foremost among them
was the Prime Minister, Mrs. Agathe Uwilingiyimana. It
bears recalling that she and other Hutu opposition
personalities were among the first to fall victim to the
horror unleashed by President Habyarimana’s supporters
after his death.
By whom? Who is it who has been committing these
unspeakable atrocities? Certainly not the Rwandan people
at large, Hutu or otherwise. These atrocities have been
committed by the Presidential Guard created by President
Habyarimana. They have been committed by elements of
the Rwandese Government Forces loyal to him. They have
been committed by the militia, the Gendarmerie. They
have been committed on orders of people close to
President Habyarimana and at the instigation of the
incendiary broadcasts of Radio Milles Collines. This radio
station is private but it is owned by people close to the late
President. Let there be no mistake: The mass media
incitement to ethnic hatred mentioned in the preamble to
our resolution has Radio Milles Collines specifically in
mind.
We have requested the Secretary-General to present
a report on investigations of the atrocities.
Ambassador Ayala Lasso, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, is already actively
involved with this issue. After we get the report, we will
want to know who is responsible for the atrocities. Then
we will want to know how those responsible will be
brought to justice. For surely they cannot avoid justice.
Today, my delegation cosponsored a decision to
move back into Rwanda - too late, for sure, for the
hundreds of thousands who have lost their lives already,
but in time, we hope, to curtail the continuation of
brutalities. We are deciding to strengthen UNAMIR’s
numbers and to strengthen its mandate. Its first priority
is to help the unfortunates who are in distress and danger
in the hinterland. UNAMIR will not get involved in the
civil war, even though a cease-fire would surely make its
humanitarian job easier.
Last month, the Security Council was in absolute
shock, stunned with disbelief at the viciousness of the
massacres that broke out. Our first concern was for the
safety of our vastly outmanned, outgunned, out-macheted
and out-mandated UNAMIR. We reduced its strength,
but not before losing 10 brave young men. Even with its
reduced strength, UNAMIR has managed, among other
things, to protect the lives - though hardly much more -
of thousands upon thousands of wretched souls in Kigali.
My Government salutes the courage of UNAMIR, the
martyrdom of its lost comrades and the coolness of its
commander. We also salute the indefatigable work of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) continuing efforts of non-governmental
organizations, which have done so much to apprise us of
the true nature of the conflicts in Rwanda.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Nigeria.
My delegation has made it clear on several occasions
in the discussions on this subject that Rwanda’s situation
is an exceptionally tragic one requiring a solution which
would, in large measure, have to be extraordinary. It is
true that a desperate disease requires a desperate cure.
My delegation also remains convinced that, while the
Organization of African Unity and the neighbouring
countries have an important role to play in efforts to halt
the ongoing carnage and restore peace in Rwanda, the
United Nations has an even more critical role to play in
galvanizing international assistance for that troubled
country. Indeed, we believe that the credibility of the
16
Security Council 3377th meeting
Forty-ninth year 16 May 1994
United Nations is not particularly well served if, in
moments of crisis, the United Nations prevaricates and
takes positions which, in hindsight, are sadly mistaken.
Nigeria sees the tasks now facing the international
community in Rwanda as three-fold: humanitarian, security
and political, all of which are closely interconnected. On
the humanitarian level, urgent assistance is needed to attend
to the needs of an estimated 2 million people who are
internally displaced and the 1.5 million others suffering
from the consequences of the severe famine and drought
which confronted the country before the outbreak of the
current hostilities.
In addition, there are thousands of Rwandan refugees
in the neighbouring countries whose needs have to be
urgently addressed.
At the level of security, international assistance is
urgently needed to halt the ongoing carnage and provide a
stable and secure environment. The provision of security
is vital not only for the thousands of civilians and displaced
persons, but also to facilitate the work of the United
Nations and other humanitarian relief agencies in Rwanda.
At the level of political concern, international efforts -
both of the United Nations and at the level of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) - must put in focus
the larger objective of achieving an immediate cease-fire
and a lasting political settlement within the framework of
the Arusha Peace Agreement.
The resolution which we have just adopted makes a
significant effort to address the pressing needs of Rwanda,
particularly in the humanitarian sphere. In contrast to the
drastic reduction of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Rwanda (UNAMIR) force level undertaken in resolution
912 (1994) of 21 April 1994, the present resolution
authorizes the deployment of the UNAMIR force level up
to 5,500 troops.
The focus of the expanded mission is humanitarian:
first, to contribute to the security and protection of civilians
and the establishment and maintenance of secure
humanitarian areas, in particular for displaced persons and
refugees; and secondly, to provide security and support for
the distribution of relief supplies and humanitarian relief
operations. In the exercise of this role, the expanded
UNAMIR is authorized to take action as appropriate to
defend itself and other international personnel and others
located in secure areas.
While the primary focus of the expanded UNAMIR
is humanitarian, the present resolution also demands that
all parties to the conflict immediately cease hostilities,
agree to a cease-fire and bring an end to the mindless
violence and carnage engulfing Rwanda. In this context,
it invites the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, in coordination with the OAU and
countries in the region, to continue their efforts to
cultivate a political settlement in Rwanda within the
framework of the Arusha Peace Agreement. My
delegation believes that it is important that we address the
wider political purpose of the United Nations involvement
in Rwanda by helping to obtain a cease-fire and helping
to promote the peace process.
Two additional important elements of the present
resolution include a request for the Secretary-General to
present a report on possible violations of international
humanitarian law in Rwanda since the outbreak of current
hostilities and the imposition of an arms embargo to
prevent the sale and delivery of arms and related matériel
of all types in Rwanda. We strongly believe these two
measures would contribute to reducing the level of
violence and thus foster the prospects of an early return
to peace in the country.
In conclusion, we join in commending the efforts of
those States, United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations which have continued to
provide humanitarian and other assistance in Rwanda
under extremely difficult circumstances. We commend
also the untiring efforts of the OAU and the Tanzanian
Government aimed at bringing the peace process back on
track.
We urge Member States to respond promptly to the
Secretary-General’s request for logistical support
capability for the rapid deployment of UNAMIR’s
expanded force level and its support in the field.
One final word: although Nigeria voted in favour of
this resolution, we have reservations on two aspects.
First, we are not entirely satisfied with the manner in
which African issues that come before the Council tend
generally to be treated. Secondly, we are unhappy with
the import of operative paragraph 7 of the present
resolution, which would seem to imply that the second
phase of UNAMIR’s deployment will be dependent on a
number of conditionalities, including a further decision or
action by the Council. Our own expectation is that the
second phase of UNAMIR’s deployment will achieve the
force level of 5,500 troops, or as close to that as possible
17
Security Council 3377th meeting
Forty-ninth year 16 May 1994
and necessary, as called for by the Secretary-General in his
report. In this regard, Nigeria has already indicated its
intention to contribute troops to an expanded UNAMIR.
We therefore call on Member States to respond urgently
and favourably to the Secretary-General’s request.
We call on the international community not to
abandon the innocent civilians in Rwanda, because to let
them down would be to let ourselves down. After all, we
are part of the same common humanity.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no further speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration
of the item on the agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.45 a.m.
18
