United Nations S/PV.3385
94-85715 (E) This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Section,
room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Forty-ninth Year
3385th Meeting
Tuesday, 31 May 1994, 6.35 p.m.
New York
President: Mr. Gambari . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nigeria)
Members: Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Cardenas
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Sardenberg
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Li Zhaoxing
Czech Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Kovanda
Djibouti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Olhaye
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mérimée
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Keating
Oman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Al-Khussaiby
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Khan
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Sidorov
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Bizimana
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Pedauye
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . Sir David Hannay
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Gnehm
Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Further report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation in Somalia, submitted in pursuance of
paragraph 14 of resolution 897 (1994) (S/1994/614)
Security Council 3385th meeting
Forty-ninth year 31 May 1994
The meeting was called to order at 6.35 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Further report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Operation in Somalia, submitted in
pursuance of paragraph 14 of resolution 897 (1994)
(S/1994/614)
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Somalia in which she requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Ms. Hassan
(Somalia) took a place at the Council table.
The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation
in Somalia, submitted in pursuance of paragraph 14 of
resolution 897 (1994), document S/1994/614. Members of
the Council also have before them document S/1994/638,
which contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the
course of the Council’s prior consultations.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless
I hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the
vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Bizimana (Rwanda) (interpretation from
French): My delegation welcomes the detailed and
complete report presented by the Secretary-General on the
situation in Somalia. In this connection, we pay tribute
to the sustained efforts of Secretary-General Boutros-
Ghali, which are being actively followed up by his Acting
Special Representative, Ambassador Lansana Kouyate.
We also wish to commend the courage of the staff of the
United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM II) and
the humanitarian organizations, as well as the significant
contribution of certain Member States that are providing
troops and logistical, material and other forms of
assistance.
The Secretary-General’s report indicates that since
the adoption of resolution 897 (1994) the process of
national reconciliation in Somalia has gained new
impetus. In this context, we welcome the Declaration,
made in the form of a manifesto of reconciliation, signed
in Nairobi on 24 March 1994 by the leaders of Somali
political organizations. Through this Declaration, the
Somalis undertake in particular to restore peace
throughout the country, to convene a national
reconciliation conference to elect a President and
Vice-Presidents, to appoint a Prime Minister, to complete
the establishment of local authorities and to create an
independent judiciary.
The implementation of this Declaration, backed by
the renewed support of the international community, is of
crucial importance; it is a challenge to be met on the way
to Somalia’s reconciliation and reconstruction. The
prospects are all the more significant in that they rely on
the determination expressed by the Somali parties to work
together towards voluntary disarmament and a permanent
cease-fire.
This determination of the parties will, however, be
meaningful and reliable only if it leads to a positive
change with respect to military activities. In that
connection, it is disturbing that, despite political
reconciliation efforts being made at the regional and
national levels, the security situation is deteriorating and
the various factions are rearming to try to improve their
positions on the ground before the national reconciliation
conference is convened.
The precarious and unforeseeable nature of the
situation is related above all to the suddenness with which
disturbances and fighting between the clans tend to break
out, as well as to the high degree of banditry, especially
in the urban centres.
2
Security Council 3385th meeting
Forty-ninth year 31 May 1994
In order to put a stop to that situation, we must
without delay proceed to the full deployment of the
authorized force of UNOSOM II, set at 22,000 men, and
provide this force with the necessary logistical and material
means to discharge its mandate.
Moreover, it is important to accelerate the
implementation of programmes relating to the justice
system and the police.
With respect to demining, we wish to commend the
efforts made by UNOSOM II, whose approach has made it
possible to extend the operation to a larger part of Somali
territory. The proposed creation of a demining training
centre and the continuation and extension of the mine
awareness programme will no doubt make it possible to
achieve success in this area.
Despite the great efforts of the international
community, the emergency humanitarian situation persists,
and the report of the Secretary-General reveals that many
Somalis still face an uncertain fate. There are shortages of
food and water as well as epidemics and various other
calamities throughout the country.
We fully support the initiative that led to setting up
the Emergency Operations Group, made up of
representatives of United Nations agencies, the consortium
of non-governmental organizations and the UNOSOM Force
command, and praise the efforts to stem the cholera
epidemic.
To help the Somalis to meet their critical needs and
face their constant challenges, collective action by the
international community is still indispensable in order to
support the efforts of the Somali people to reconstruct their
country’s political and socio-economic structure.
That is why my delegation supports the draft
resolution before the Council to renew the mandate of
UNOSOM II.
Mr. Khan (Pakistan): My Government, which today
is the largest contributor to the United Nations Operation in
Somalia (UNOSOM II) in terms of personnel, was most
gratified when the leaders of the Somali political
organizations, meeting in Nairobi, adopted a declaration on
24 March 1994. In this Declaration the Somali leaders not
only affirmed their repudiation of violence and acceptance
of voluntary disarmament, but also agreed to convene a
national reconciliation conference to elect a President and
an unspecified number of Vice-Presidents and to appoint a
Prime Minister. Another important feature of the
Declaration was the appeal addressed to the international
community, asking it to continue its efforts to assist
Somalia until it could stand on its own feet. This appeal,
in my view, among other things, vindicated the presence
of UNOSOM II in Somalia - a presence whose very
legitimacy had been put under question not very long ago.
We regret, however, that the repeated postponements
of the preparatory meeting to lay the groundwork for the
national reconciliation conference have somewhat
tarnished the promise of the Nairobi Declaration. I doubt
if the international community is prepared to see the
Declaration of 24 March 1994 meet the same fate as the
Addis Ababa Accords of March 1993. We do understand
that the process which the Somali parties have embarked
upon is a complicated one. Therefore, some delays could
have been expected to take place for legitimate reasons.
However, in all such situations a point can be reached
where scepticism replaces hope.
The Government and people of Pakistan have the
deepest feelings of sympathy and fraternity for the people
of Somalia. It is only because of this, as well as our
commitment to the peace-keeping role of the United
Nations, that we have persisted with our participation in
UNOSOM II, despite many difficulties. Nevertheless, we
remain deeply concerned about the safety, security and
welfare of our troops serving under the United Nations
flag, and - God forbid - if there is any large-scale
outbreak of fighting in Somalia resulting in casualties
among the Pakistani contingent, then my Government
would be obliged to seriously review the situation.
While we are concerned at the deterioration in the
security situation in Somalia, the continued interfactional
fighting and the rise in the incidence of banditry, we
cannot at the same time ignore the positive elements over
the last few months. The foremost among these is the
declared commitment of the Somali parties to pursue the
path of reconciliation. The progress in the
implementation of the justice and police programmes,
though slightly behind schedule, can be termed adequate.
The overall humanitarian situation has registered
considerable improvement over the last year or so. The
demining programme has also proceeded in a satisfactory
manner.
I should like to place on record my delegation’s
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his latest report on
Somalia, which we find most useful, well-structured and
cogent. My delegation was willing to accept his
3
Security Council 3385th meeting
Forty-ninth year 31 May 1994
recommendation to renew the mandate of UNOSOM II for
a period of six months. We felt, however, that an equally
convincing case had been made for reducing the extension
period to four months. This should not be seen as an
erosion of the commitment of the international community
to the people of Somalia. Rather, it signifies a desire to
persuade the Somali parties to hasten their endeavours
towards the objective of national reconciliation. My
delegation is confident that adequate progress during this
period would lead to a further renewal of the UNOSOM
mandate. My delegation will therefore support the draft
resolution before the Council.
Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): Allow me, at the outset,
to extend my delegation’s sincere thanks through you,
Mr. President, to Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, for his
comprehensive report on Somalia, which is undoubtedly
responsive to many of our concerns regarding the situation
in Somalia. I should also like to seize this opportunity to
commend the Secretary-General’s Special Representative
for his vigorous efforts in this regard.
My delegation welcomes the successful efforts of the
United Nations in convening a meeting between the Somali
leaders in Nairobi, the capital of Kenya, which has
contributed to the improvement of dialogue and the
narrowing down of the differences between the conflicting
Somali factions which led to the signing of the Nairobi
Declaration on 24 March 1994. There is no doubt that this
development is considered a step in the right direction, and
all efforts should be geared towards achieving the best
results for all.
My delegation reiterates its previous position,
believing that it is for the Somali people themselves to
assume a greater role in resolving the Somali crisis, and it
also reaffirms the significant role of the United Nations and
of the international community in helping them to overcome
their crisis.
Once again, we urge the Somali leaders to assume
their responsibilities in ending their differences in favour of
achieving national reconciliation through the peaceful and
effective implementation of the agreements reached by
them in this matter.
It is obvious that the draft resolution to be adopted
reflects the Council’s concern over this matter, stressing the
importance of the forthcoming period in the history of the
Somali people and stating that United Nations support for
them is conditioned by the extent of their leaders’
determination and practical willingness to solve their
problems.
We believe that this is the right message that the
Council should address to the Somali leaders in order to
reach solid ground on the basis of which positive and
reacquired goals are achieved. We are hopeful that this
message will have a positive reaction from the Somali
leaders.
My delegation will support the draft resolution
which is about to be adopted.
Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): My delegation has read
with considerable interest the further report (S/1994/614)
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation
in Somalia (UNOSOM), dated 24 May 1994. It seems to
reflect the mood of the international community: one of
anticipation and appreciation, but also of hope.
Almost unexpectedly, the factions met in Nairobi
about two months ago and actually forged an agreement
foreseeing a national Government, complete with all the
normal structures and positions. Most encouraging of all,
though, was the coming together of the principal
protagonists to sign the Nairobi Declaration - perhaps
their first face-to-face negotiations in some time.
Unfortunately, the process has become riddled with
postponements and delays. In fact, the initial preparatory
meeting has yet to take place, and no firm date has been
set for the major reconciliation conference.
Repeated references by the Secretary-General to the
deteriorating security situation, the rise in incidents and
banditry, the reappearance of the feared "technicals", and,
worst of all, the escalating level of rearming seen in all
factions do not portend a happy outcome. Once again,
the cease-fire commitments have not been honoured, and
there is a real concern as to what will transpire in the
coming months. Despite the negative aspects, however,
efforts to reach agreement and to schedule the necessary
conferences and meetings continue. Surprisingly, and
perhaps another indication of seriousness, all the factions
have requested a continued United Nations presence.
Naturally, while these attempts at setting up
meetings continue, other activities go on as well. With
the eventual withdrawal of UNOSOM II, the Somalis will
have to assume total responsibility for their own security
and justice system. My delegation is pleased to note the
attention being devoted to the recruitment and training of
4
Security Council 3385th meeting
Forty-ninth year 31 May 1994
Somali police and judges and to the rehabilitation of penal
institutions. If there is any possible way to hasten this
critical process, we would urge the Secretary-General to
explore it, and we would also urge Member States to be
generous in their cash contributions and contributions in
kind.
The current humanitarian situation remains, as always,
a cause of concern. The declining security situation has
made the delivery of aid more precarious and unpredictable
and has hindered efficiency. UNOSOM II and the other
agencies are to be congratulated, however, on the manner
in which they have embarked upon emergency and
contingency planning and on their concerted response
mechanisms. Additionally, efforts aimed at resettling
displaced persons, demining, and planning for rehabilitation
and reconstruction by the Somalia Aid Coordination Body
are proceeding apace. In every one of these endeavours the
primary issue is that of security.
We are clearly at a point in Somalia where subsequent
steps must come from the Somali people themselves. Firm
dates for the necessary preparatory meetings must be set as
soon as possible so that a conference of national
reconciliation can follow. The situation on the ground, as
the Secretary-General says, is a matter of growing concern,
and, if not addressed soon by the Somalis through a
cease-fire and disarmament agreement, it could quickly
escalate out of everyone’s control.
We fully concur with the sentiment expressed by the
Secretary-General that the presence of UNOSOM II is a
stabilizing factor which has prevented total anarchy. From
this perspective, a United Nations pullout at this critical
juncture would be a sign of abandonment, and would be
completely unacceptable to my delegation. With positive
signs to offset the negatives and with the growth of a police
force, what Somalia needs is time. However, such time
must be employed wisely and quickly. The responsibility
for this rests squarely on the shoulders of the Somalis, who
must show
"evidence of serious and productive pursuit of the
reconciliation process" (S/1994/614, para. 76).
My delegation will therefore support the draft
resolution before us to renew the mandate of UNOSOM II,
with the anticipated completion of its mission by
March 1995.
The President: I shall now put draft resolution
S/1994/638 to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Brazil, China, Czech Republic, Djibouti,
France, New Zealand, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Spain, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 923 (1994).
I shall now call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements following the voting.
Mr. Li Zhaoxing (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): Since the adoption of Security Council
resolution 897 (1994), the Somali peace process has made
some headway, but at the same time unstable elements
have further increased, resulting in a chaotic social order
devoid of safety. This cannot but cause us deep concern.
The main purpose of a number of resolutions
adopted by the Council on the question of Somalia is to
promote the peace process initiated by the Addis Ababa
Agreements, achieve genuine national reconciliation and
restore peace and stability in Somalia so that its people
can set out on the road of rebuilding their homeland and
revitalizing their national economy. The United Nations
Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM II) has played an
important role in safeguarding humanitarian assistance,
enhancing negotiations between various parties and
promoting national reconciliation in Somalia. Therefore,
the Chinese delegation supports the recommendation of
the Secretary-General on the extension of the mandate of
UNOSOM II and voted in favour of the resolution just
adopted.
The international community should continue to
make every possible endeavour to help the Somali people
to seek an appropriate solution acceptable to all through
dialogue and negotiation and to achieve genuine national
reconciliation. This is the key to ending civil war and
restoring peace in Somalia. In this connection, the
Organization of African Unity and the African States can
and should continue to play an important role.
UNOSOM II is entrusted with the task of supporting
the Somali people in their efforts to achieve national
reconciliation. Meanwhile, its humanitarian mandate
remains unchanged, and the principle of using
5
Security Council 3385th meeting
Forty-ninth year 31 May 1994
non-coercive measures should be observed in the
performance of that mandate. We believe that the final
solution to the Somali question lies with the Somali people
themselves. As long as all the Somali parties adopt a
compromising and flexible attitude, an appropriate final
solution to the Somali question will be found through
peaceful negotiation.
Mr. Ladsous (France) (interpretation from French):
My delegation joined in the adoption of this resolution
extending the mandate of the United Nations Operation in
Somalia (UNOSOM II) for four months, until
30 September 1994.
My delegation believes that the United Nations must
continue its task of promoting that country’s return to
stability and peace.
My country notes that progress has been made in this
direction. Thus, the United Nations presence has made it
possible for a large part of the country to return to normal
life. The United Nations was called into Somalia in order
to put an end to the famine there. From this point of view,
we can say that the objective has been achieved.
Moreover, the Blue Helmets have made it possible for part
of the country’s administration to be re-established. Here
too, significant progress has been made, particularly in
respect of the implementation of the programmes
concerning the judiciary and the police; these programmes
should not only continue, they should be accelerated.
However, the labour of national reconstruction and
reconciliation cannot succeed without the active
participation of the Somalis themselves. First and foremost,
the factions must continue their negotiations towards the
prompt establishment of a government in Somalia that
everyone accepts. We have taken note of the holding of a
conference preparatory to forming such a government.
France recalls that the success of any forthcoming
agreement between the Somali factions on this issue will
depend on our continuing the efforts we have undertaken to
restore peace in that country.
However, we note with regret that the security
conditions continue to worsen. We deplore in particular the
obstacles set in the way of the free movement of
UNOSOM II personnel, given that their apportioned task is
aimed primarily at protecting the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to the civilian population.
Those who for too long lived by pillaging the country,
before the Blue Helmets arrived, must not be allowed to
claw back their room for manoeuvre. We therefore call
upon the factions to demand that their people display as
much restraint as possible so as not to compromise the
ongoing efforts and so as not to impel those willing to
assist the Somali people to put an end to their missions,
which must be accomplished.
In this connection, my country congratulates the
Blue Helmets and all of the men and women who have
been providing humanitarian assistance and health care on
their courage in continuing their efforts in Somalia, where
their conditions of service have become extremely
dangerous, as has been shown by the recent deaths of five
Nepalese soldiers.
France, for its part, will do everything in its power
to go on supporting the United Nations mission so that,
by March 1995 - as the resolution we have just adopted
once more recalls - the objective that we set ourselves
when we put the Somali question on the Council’s agenda
in 1992 will be achieved in full and that reconciliation
between all Somalis will become a reality.
Sir David Hannay (United Kingdom): Our last
debate on the United Nations Operation in Somalia
(UNOSOM), in February, took place following a
thoroughgoing review of the whole operation. This
review resulted in a revised and more realistic mandate
which left in no doubt the need for the active cooperation
of the Somali people if the operation was to achieve its
goal. During the six months of the present mandate we
have seen some progress. The 24 March Nairobi
Declaration, in which all parties committed themselves to
national reconciliation, was a step forward and an
example of what can be achieved by the Somali parties in
cooperation both with each other and with UNOSOM.
But progress since then has been painfully slow.
While we welcome the Lower Juba Regional Conference
which took place last week, we very much regret that the
preparatory meeting for the national reconciliation
conference, which all parties had agreed would take place
on 15 April, has been postponed yet again.
More worrying still is the fact that, while the
political process has been stalled, the security situation
has been deteriorating. Not only have the parties failed
to honour their commitments to voluntary disarmament,
but some factions have begun to rearm and the
construction of "technicals" has resumed. Banditry
continues to rise, and we are once again confronted with
the news of attacks on United Nations peace-keepers,
6
Security Council 3385th meeting
Forty-ninth year 31 May 1994
most recently the tragic deaths, two weeks ago, of five
Nepalese soldiers serving with UNOSOM.
The international community, my Government
included, has made a massive contribution towards the
effort to rebuild Somalia, both through UNOSOM and
through the provision of humanitarian and reconstruction
assistance. By adopting this resolution extending the
mandate of UNOSOM for a further four months we are
showing our willingness to continue that commitment. But,
as the resolution makes clear, the ultimate responsibility for
achieving national reconciliation and for rebuilding their
country rests with the Somali people.
The international community will of course do
everything possible to help this process, but it cannot be
expected to sustain this commitment indefinitely without a
matching commitment from the Somali parties.
My Government believes that the resolution just
adopted offers the Somali parties a further chance to work,
with UNOSOM’s help, towards a lasting agreement on
national reconciliation, building on what has already been
achieved. We urge them to make the best use of this
opportunity.
Mr. Keating (New Zealand): New Zealand has
supported the adoption of this resolution because of the
importance we attach to the United Nations involvement in
Somalia and to the fulfilment of the undertaking made in
the adoption of resolution 814 (1993), providing for the
original establishment of UNOSOM II. That undertaking
was that the United Nations would do what it could to
assist the Somali people by bringing humanitarian relief to
those in need, by assisting the Somali parties in the process
of national reconciliation and by attempting to ensure the
maintenance of a stable security situation in the country.
Subsequent events required the Security Council to
undertake a fundamental review of the role of UNOSOM II
at the beginning of this year. That review led to the
adoption of resolution 897 (1994), by which the Council
redefined the mandate of UNOSOM, particularly in the
tasks and methods of operation assigned to it in the security
field. An important aspect of that resolution was the
reaffirmation in its preamble of the objective that
UNOSOM II would complete its mission by 1995.
It is particularly important to my delegation that the
resolution we have just adopted repeats that reaffirmation.
As the Secretary-General’s report makes clear,
notwithstanding the outbreaks of local fighting and the
upsurge in banditry, the situation in Somalia since the
adoption of resolution 897 (1994) has been surprisingly
stable, despite the many predictions in the media of a
collapse in the security situation once the majority of
western troops withdrew by 31 March.
Developments on the political front have, on one
analysis, been less than satisfactory. It is true that there
have been recurring delays in the convening of the
preparatory meeting for the national reconciliation
conference. The resulting further postponement of the
national reconciliation conference itself has, at the very
least, been a frustrating demonstration of the complexity
and mistrust which characterize Somali politics.
But it is possible to analyse the situation in quite a
different way. My delegation considers that it would be
quite wrong to characterize what has been going on in
Somalia over the past four months in negative terms.
There are a number of notable successes to
counterbalance the setbacks, and reasons which explain -
if they do not justify - the slow pace on the political
front.
On the humanitarian front, we must continue to
congratulate UNOSOM and the responsible international
agencies for ensuring the delivery of relief assistance to
Somalis at risk, for their ongoing assistance to refugees
and internally displaced persons, and for their efforts to
re-establish Somali agricultural programmes. We
particularly congratulate them for their effective response
to the major challenge posed by the outbreak of the
cholera emergency in February.
On the domestic security front, some progress has
been made in the Somali police and justice programme,
particularly in the training and re-establishment of a
Somali police force.
Considerable satisfaction can also be taken, in our
analysis, from developments on the political front.
Congratulations are particularly due to the Acting Special
Representative on successfully persuading all the Somali
parties to sign up to the Nairobi Declaration on 24 March.
This document provides what has been missing from the
Somali political process for the past year - namely, a
commonly agreed statement of political principles and
objectives.
7
Security Council 3385th meeting
Forty-ninth year 31 May 1994
Of course, it is disappointing that the Somali parties
have not followed up on the Nairobi Declaration with the
speed which we would all want. But it certainly cannot be
said to be a surprise that such delays have occurred. When
one considers the background against which they have been
operating - the divisions and fighting among the clans and
the departure in March of a number of important
contributors to UNOSOM - the fact that there was progress
at all is cause for some celebration. Moreover, in the past
week there have been further encouraging signs on the
political front, notably the convening of the Lower Juba
regional conference, which will be of major importance in
resolving tension in Kismayo, and, most recently, there has
been agreement to proceed with the next phase of the
national reconciliation process with a meeting next week in
Nairobi.
It is because of this picture that my delegation was
strongly of the view that the Security Council had no basis
for rejecting the recommendation of the Secretary-General
that UNOSOM II’s mandate should be extended for a
further six-month period. We believe that what Somalia
and UNOSOM most need at this point is a period of
stability in which they can consolidate the gains that have
been made and can tackle the problems that undoubtedly
remain.
There are also strong reasons, in our view, in the
context of the responsible management of peace-keeping
operations - both financial reasons and in terms of proper
planning - for the Security Council to avoid subjecting the
terms of a peace-keeping mandate to artificial and
politically generated time-frames. New Zealand has
consistently argued against such practices in all other cases.
In the specific case of Somalia we do not believe that
it is appropriate or productive at this stage to impose on
UNOSOM or the Somali parties artificial criteria or time-
frames which make little sense in the circumstances and
traditions of Somalia. This does not mean that the Somali
parties should have a free hand to delay indefinitely the
process of national reconciliation. But it does mean that we
should be wary of trying to use tactics such as artificially
shortening mandates to bring pressure to bear on people
whose past behaviour indicates that fine-tuning the wording
of Security Council resolutions is of negligible value in
persuading them to cooperate with the United Nations.
Indeed, there are some in Somalia who might welcome
the opportunity to speed the United Nations on its way. If
that were to be the result of the Council’s action today, we
would have done a grave disservice to the Somali people
and to the humanitarian mission which first inspired the
international community to get involved in Somalia.
My delegation believes that the Security Council
would be more effective if it had turned its attention to
the issues which will confront us in real terms in the very
near future. We have a commitment to maintain the
current operation until March 1995. But what kind of
United Nations presence should be envisaged for Somalia
after March 1995, and how should UNOSOM’s
operations and structure be implemented to ensure that the
transition to that next phase is as smooth and as beneficial
to the Somali people as possible? We want these
considerations to be at the forefront of the Council’s
attention in the coming months.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): As we undertake the
review of the activities of the United Nations Operation
in Somalia (UNOSOM II) called for in Security Council
resolution 897 (1994), we have the opportunity to discuss
the criteria for the assessment of the United Nations
involvement and future course of action in intricate
situations such as the one prevailing in Somalia. In this
endeavour we are making good use of the criteria set out
in the presidential statement of 3 May 1994, in which, on
a non-binding basis, the Council provided the terms for
the review of mandates of peace-keeping operations. To
my delegation, such terms should be observed
consistently, without discrimination and with sufficient
flexibility to allow unforeseen situations to be
accommodated within their framework. Having this in
mind, and considering that we have fulfilled the
requirement I have mentioned, the Brazilian delegation
voted in favour of resolution 923 (1994).
The adoption of resolution 897 (1994) earlier this
year represented a turning point in the mandate of the
United Nations Operation in Somalia. In order to deal
with an exceedingly complex and unsafe environment, the
Security Council decided to shift its emphasis to assisting
the political process in Somalia. By doing so, the
Council acknowledged the fact that the Somali parties and
their leaders bear the ultimate responsibility for setting up
viable national political institutions and for reconstructing
their country.
The comprehensive report of the Secretary-General,
for which we are grateful, provides the Security Council
with information on the Somali political developments
since the adoption of resolution 897 (1994) and on the
discharge of the mandate of UNOSOM II. We welcome
the fact that the transition period following the withdrawal
8
Security Council 3385th meeting
Forty-ninth year 31 May 1994
of a large number of troops and the reorientation of the
mandate of the peace-keeping operation has not degenerated
into generalized violence. The relatively smooth transition
is largely the result of the diligent work done by the
Secretary-General’s Acting Special Representative,
Ambassador Kouyate, who deserves our praise. Time has
proved right those delegations in the Council which, like
my own, have consistently maintained that this body
should, to the fullest extent possible, seek to avoid the
application of the extraordinary powers for enforcement
action conferred upon it in Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter.
We are encouraged by the Declaration made by the
leaders of the Somali organizations, signed in Nairobi on
24 March last. Among the various important issues
contained therein is the parties’ agreement that, in order to
restore sovereignty of the Somali State, a national
reconciliation conference should be convened to elect a
President and a Vice-President and to appoint a Prime
Minister.
The Somali Declaration points to an entirely Somali
solution to the Somali problem. UNOSOM, as rightly
indicated by the Secretary-General, will play the role of
facilitator in this process. We concur with the assessment
of the Secretary-General that, although difficult, the
situation in Somalia allows for hope. We view as a
positive step forward the unanimous commitment of the
Somali parties to the pursuit of the path of reconciliation
and their decisions concerning a cease-fire and voluntary
disarmament. The appeal of all Somali leaders to the
United Nations for continued support in their reconciliation
and rehabilitation efforts is a dramatic change in their
attitude towards UNOSOM. It proves that they have started
to heed the appeals of the international community, thus
putting the United Nations Operation in the country in a
completely new perspective of dialogue and cooperation.
The momentum that has been gained should be kept going.
It is vital to capitalize on these developments in the
political environment in Somalia in order to reach a prompt
settlement to this complex conflict.
Despite those positive developments, much remains to
be done in the field of security, and we deeply deplore the
fact that attacks on United Nations personnel and
non-governmental organization personnel still take place.
In the political field, in spite of the promising adoption of
the Declaration by the leaders of the Somali political
organizations, the process of national reconciliation is still
being subjected to undue delays. In particular, we are
dismayed by the information contained in the Secretary-
General’s report to the effect that the situation remains
tense and that factions are rearming themselves.
The Brazilian delegation hopes that when the
Council undertakes its next review of UNOSOM II the
political and security situation in Somalia will have
continued to improve so that by the envisaged date of the
completion of the Operation’s mission the Somalis will be
in a position to take up the reconstruction of their
country.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to pay tribute to
those who selflessly risk their lives in Somalia for the
cause of peace and to thank troop-contributing countries
for their continued commitment to this important United
Nations peace-keeping operation.
Mr. Gnehm (United States of America): The
resolution we have adopted today comes at what the
Secretary-General rightly calls "a defining moment"
(S/1994/614, para. 70). This resolution underscores the
growing impatience of the international community with
the pace of progress towards national reconciliation in
Somalia which is best evidenced by the failure of the
parties to meet yesterday as scheduled after three prior
postponements. The adjustment in the length of the
mandate’s renewal to four months and the provision for
a review of progress is therefore not an empty exercise.
We believe that the Somali parties are paying close
attention to what this body does. This is not a time for
routinely conducting business as usual.
The resolution puts those most responsible for
obstructing forward movement on notice: it is time for
Somalis simply to get on with the job of moving towards
political reconciliation. Our support for this measure
today is predicated on this understanding of its meaning.
The restoration of normality in Somalia is primarily
a job for the Somalis themselves. Outsiders, including
the United States, remain willing to help Somalia, but it
is up to the Somalis themselves to make the difficult
decisions needed to bring about political reconciliation.
In supporting this resolution the United States believes
that the Somali factional leaders must understand that
they hold the key to their country’s future progress. We
urge them to do so my implementing the agreement
between them - the Nairobi Declaration of 24 March.
As the Secretary-General has made clear in his
recent report on Somalia, this is a last chance - continued
delay in the reconciliation process or the outbreak of
9
Security Council 3385th meeting
Forty-ninth year 31 May 1994
renewed violence will prompt the international community
to draw the appropriate conclusions. The Secretary-General
noted in his report that, under such circumstances, he would
not hesitate to recommend an end to this mission.
We strongly support the tough message the Secretary-
General has attempted to deliver to the Somali factions.
The international community has expended considerable
resources and many lives to help Somalia. Absent
unambiguous indications to the contrary, the international
community is not prepared to continue helping a people
who seem unwilling to help themselves.
Mr. Sidorov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian): The Russian Federation has consistently
favoured the speedy restoration of peace in Somalia and the
return of its people to normal life. We support the efforts
of the international community to render humanitarian
assistance to the population of this country.
Unfortunately, the process of national reconciliation in
Somalia is experiencing serious breakdowns. There is still
no clarity concerning the issue of the timetable for holding
the conference on national reconciliation and other
fundamental agreements and duties are also not being
carried out; these were set forward by the leaders of the
Somali political factions in the Nairobi Declaration of
24 March.
We are deeply concerned by the lack of progress in
implementing the concept of voluntary disarmament. We
are concerned by the rearming of the Somali factions and
by the use on the part of some of them of military force to
strengthen their negotiating positions.
As a result of these actions, the security situation -
inter alia as it affects the personnel of the United Nations
Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM II) and of other
international and non-governmental organizations - is
deteriorating. This is blocking efforts to render
humanitarian assistance and complicates the process of
political reconciliations; it also undermines the faith of the
international community in the sincerity of the obligations
undertaken by the Somali sides in Nairobi.
The Russian delegation voted for the resolution
adopted today by the Security Council, believing as it does
that it conveys to the Somali sides a serious signal
concerning the need to step up efforts to accelerate the
process of national reconciliation and establishing
conditions for peace that are necessary for the shift to a
political and social recovery in Somalia.
We are convinced that the key to a speedy
settlement of the extended crisis in Somalia is in the
hands first and foremost of the Somalis themselves, who,
as is emphasized in the resolution, bear major
responsibility for the establishment of viable political
institutions and for the restoration of their country. It is
precisely the Somali parties which must demonstrate the
required political will, flexibility and a readiness for
compromise and which must also cooperate constructively
with the international community, which is sincerely
trying to render them all possible assistance.
At the same time the Somali sides must be clearly
aware that the international community and the Security
Council are carefully following the situation in Somalia
and will properly react to its further development.
In this context we consider it important that the
resolution contains a reaffirmation of the fact that
UNOSOM II will conclude its mission by March 1995
and that in July this year the Security Council once again
will carefully consider the situation in Somalia.
For its part Russia intends to continue to render
necessary political assistance to the process of restoring
peace and harmony on Somali soil and a revival of the
institutions of Somali statehood.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Nigeria.
My delegation regrets that it did not find much
ground for optimism in the further report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation in
Somalia submitted in pursuance of paragraph 14 of
resolution 897 (1994) of 24 May 1994 (S/1994/614),
which constitutes the basis for the resolution we have just
adopted.
On the political front the parties and factions in
Somalia seem to be as far apart as ever following the
outbreak of inter-clan fighting in early April and the
subsequent refusal of the Group of 12 to participate in the
meeting of the national reconciliation which was proposed
for 15 May 1994 but had to be postponed again until
30 May 1994. Now it has become clear as we speak
today that the twice-postponed meeting has failed to
materialize, thus giving added cause for frustration and
for the feeling that there is a lack of seriousness on the
part of the warring parties in Somalia.
10
Security Council 3385th meeting
Forty-ninth year 31 May 1994
The security situation has also deteriorated remarkably
since the last adjustment of the UNOSOM mandate.
Security conditions are made worse by the fact that
expectations are now rife among the parties and factions in
Somalia that it will not be long before the entire United
Nations mission pulls out of the country. In the climate of
additional uncertainty, non-governmental organizations in
several locations in Somalia are being exposed to ever-
growing danger. As the Secretary-General himself puts it:
"the level of security is unpredictable as disturbances
and inter-clan fighting occur without warning."
(S/1994/614, para. 21)
In terms of disarmament and demobilization, the
situation has also been far from encouraging. Despite their
commitments to voluntarily disarm and demobilize, in line
with the Nairobi Declaration of 24 March 1994, the parties
to the conflict have failed to deliver on their commitments.
Of course, voluntary disarmament and demobilization can
only take place when the parties are prepared to settle their
disputes peacefully. In Somalia, such a disposition appears
to be lacking. On the contrary, the evidence available in
the past few weeks indicates that the major factions have in
fact been replenishing their weapons stockpiles and
rebuilding their defensive positions with only one purpose
in mind - and that purpose is awful.
Also on the humanitarian front, the situation has
deteriorated rapidly. Of course, this is tied to the
emergence of the so-called "technicals", increased banditry
and a general deterioration in the security and political
situations which have combined to thwart the movement of
humanitarian personnel and the delivery of relief material.
On the positive side, however, despite the troop
reduction, the military contingents of UNOSOM II have
continued to discharge, as best they can under the
circumstances, their humanitarian duties in Somalia.
Moreover, they have also continued to support the newly
established police division in carrying out the important
tasks of reconstituting the Somali national police. On the
humanitarian side, despite difficulties in the distribution of
relief and the movement of personnel due to prevalent
insecurity, available statistics show that the humanitarian
division of UNOSOM II continues to be actively engaged
in the resettlement of thousands of internally displaced
persons in Somalia.
But at this point some crucial questions have to be
asked. Given, on the one hand, the continuing apparent
lack of visible progress in achieving a political settlement
of the Somali conflict and the deteriorating political,
military and security situation in the country, and, on the
other hand, the enduring humanitarian and political needs
of the Somali people, what course of action must the
international community now pursue in Somalia? Should
the international community - or, more specifically, the
United Nations - now cut off all its assistance to Somalia
and abandon the Somalis to a fate dictated not so much
by the Somali people, but by the parties and factions that
control the instruments of violence and coercion in the
country, even though, statistically speaking, these
elements are in the tiniest of tiny minorities?
The resolution which we have just adopted, and
which my delegation voted in favour of, indicates that the
international community, though conscious of the fact that
the Somali people must continue to bear the ultimate
responsibility for achieving national reconciliation and
rebuilding their country, is prepared none the less to
continue to play its part in promoting the peace process
in Somalia. To this end, although the resolution does not
extend the mandate for the six-month period
recommended by the Secretary-General - an option which
my delegation would clearly have preferred - it renewed
the mandate of UNOSOM II for an additional four-month
period.
The Nigerian delegation sees much merit in the tenor
of the present resolution calling upon the parties to show
good faith if continued United Nations support in Somalia
is to be assured. We believe, however, that the situation
in Somalia, because of its exceptional circumstances -
including, in particular, the absence of a government -
deserves a special and more flexible consideration and
must not be treated in exactly the same framework as
some other United Nations peace-keeping operations,
where credible governmental and non-governmental
authorities exist. It would be a sad mistake if, because of
the desire for quick results, the United Nations were in
the immediate future - long before our initial target date
of March 1995 is reached - to embark on a precipitate
withdrawal from Somalia without taking into full account
Somalia’s special circumstances.
Finally, my delegation would like to thank all States
and all non-governmental organizations which have
extended humanitarian assistance to Somalia. We are
thankful to those Governments that have continued to
provide troops and financial and logistical resources for
the continuation of UNOSOM’S mandate under extremely
difficult circumstances. We also wish to thank the
Secretary-General and his Acting Special Representative
11
Security Council 3385th meeting
Forty-ninth year 31 May 1994
for their untiring efforts to achieve a political settlement of
the Somali conflict. For its part, Nigeria, as a troop-
contributing country to UNOSOM II, will continue to play
a constructive role in helping to resolve the conflict in
Somalia.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of
its consideration of the item on the agenda.
The meeting rose at 7.35 p.m.
12
