United Nations S/PV.3455
94-87025 (E) This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Section,
room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Forty-ninth Year
3455th Meeting
Thursday, 10 November 1994, 11 a.m.
New York
President: Mrs. Albright . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (United States of America)
Members: Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Cárdenas
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Sardenberg
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Li Zhaoxing
Czech Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Kovanda
Djibouti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Olhaye
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mérimée
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Keating
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Gambari
Oman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Al-Khussaiby
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Marker
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Bakuramutsa
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Yañez-Barnuevo
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Sir David Hannay
Agenda
Letter dated 2 November 1994 from the President of the Trusteeship Council addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/1994/1234)
Security Council 3455th meeting
Forty-ninth year 10 November 1994
The meeting was called to order at 11.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 2 November 1994 from the President of the
Trusteeship Council addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/1994/1234)
The President: I should like to inform the Security
Council that I have received a letter from the representative
of Australia in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Butler
(Australia) took the place reserved for him at the side
of the Council Chamber.
The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/1994/1234, which contains the text of a letter dated 2
November 1994 from the President of the Trusteeship
Council addressed to the President of the Security Council.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1994/1264, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by China, France, the Russian
Federation, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/1994/1200, which contains the
text of a letter dated 17 October 1994 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General.
It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/1994/1264) before it. If I hear no objection, I shall put
the draft resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Brazil, China, Czech Republic, Djibouti,
France, New Zealand, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Spain, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 956 (1994).
I shall now call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements following the voting.
Mr. Mérimée (France) (interpretation from French):
Since France is currently serving as President of the
Trusteeship Council, it is a special pleasure for me to
welcome the adoption by the Security Council of the
resolution recording the accession of the Republic of
Palau to independence. This resolution is the final
necessary step to mark the end of the Trusteeship
System’s applicability to Palau.
On this occasion, I should like to extend to the
Government and people of Palau our best wishes for
every success in their first undertakings as an independent
State. In particular, it is my hope that the Republic of
Palau will shortly be joining us as the youngest Member
of the United Nations. Your thanks must also go to the
Administering Power, the United States of America, for
having successfully carried out the mandate entrusted to
it, which comes to an end with the entry into force of the
Compact of Free Association between Palau and the
United States.
The date of its entry into force, 1 October 1994, is
historic for another reason: with Palau’s accession to
independence, the Trusteeship Council has successfully
completed the task entrusted to it under the Charter of the
United Nations with respect to those Territories placed
under the Trusteeship System following the Second World
War. This is why, during its session last May, it adopted
an amendment to its rules of procedure under which it no
longer needs to meet regularly. This formula
2
Security Council 3455th meeting
Forty-ninth year 10 November 1994
reduces to the minimum the budgetary implications of its
continued operation, whose cost will henceforth be
negligible for the Organization, without there being any
need to contemplate any modification of its status, thus not
closing any doors for the future. Consequently, we should
think twice before recommending that the Charter be
amended to terminate the legal existence of that body.
The Trusteeship Council thus remains an instrument
that the international community could resort to if
necessary.
The work of the Trusteeship Council represents a
considerable success by the United Nations: all the
Territories placed under the Trusteeship System are now
complete masters of their destinies. The task was by no
means an easy one, and our resolution recording the
independence of Palau should therefore be regarded as
something more than a routine step.
Sir David Hannay (United Kingdom): The resolution
which the Council has just adopted marks a significant
moment in the history of the Trusteeship Council and,
indeed, in the history of the United Nations. The
termination of the Trusteeship Agreement for the last Trust
Territory of the Pacific Islands, Palau, represents the
successful end of an important chapter in the work of the
Trusteeship Council.
The United Kingdom currently holds the
vice-presidency of the Trusteeship Council. It is therefore
with great pleasure that I congratulate the people of Palau,
who celebrated the implementation of the Compact of Free
Association with the United State on 1 October this year.
We look forward to the day when they will take their place
as a Member State of the United Nations.
The United Kingdom has long enjoyed friendly
relations with the people of Palau; they go back to the year
1783. I must also congratulate and thank the United States
which, as administering Power, has honoured the trust
placed in it by the United Nations and worked to ensure the
well-being and prosperity of the people of Palau.
The decision just taken by this Council therefore
marks the conclusion of the immediate responsibilities of
the Trusteeship Council. The United Kingdom takes this
opportunity to extend its thanks to all those, in particular
the members of the staff of the United Nations, who have
over the years worked towards this goal in accordance with
the principles laid down in the Charter.
Mr. Keating (New Zealand): New Zealand warmly
welcomes today’s decision by the Security Council to
terminate the Trusteeship Agreement in respect of Palau.
We congratulate Palau most warmly on this historic
occasion.
This is a development which we and the other
nations of the South Pacific have looked forward to for
some time, and we greet it with much pleasure and
satisfaction. With this final formal step, all four
constituent Governments of the former Trust Territory of
the Pacific Islands — the Federated States of Micronesia,
the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the Commonwealth
of the Northern Mariana Islands and the Republic of
Palau — have now freely exercised their right to
self-determination and moved beyond the status of Trust
Territories into independence or self-government.
The people of Palau have made a critical decision,
and the Compact of Free Association with the United
States entered into force on 1 October. We welcome
Palau’s emergence into full nationhood and we wish the
Palauans every success as they proceed with the task of
pursuing the economic and social well-being and
advancement of their country. We now look forward to
working with them as full partners in the South Pacific
Forum, and we offer them our support and cooperation in
addressing our common regional and global concerns. We
hope that the day will soon come when we can also
welcome them here into the United Nations.
We commend the United States also for its role as
Administering Authority in fostering the development of
Palau’s political institutions to this point. We also
recognize the role played by the Trusteeship Council in
promoting the progressive self-government of Palau and
all the former Trust Territories.
The adoption of today’s resolution is, as others have
said, doubly significant. It marks not only the end of
Palau’s former dependent political status but also the
completion of the work entrusted to the Trusteeship
Council under Chapters XII and XIII of the Charter. This
brings to a successful conclusion a very important phase
in United Nations history and is testimony to the ideals
set out in the Charter half a century ago.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation
from Russian): The Russian delegation is very pleased to
note that, the tasks assigned to the United Nations
Trusteeship System having been fully discharged, a
significant contribution has been made to the solution of
3
Security Council 3455th meeting
Forty-ninth year 10 November 1994
questions involving the exercise by peoples of their
inalienable right to self-determination.
The resolution unanimously adopted today by the
Security Council terminates the United Nations Trusteeship
Agreement with respect to the last Trust Territory, Palau.
The adoption of this resolution, as my colleagues have
mentioned today, is not only a turning point in the
centuries-old history of the people of Palau, but also an
important event for the entire United Nations, which will
soon be celebrating its fiftieth anniversary.
We would like to wholeheartedly congratulate the
people and the Government of the Republic of Palau on
their accession to independence and wish the citizens of
that beautiful country well-being and prosperity. We are
certain that that State, like other former Trust Territories,
will soon become a full-fledged member of the international
community.
The Russian delegation would also like to express its
appreciation to our partners in the Trusteeship Council —
the delegations of China, France, the United Kingdom and
the United States — as well as to the Secretariat of the
United Nations for their constructive work.
Mr. Li Zhaoxing (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): The resolution which has been just adopted
unanimously by the Security Council is of historical
significance. It not only announces to the world the
termination of Palau’s status as a Trust Territory and the
birth of an independent Palau, but also marks the fulfilment
of the historical task entrusted to the United Nations
Trusteeship System under the United Nations Charter. For
this, we wish to express our welcome.
The United Nations Trusteeship System was
established under special historical conditions obtaining
after the Second World War. The principal task set forth in
the United Nations Charter for the International Trusteeship
System is to further international peace and security and
promote the political, economic, social, and educational
advancement of the inhabitants of the Trust Territories and
their progressive development towards self-government or
independence. Thanks to the long, unwavering efforts of the
people of the Trust Territories and the international
community, a number of Trust Territories have, one after
another, terminated their trusteeship status and become
independent and equal members of the international
community.
After the termination in 1990 of the trusteeship over
part of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands —
namely, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall
Islands and the Northern Mariana Islands — Palau
became the only remaining Trust Territory under the
United Nations Trusteeship System.
With the assistance of the United Nations, Palau held
a plebiscite on its future political status in November of
last year. The outcome of the plebiscite proved that the
people of Palau were ready to terminate Palau’s status as
a Trust Territory and to achieve national
self-determination and independence. On 1 October this
year, the Republic of Palau was declared independent. On
30 September this year, His Excellency Mr. Jiang Zemin,
President of the People’s Republic of China, sent a
telegram to His Excellency Mr. Kuniwo Nakamura,
President of the Republic of Palau, to extend, on behalf
of the Chinese Government and people, warm
congratulations to the Government and the people of
Palau and to announce the Chinese Government’s
decision to recognize the Government of the Republic of
Palau. The Chinese delegation wishes to take this
opportunity to extend again its warm congratulations to
the Government and the people of Palau and to express
its appreciation for the efforts and contributions made by
the parties concerned.
Over the years, the Chinese Government and people
have consistently supported the peoples of the Trust
Territories, including the people of Palau, in their efforts
for national self-determination and independence. On
several occasions, the Chinese delegation has sent
important officials to Palau to participate in the work of
the United Nations with respect to that country.
We respect the political choice made by the people
of Palau concerning their country’s political future based
on their own free will and hope that the people of Palau
will achieve new victories in their endeavour to safeguard
their national independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity and in the cause of building up their country.
The Chinese Government and people are willing further
to develop the friendship between our two countries and
our two peoples and to promote friendly relations and
cooperation with equality and mutual benefit on the basis
of the five principles of peaceful coexistence.
Mr. Yañez-Barnuevo (Spain) (interpretation from
Spanish): The Security Council has just adopted
resolution 956 (1994), which had our complete support.
We thank France, as President of the Trusteeship Council,
4
Security Council 3455th meeting
Forty-ninth year 10 November 1994
and the United States, as Administering Authority, for their
work with regard to the exercise by the people of Palau of
their right to self-determination, which led to the
independence of Palau and to agreement on a Compact of
Free Association with the United States.
Spain has a long history of close connections with the
Palau archipelago ever since the islands were first visited
by the Spanish navigator Ruy López de Villalobos in 1543.
The first printed reference to the archipelago was also the
work of a Spaniard: Father Pablo Clain, who in 1697
published a volume entitled Breve Noticia del Nuevo
Descubrimiento de las Islas Palis o Palaos. The islands had
links with the Spanish crown until 1899.
The delegation of Spain wishes most warmly to
congratulate the people of Palau on this historic occasion.
We wish them peace and prosperity, and hope we shall
soon see the representatives of Palau in the United Nations
family.
With the termination of the Trusteeship Agreement for
Palau, the long work of the Trusteeship Council under
Chapter XII of the Charter has been crowned with success.
Today gives us one more opportunity to congratulate the
Trusteeship Council on its work and to look to the future
with confidence.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United States.
The United States warmly congratulates the Republic
of Palau on the occasion of its independence and looks
forward to the day when the people of Palau joins us here
as a Member of the United Nations.
The United States served for 47 years as
Administering Authority in Palau pursuant to its Trusteeship
Agreement with the United Nations. In exercising its
obligations as Administering Authority, the United States
sought to fulfil the expectations of the international
community and, pursuant to Article 76 of the United
Nations Charter, to promote the economic, social and
educational advancement of the people of Palau. During
this period, the United States has always recognized and
supported the fundamental premise of the Trusteeship: that
the people of Palau must be free to follow the path of their
choosing in conducting their relations with the rest of the
world. As President Clinton noted in his congratulatory
message on Palau’s independence,
“We are gratified that the people of Palau,
through democratic processes, have expressed their
will to continue in a special relationship with the
United States by joining in a Compact of Free
Association between our two sovereign States.”
We will consult closely with Palau on how the
United States can assist that nation as it seeks to take its
place in the world, develop its economy and preserve its
unique environment. In so doing, we intend to take full
account of the preferences of the people of Palau.
Throughout the history of the United States, we have
consistently supported a policy that the countries and
peoples of the Pacific should be able to chart their own
destinies. Implementation of the Compact of Free
Association signals yet again that the United States is
committed to remaining engaged in the Pacific in an
effort to help ensure its security and prosperity.
With the termination of the Trusteeship Agreement
with respect to Palau, the United Nations has concluded
another chapter in its exemplary effort to bring
self-determination to all corners of the world. It is one of
the accomplishments of which we all can be most proud.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The representative of Australia has asked to make a
statement. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Butler (Australia): I have the honour to address
the Council in Australia’s capacity as current Chair of the
group of South Pacific countries, on behalf of the
Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, the Marshall Islands,
New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands,
Vanuatu, Western Samoa and Australia.
The resolution the Security Council has just adopted
is an historic one. The Council’s decision, in the light of
the entry into force on 1 October 1994 of the new status
agreement for Palau, that the objectives of the Trusteeship
Agreement have been fully attained and that the
applicability of the Trusteeship Agreement is terminated
with respect to Palau, is one which the member States of
the South Pacific group warmly welcome.
This decision is the final stage in the process set in
train following the act of self-determination by the people
of Palau on 9 November 1993, when they chose to enter
5
Security Council 3455th meeting
Forty-ninth year 10 November 1994
into a Compact of Free Association with the United States.
The United Nations Visiting Mission that observed the
plebiscite reported to the Trusteeship Council that the
plebiscite had been conducted in a free and fair manner and
that the results reflected the wishes of the people of Palau.
The act of self-determination was subsequently
endorsed by the Trusteeship Council, which concluded in
its resolution 2199 (LXI) of 25 May 1994 that the people
of Palau had freely exercised their right to self-
determination in choosing their future status and that the
United States had satisfactorily discharged its obligations
under the Trusteeship Agreement of 18 July 1947.
The positive developments which have occurred
recently in Palau, in particular the exercise by the people of
their right to self-determination, have been followed with
close interest and with the full support of the member
States of the South Pacific group. We congratulate the
people of Palau on their decision to enter into the Compact
of Free Association with the United States.
We also wish to congratulate the United States on
successfully discharging its obligations under the trusteeship
arrangements and on advising the Security Council of the
entry into force, on 1 October 1994, of the Compact of
Free Association.
We also wish to express our appreciation to the
Trusteeship Council for the role it has played in support of
the exercise by the people of Palau of their right to self-
determination and for fully discharging its obligations to
Palau under the United Nations Trusteeship System.
Palau, as a country in the Pacific region, already has
very close ties with the other Member States of that
region. The strength of the relationships that exist was
demonstrated by the large attendance at the independence
celebrations on 1 October by representatives from
countries from the Asia-Pacific region, as well as by
representatives of the United Nations, the South Pacific
Forum and the South Pacific Commission.
We are confident that these relationships will
continue to develop and grow stronger now that Palau has
embarked upon a new path as an independent country.
The countries of the South Pacific, some of which
were former Trust Territories which also gained their
independence under the United Nations Trusteeship
System, are committed to cooperating closely with Palau
as it sets out on this new and exciting journey.
We wish the people of Palau success and prosperity
in the future as members of the international and regional
community.
The President: There are no further names on the
list of speakers.
The Security Council has thus concluded its
consideration of the item on the agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.
6
