United Nations S/PV.3499
95-85125 (E) This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Section,
room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fiftieth Year
3499th Meeting
Wednesday, 8 February 1995, 10 a.m.
New York
President: Mr. Merafhe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Botswana)
Members: Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Sersale di Cerisano
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. He Yafei
Czech Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Kovanda
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mérimée
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Graf zu Rantzau
Honduras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Martínez Blanco
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wisnumurti
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ferrarin
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Gambari
Oman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Al-Khussaiby
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Bakuramutsa
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . Mr. Plumbly
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Gnehm
Agenda
The situation in Angola
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM II) (S/1995/97
and Add.1)
Security Council 3499th meeting
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Angola
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM II)
(S/1995/97 and Add.1)
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Algeria, Angola, Brazil, Guinea-Bissau, India, Kenya,
Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, the Netherlands,
Norway, Portugal, Senegal, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Tunisia, the United Republic of Tanzania, Zaire, Zambia
and Zimbabwe, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Moura
(Angola) took a place at the Council table; Mr.
Lamamra (Algeria), Mr. Valle (Brazil), Mr. Toure
(Guinea-Bissau), Mr. Sreenivasan (India), Mr.
Muthaura (Kenya), Mr. Qhobela (Lesotho), Mr.
Bwanali (Malawi), Mr. Afonso (Mozambique), Mr.
Gurirab (Namibia), Mr. Biegman (Netherlands), Mr.
Biørn Lian (Norway), Mr. Catarino (Portugal), Mr.
Cissé (Senegal), Mr. Nzo (South Africa), Mr. Yañez-
Barnuevo (Spain), Mr. Osvald (Sweden), Mr. Fayala
(Tunisia), Mr Mwakawago (United Republic of
Tanzania), Mr. Lukabu Khabouji N'zaji (Zaire), Mr.
Mushota (Zambia) and Mr. Mumbengegwi (Zimbabwe)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM II), documents
S/1995/97 and Addendum 1.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1995/117, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents:
S/1994/1441 and S/1994/1451, letters dated 9 and
28 December 1994, respectively, from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council, concerning the
Lusaka Protocol;
S/1995/51, letter dated 17 January 1995 from the Chargé
d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of Angola
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council; and
S/1995/94, letter dated 30 January 1995 from the
Permanent Representative of Angola to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting
the text of a message dated 24 January 1995 from the
President of the Republic of Angola addressed to the
Secretary-General.
The first speaker is the Minister for External
Relations of Angola, His Excellency Mr. Venâncio de
Moura. On behalf of the Security Council, I welcome him
and invite him to make his statement.
Mr. de Moura (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese;
English text furnished by the delegation): I begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on behalf of the Government of
the Republic of Angola and on my own behalf, on your
assumption for February of the presidency of this
important United Nations body, which bears primary
responsibility for the maintenance of peace and
international security.
Let me also congratulate His Excellency Ambassador
Emilio Cárdenas, the outgoing President, on the way in
which he conducted the work of the Council last month.
Our warm congratulations go also to the newly
elected members of the Security Council, to which I wish
the best of success in their work in solving the numerous
problems that the international community is facing.
2
Security Council 3499th meeting
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
The presence in this Chamber of a ministerial
delegation from the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
composed of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of several
African countries, heartens us and further shows us that
African countries, whether independently or through their
continental organization the OAU, are deeply committed to
the search for solutions to the extremely serious problems
afflicting the African continent. We hail the presence of the
Foreign Ministers here today and thank them for their
gesture of solidarity with the Government and the people of
Angola, who aspire to peace and understanding.
Of late, Angola has been discussed extensively in this
important United Nations body because of the devastating
war that has lasted for several years, with respect to the
resolution of which the Security Council continues to make
an invaluable contribution.
At the last meeting of the Council devoted to the
situation in Angola, we described to members the efforts
that the Angolan Government and the international
community are making towards a negotiated solution of the
post-election crisis in Angola. Today, the situation in
Angola has evolved in a positive way, and there are
prospects for a lasting peace for the Angolan people. Over
two months have elapsed since the formal signing of the
Lusaka Protocol. Notwithstanding the understandably slow
pace of the process due to its complexity, we can state our
certainty that the implementation of the phases provided for
in the Lusaka Protocol is, from our point of view,
irreversible. This leads us to believe that, this time, peace
has come to stay.
Therefore, it is a pleasure for me to announce before
this forum that the current military situation on the ground
in Angola is calm. The cease-fire that entered into force on
22 November 1994 is being observed without any major
incidents. The minor incidents that have occurred are not
unusual in a sensitive process such as ours and, therefore,
are far from posing a threat to the success of the peace
process and cannot be used as a pretext for hindering or
delaying the completion of the steps set forth in the Lusaka
Protocol. The Joint Commission created under the Lusaka
Protocol is operating normally under the guidance of its
tireless Chairman, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Maître Alioune Blondin Beye, who has
made every effort to promote the full implementation of the
provisions of the Protocol.
As members know, the invitation addressed by His
Excellency President Jose Eduardo dos Santos to the leader
of Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA),
Mr. Jonas Savimbi, for a meeting within Angolan territory
and the acceptance of that invitation constitute another
positive step towards the creation of a climate of
confidence for the Angolan people and the international
community, which will help strengthen peace and national
reconciliation.
I stress that, with the letter the President sent to
Mr. Savimbi and Mr. Savimbi's recent response in which
he gave his agreement to the meeting — with proper
preparation — and took due account of his responsibility
for the meeting's taking place, the meeting could well
take place shortly.
The meetings of the military chiefs of staff of the
Government and of UNITA, held at Chipipa, Huambo
province, and at Waku-Kungo, Kuanza-Sul province,
constituted another important step towards building trust
between the two military forces, which in the near future
will form a single army under the command of a single
commander-in-chief. A practical result of these meetings
was the acceleration of the disengagement of Government
and UNITA forces in the areas in which they were in
direct contact, thus avoiding the risk of confrontation and
allowing the establishment of verification, monitoring and
control machinery, including a three-way communications
system, the beginnings of free movement of people and
goods, and the cessation of hostile propaganda between
the Government and UNITA.
The report of the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros
Boutros-Ghali, on the evolution of the peace process in
Angola since the adoption of resolution 966 (1994)
clearly illustrates the situation as I have described it.
Taking into account the positive developments in the
process, which to some extent allay the concerns of the
Council as expressed in its resolution 966 (1994), my
Government considers that the conditions have been
created for the speedy constitution of a UNAVEM III
with a specific mandate as set forth in the Lusaka
Protocol, including technical, material and human
resources sufficient for it to carry out its mandate. The
creation and rapid deployment of UNAVEM III would be
one of the best ways to avoid the mistakes that were
made at the time of the implementation of the Bicesse
accords, thus avoiding the derailment of the process.
We are aware of the high costs involved in the
deployment of UNAVEM III, but, quoting His Excellency
President José Eduardo dos Santos,
3
Security Council 3499th meeting
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
“these costs will be but a fraction of the cost of a war
and dealing with its victims”.
In this context, my Government wishes to emphasize
the need for the quick deployment of UNAVEM III,
because it alone — as we all know — will bear
responsibility for the quartering, disarming and selection of
UNITA troops that are to be integrated into the unified
national army of Angola and for the demobilization of the
excess military personnel that will be reintegrated into
civilian life after receiving vocational training.
My Government wishes to reaffirm that the Lusaka
Protocol signals the beginning of a decisive step towards
the definitive solution to the Angolan internal conflict, by
establishing a unique opportunity for eliminating completely
the threat of renewed war. At the same time, it has paved
the way for the normal functioning of the democratic
institutions that emerged from the multi-party elections,
which both the United Nations and the international
community declared to be free and fair.
The Lusaka Protocol thus creates prospects for the
exercise of democracy in Angola, a democracy free of
armed parties and one in which the will of the people,
expressed at the ballot box, will be respected. Under such
conditions, the Government of the Republic of Angola will
be in a position to concentrate all its efforts on the social
and economic development and well-being of all the
Angolan people. In order for us to fulfil this aspiration, it
is important that the international community should
continue to play its role in the consolidation of peace and
stability in Angola and discourage all those who plan to act
in a manner contrary to the spirit and the letter of the
Lusaka Protocol.
The Angolan Government believes that this meeting of
the Security Council, with the creation of UNAVEM III,
will open up a new phase, because it will spare the people
of Angola, who yearn for peace, more frustration. As to the
responsibilities of the Government, I wish to reiterate our
determination to make every effort to facilitate the tasks of
UNAVEM III by ensuring safety and providing the
necessary facilities for its work.
Though such an amount is unprecedented in the annals
of the Council's peace-keeping activities, my Government
estimates that the costs of the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol may be as much as $1.26 billion. As we have
previously stated, both here and at the bilateral level with
some of those present here today, that amount would cover
the following expenses: installation of UNAVEM III in
Angola; installation and temporary cantonment of UNITA
military personnel and their families; reconstruction of the
main airfields, railways, ports, roads, bridges, streets and
other infrastructure that will be used by the United
Nations troops — here I wish to state that, according to
studies carried out by my Government through its relevant
Ministries, there are at this time 109 destroyed bridges, a
number not equalled even in the colonial war;
resettlement of displaced persons, of whom there are
approximately 3.5 million in the country, victims of the
war; demobilization of excess military personnel, both of
UNITA and of the Government; social reintegration of
demobilized personnel, including technical vocational
training before reintegration into productive society;
re-establishment of the State administration in areas
previously under the control of UNITA forces, which,
under the provisions of Security Council resolution 864
(1993), will have to pull out of those areas; reconstruction
of the various kinds of infrastructure destroyed during the
war; and Government administration and communications.
Towards the amount I have referred to, and in order
to address the various points I have indicated, the
Government will immediately contribute approximately
$64.7 million in cash. This amount would be allotted as
follows: $15.5 million outlaid from the Government
budget for a residential compound; parking facilities;
harbour space for vessels; harbour and airport
warehouses, including offices; and fuel and fuel
derivatives. This would include a 30 per cent discount on
international prices for incoming goods, exemption from
customs-clearance formalities, the granting of parcels of
land and so on. The disbursement of these amounts by the
Angolan Government will be facilitated if UNITA
completely disengages itself from the mining areas it
occupies in the province of Lunda, where it is illegally
mining diamonds.
Although there is a general climate of peace as far
as military activity is concerned and there is already free
movement of people and goods, the social and
humanitarian situation is still a matter of concern. The
consequences of the war are clearly evident. Other tasks
that we must carry out include reintegration of the excess
UNITA troops to be demobilized, various forms of
assistance to the millions of displaced persons and
refugees who are returning to their places of origin,
reconstruction of basic infrastructure and clearance of
land-mines.
Since this is a far-reaching humanitarian operation
that will include people from UNITA and other political
4
Security Council 3499th meeting
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
parties within the framework of a true national
reconciliation, the international community is urged to play
an important role as part of this operation and not impose
conditions of various kinds. Peace is within our grasp; it is
close. Let us not focus on absurd or contradictory demands
different from positions already taken by the Assembly or
Council.
The mobilization of financial and humanitarian aid is
therefore a sine qua non for us to overcome the challenges
that we face under the present circumstances. In this
context, therefore, I launch an appeal to the international
community and to all governmental and non-governmental
organizations, asking them to continue, even more
vigorously, to lend their support, in all possible forms, to
the Angolan Government, which truly wants a lasting peace
for all Angolans so that conditions may be created for
beneficial cooperation with all Member States with which
the Government of Angola maintains relations.
I also wish to take this opportunity, on behalf of the
Government and the people of Angola, to express our
gratitude for the generous humanitarian assistance that we
have so far received from various Governments, at the
bilateral and multilateral levels, specialized agencies in the
United Nations system and non-governmental organizations.
Our special thanks go to those who have been directly
involved in the distribution of humanitarian aid to the
needy, very often at the risk of their own lives.
Before concluding, I reiterate the deep appreciation of
my Government to my colleagues the Ministers of Foreign
Affairs who, representing, firstly, the Organization of
African Unity and, secondly, their respective Governments,
travelled to New York to express their solidarity with the
people of Angola at this time when it is striving for a well-
deserved and lasting peace. I assure Their Excellencies that
we will do honour to this gesture of solidarity by promising
to do everything in our power to fulfil the commitments we
entered into at Lusaka. I should like to reiterate once again
the deep gratitude of the Government of the Republic of
Angola for the tireless efforts they have made on behalf of
peace and national reconciliation in Angola. I extend our
gratitude also to all those countries that have already
indicated their willingness to contribute men, matériel and
other support to UNAVEM III. We hope that the adoption
at this meeting of the resolution establishing UNAVEM III
will be a step towards the definitive establishment of lasting
peace in Angola.
(spoke in French)
Lastly, we should like to express our concern with
regard to some paragraphs — specifically, paragraphs 6,
8 and 12 — in the draft resolution that is soon to be put
to the Council for adoption. Indeed, this concern was the
reason for our late arrival today. At the appropriate
moment, we shall put forward specific proposals to
improve the text. These will reflect a number of concerns
that we had already submitted for the consideration of the
President of our Republic, who called us this morning to
convey his concern in respect of the paragraphs I
mentioned just now.
The President: I thank the Minister of External
Relations of Angola for his kind words addressed to me.
I should like to inform members that I have received
a letter dated 8 February 1995 from the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations. The
letter reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that during the
meeting of the Security Council devoted to
consideration of the situation in Angola, the Council
extend an invitation, under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure, to His Excellency Dr. Salim
Ahmed Salim, Secretary General of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU).”
This letter will be published as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/1995/123.
If I hear no objection I shall take it that the Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to His
Excellency Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The next speaker is the Minister of External Affairs
of Malawi, His Excellency Mr. E. C. I. Bwanali. I
welcome His Excellency and invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Bwanali (Malawi): Allow me, Sir, to start by
congratulating your country on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of February. My
delegation is particularly pleased to see you in the Chair,
and we are confident that the deliberations of the Council
will be ably and effectively guided and that fruitful results
will be achieved. We wish the representative of your
5
Security Council 3499th meeting
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
country well as he carries out the many tasks that will
come before him during his tenure.
My delegation also wishes to congratulate his
predecessor in office for a marvellous job done during the
month of January.
I have the honour to speak before the Security Council
as leader of a delegation of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) Council of Ministers, made up of Foreign
Ministers from Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia, South
Africa and Zambia and representatives of Senegal and
Guinea-Bissau. In doing so, I should like to declare our full
support for the position of the Angolan Government, as so
clearly set out by its Foreign Minister, Mr. Venâncio de
Moura, on the subject now being considered by the
Council. However, each of the Ministers in my delegation
will be free to address the Security Council individually on
the issue under discussion. I wish also to acknowledge the
presence in our delegation of the representative of the
current Chairman of the OAU, the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Tunisia, who is also a member of our delegation.
We have carefully studied the report of the
Secretary-General to the Council, which provides a very
clear, comprehensive and detailed account of the
developments that have taken place since the initialling of
the Lusaka Protocol on 31 October 1994. We are
particularly encouraged by the Secretary-General's
assessment and conclusions indicating that, despite some
infringements, the cease-fire provided for in the peace
agreement signed on 20 November 1994 is generally being
observed by all parties and that significant progress has
been achieved in the implementation of the Angolan peace
processes.
We concur with the Secretary-General's assessment.
However, it is the view of the OAU Council of Ministers
that these achievements need buttressing if the fragile peace
process in Angola is to be sustained. It is in this context
that my delegation has been mandated to come and convey
to the Security Council Africa's grave concern that, unless
urgent and appropriate measures are taken by the
international community, particularly the United Nations, to
sustain the current momentum, the entire peace process in
Angola could be seriously threatened.
There is an English saying, “once bitten, twice shy”.
And in the case of Angola, this saying, vis-à-vis
international involvement, would seem à propos. Indeed,
we can still recall how, nearly four years ago, when
everything seemed to be going well and peace appeared to
be holding, suddenly the guns came alive and, in a flash,
Angola slid back into a war even more vicious than that
previously experienced.
We can thus appreciate the concerns of those who
urge caution against any increased international
involvement until peace has been firmly established in
Angola. However, we are convinced that the situation is
different this time around and that the Angolan people are
tired of war.
It is now 80 days exactly since the Lusaka Protocol
was signed and 78 since the cease-fire came into effect.
In that period, the Angolan people have demonstrated
their earnest desire for peace, as confirmed by the
generally agreed assessment that, despite minor
infractions, the cease-fire is holding. Meanwhile, the two
parties — the Government of Angola and UNITA —
have continued their efforts to implement the other
aspects of the Lusaka Protocol. For example, the military
commanders have met several times in the context of the
Joint Commission and, as the Foreign Minister of Angola
informed us today, the UNITA leader, Mr. Jonas Savimbi,
has now unconditionally agreed to meet the President of
Angola, Mr. José Eduardo dos Santos.
There is therefore a need for a clear demonstration
of firm international support and solidarity for the people
of Angola as they seek to build and consolidate the peace
based on the Lusaka Protocol. It is for this reason that my
delegation has come to urge the Council to facilitate the
speedy establishment and deployment of the enlarged
United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III), one of the mechanisms provided for in
the Lusaka Protocol. In this connection, we are
encouraged by the apparent consensus amongst members
of the Security Council on the need for the speedy
establishment and deployment of UNAVEM III.
We have taken careful note of the concerns
expressed in the light of past experiences, especially in
respect of UNAVEM I, that we must “do it right this
time”. In this context, reference has been made to
paragraph 32 of the Secretary-General's report. Whilst we
concur fully with the need to do it right this time, it is
our view that the speedy deployment of the mechanisms
provided for in the Lusaka Protocol would serve as a
confidence-builder and encourage the parties concerned to
move forwards even further in implementing the
“Acordos de Paz”. It would also help to secure the
prevailing cease-fire, without which the fragile peace
process in Angola could collapse, with dire consequences.
6
Security Council 3499th meeting
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
It is our conviction, therefore, that the speedy establishment
of UNAVEM III is the best way to ensure that, this time
around, we can “do it right”.
Before concluding, I wish to take this opportunity to
express my delegation's appreciation and gratitude for the
sympathetic understanding and cooperation we have
received from all those with whom we have had the chance
to hold consultations on the matter before this meeting. We
especially appreciate the understanding with which our
particular concerns in respect of the enabling draft
resolution — which the Council will be considering later
today — were received. We believe that this cooperation
has facilitated the presentation to the Council of an enabling
draft resolution which, whilst possessing some difficult
elements here and there, generally takes account of the
concerns of all the parties. It has been our concern that the
enabling resolution should not have so many
conditionalities that it becomes itself an impediment to the
advancement of the peace process. We believe that the draft
resolution before the Council today can be adopted by
consensus and we hope that it will be so adopted.
Members of the Council are called upon to take this
historic decision, one with enormous implications for the
future of political developments in Angola. We believe that
time and circumstances have presented the international
community with a rare opportunity to help bring about
permanent peace in Angola. It is in this respect that the
OAU Council of Ministers decided to send a delegation to
New York.
If this opportunity is allowed to slip away, posterity
will judge us very harshly. We owe it to the present and
future generations of Angolans to do right by them. It is
now all in the hands of the Council.
The President: I thank the Minister of External
Affairs of Malawi for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of India. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Sreenivasan (India): We are pleased to see you,
Sir, presiding over this meeting of the Security Council. It
is fitting and proper that it is under Botswana's presidency
that the Security Council will be approving the
establishment of the enlarged United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM III). This decision will
reflect the international community's continued concern for
and commitment to peace and reconciliation in Angola.
Despite discouraging set-backs in the past, the United
Nations has kept up its patient and persistent engagement
in Angola.
In Angola peace appears to be on the horizon. The
people of Angola seek peace. The cease-fire is generally
holding. There are prospects of a face-to-face meeting
between the President of Angola and Mr. Savimbi.
At this critical time, when we are on the threshold
of peace, it is important that the United Nations should
give a decisive and early push towards a final settlement.
This is the time to give a clear and unequivocal message
to those elements that might still have some doubts or
reservations about the future.
In his report, the Secretary-General has proposed the
phased deployment of troops and other personnel. There
should be adequate flexibility provided in this regard to
ensure that the progressive achievement of the tasks of
UNAVEM III is not delayed. We would also urge the
Security Council to keep the termination date of the
mission sufficiently flexible to ensure the fulfilment of the
objectives of the mission.
We wish to use this opportunity to appeal to His
Excellency Mr. Eduardo dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi for
an early meeting between them. It is our fervent hope that
they will fulfil the expectations of the international
community and the Angolan people and display the
necessary political will to bring about political
reconciliation and trust at all levels to ensure the
establishment of a lasting peace and an end to all
bloodshed in Angola.
India has participated in the United Nations
peace-keeping operations in Angola ever since their
beginning in 1989. In the present phase we have already
deployed 16 military observers. Twenty civilian observers
will be joining them shortly. We have committed an
infantry battalion and an engineering support company for
UNAVEM III. All these units will come fully equipped,
and are ready for deployment. This is a reflection of our
earnest desire to help the international community to
restore peace and normality in a country with which India
has the friendliest of relations.
Besides this contribution of troops, India has an
ongoing bilateral programme of economic and technical
cooperation with Angola.
7
Security Council 3499th meeting
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
India's contribution to UNAVEM III in Angola is part
of the long-term, consistent and principled support that my
country has extended to the cause of peace and security on
the African continent. India has been at the forefront of
United Nations peace-keeping operations, starting with
Congo and including Namibia, Mozambique, Somalia,
Liberia and Rwanda. India has always been in the forefront
of championing African causes of freedom, justice and
economic and social development.
The underlying cause of the recent conflict in Angola
and in other parts of Africa has to be attributed primarily
to the cold war. Fortunately, the cold war is over now.
Durable peace must now be established so that the
underlying problem of inadequate development can be
tackled as a top priority. This is also the surest way of
ensuring the establishment of sustained peace and prosperity
in Angola and elsewhere.
The President: I thank the representative of India for
his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Norway. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Biørn Lian (Norway): Allow me first, Sir, to
congratulate you on your assumption of the office of
President of the Security Council for the month of February
and to thank your predecessor, Ambassador Cárdenas, for
the excellent work he accomplished. I would also like to
extend a warm welcome to the ministerial delegation of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), under the leadership
of the Foreign Minister of Malawi, and to the Foreign
Minister of Angola; we listened to their interventions with
the closest attention.
In 1994 the grave humanitarian situation caused
Angola, together with Rwanda, to be the largest recipient of
Norwegian humanitarian aid. Angola's road to peace has
been long and arduous. After numerous set-backs in the
negotiations, Norway welcomed with satisfaction the
signing of the Lusaka Protocol on 20 November 1994 and
the entry into force of the cease-fire. A significant step had
been taken towards the restoration of lasting peace in
Angola. We congratulate the people of Angola and join
them in their wish to see an end to the human suffering and
the tragic toll that the protracted war has inflicted. The
Lusaka Protocol means that a decisive step has been taken
towards the final resolution of the internal conflict in that
war-torn country.
In this connection, my delegation commends most
sincerely the excellent work accomplished by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Maître
Blondin Beye. Norway believes that a critical factor for
the eventual success of the peace process in Angola is the
creation of conditions that will make the implementation
of the provisions of the Protocol possible. The
establishment of the third United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM III), as suggested in the
report of the Secretary-General, will have a key function
in assisting the Government of Angola and UNITA in
coping with the remaining obstacles and thus in achieving
the all-important goal of national reconciliation and the
restoration of a durable peace in Angola.
Since the operation started, Norway has participated
in UNAVEM with military observers, and I can announce
today that my Government has determined that we should
maintain our contribution within the framework of
UNAVEM III at about the same level. We are pleased
that the Security Council in its draft resolution has
decided on a mandate period of one year, as suggested in
the report. Implementation of the Lusaka Protocol is
already behind the time set in the report, and a shorter
period than one year would seem unrealistic to us.
However, much remains to be done within the
framework of the Peace Accords and the relevant Security
Council resolutions in order to give full effect to the
peace settlement. We note with appreciation the
Secretary-General's observations regarding the respect for
the cease-fire shown by the Government and UNITA,
their commitment to ensuring the safety and security of
United Nations personnel and their commitment to the
Lusaka process and to national reconciliation. We feel
that further concrete confidence-building measures will be
imperative for a successful peace process, and therefore
urge the parties to the Protocol to continue to commit
themselves fully and faithfully to implementing its
provisions and to respect and maintain the cease-fire
throughout the country.
As my Foreign Minister stated in his address to the
General Assembly at its forty-ninth session, Norway
stands ready to support regional processes to encourage
closer cooperation between African nations. In general,
regional organizations should take on more responsibility
for peace-keeping in the future. The presence today of the
ministerial delegation of the OAU sends a positive signal
that we note with great appreciation. It follows from what
I have said that we would welcome a substantial regional
effort in UNAVEM III.
8
Security Council 3499th meeting
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
In a country like Angola, humanitarian action can
serve as a dynamic force for peace. It can help create
momentum towards restoring security and promoting
reconciliation. The number of non-military tasks planned
for UNAVEM III is indeed significant. We support the
priorities set for the United Nations humanitarian
programme: relief assistance, mine clearance,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants,
repatriation of refugees and resettlement of internally
displaced persons.
The operation will be costly. I would like to
emphasize the fundamental importance of a sound financial
basis for UNAVEM III. It is incumbent on all Member
countries to fully meet their responsibilities in this respect.
In a comprehensive peace-keeping operation like
UNAVEM III, the issue of the coordination of the various
elements and activities, be they of a military or a
non-military character, is crucial. We welcome the plan to
establish integrated teams to coordinate day-to-day
functions and to ensure the most efficient use of available
resources. As far as possible, longer term development
assistance to Angola should also be designed and managed
with a particular view to reinforcing the peace process.
As a country passing through a crucial stage in the
process of building democracy, Angola needs the support
and encouragement of the international community. Norway
has played its part in trying to repair the severe damage to
Angola's economic and social fabric. In 1994, Norway
contributed $6.8 million in humanitarian assistance to
Angola. Of these funds, more than $1.3 million was spent
on mine clearance. Mine-clearance programmes in Angola
will be high on our priority list in 1995 also. To date,
$700,000 has been earmarked for a central mine-clearance
school in Luanda. In 1994, most of the Norwegian
humanitarian assistance was channelled through
international and national organizations such as the World
Food Programme, the Red Cross, Norwegian People's Aid,
the United Nations Children's Fund and Church Action for
Angola, as well as through the United Nations Department
of Humanitarian Affairs.
In addition, $2.2 million was given to Angola as long-
term development assistance in 1994. We will continue our
long-term support for the people of Angola; the same level
of assistance is foreseen for 1995.
There is now a real chance that the Angolan peace
process will be crowned with success. The international
community is showing full solidarity with Angola through
the decisions that are being taken today. But this
solidarity can only support the efforts of the Government
of Angola and UNITA, whose will to implement the
peace accords and to engage in genuine reconciliation will
remain decisive.
Let me therefore conclude by expressing the hope
that Angola will continue the successful trend of Namibia,
South Africa and Mozambique in establishing a peaceful
and democratic society.
The President: I thank the representative of Norway
for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the Minister of Foreign Affairs
of Zambia, His Excellency the Honourable Mr. Remmy
K.K. Mushota. I welcome Mr. Mushota and invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Mushota (Zambia): On behalf of my delegation
and of other delegations from the southern African region,
let me extend to you, Sir, our congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of February. It is particularly gratifying to see
you, a son of southern Africa, presiding over the
Council's deliberations on Angola. We wish you well.
My delegation is most grateful to you, Sir, and to
the other members of the Council for giving me the
opportunity to participate in this important meeting, which
has been convened to consider the establishment of a
third United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III).
Since I am addressing this body following the
historic signing on 20 November 1994 of the Lusaka
Protocol on Angola, allow me to convey my
Government's gratitude to the Secretary-General, to the
Security Council and to the United Nations as a whole for
all the efforts that culminated in the signing of the
Angolan peace agreement.
In the same vein, permit me to congratulate
Maître Alioune Blondin Beye, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Angola, who presided over the
Lusaka talks with patience, total commitment and
steadfastness. Our commendations go also to the troika of
official observers from Portugal, the Russian Federation
and the United States of America for their tireless efforts
in ensuring that the Lusaka talks succeeded.
9
Security Council 3499th meeting
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
Above all, I wish to pay a deserved tribute to the
Government of the Republic of Angola and to UNITA for
the mature and statesmanlike manner in which they
conducted themselves during the Lusaka talks and for their
determination to reach a peace agreement.
The Lusaka Protocol was a product of painstaking
efforts by the principal parties to the Angolan conflict and
by a concerned international community. Indeed, it testifies
to the total commitment of the United Nations in general
and the Security Council in particular to the peace process
in Angola.
Since the signing of the Lusaka Protocol, there have
been some positive developments, particularly in the
military and political areas. For example, the meetings of
Chiefs of Staff — on 10 January 1995 at the village of
Chipipa in Huambo Province and on 2 and 3 February 1995
in Waku-Kungo — were an important development towards
the implementation of the peace agreement.
In the humanitarian area too there has been
appreciable improvement. We note with appreciation the
launching by the United Nations of a $213-million inter-
agency appeal fund for Angola to cover humanitarian
activities for 1995.
Equally important has been the series of meetings of
the Joint Commission. The arrival in December last year of
a significant number of the expected 500 observers was a
welcome move on the part of the United Nations, the more
so as it took place within one month of the signing of the
Lusaka Protocol.
The people of Angola, like all the rest of us in the
southern African subregion, are acutely aware that the onus
of establishing lasting peace in that country rests first and
foremost upon the people of Angola themselves, for peace
cannot be imposed from outside Angola. Nevertheless, the
international community has a responsibility to assist the
people of Angola in achieving that lasting peace. As is well
known, peace is indivisible and a key to development
efforts. It is for this reason that the United Nations has
invested heavily in the peace process in that country, for
which those of us from that part of the world are most
grateful to the world body. The Lusaka Protocol is living
testimony to the commitment of the international
community.
In a number of its resolutions, the Security Council is
on record as having committed itself to the implementation
of the peace agreement on Angola. The time has come
therefore to establish UNAVEM III in order to give effect
to that commitment by this body. Indeed, the credibility
of the United Nations and, in particular, that of the
Security Council is at stake. Therefore, nothing should
therefore be allowed to stand in the way of or, indeed,
frustrate the immediate implementation of the agreement,
as stipulated in the Lusaka Protocol.
The Angolan situation should not be treated any
differently from other peace-keeping operations in which
the United Nations has been involved. Yes, peace is an
expensive commodity to achieve or maintain. In view of
its crucial importance, though, it is my delegation's
contention that no price is too high to pay for peace. My
Government is convinced that the United Nations will live
up to its expectations in this regard.
Angola is a country that is potentially rich in natural
resources. Unfortunately, the long, fratricidal war has
taken a heavy toll on its ability to exploit those resources
to the full. The country will come out of its quagmire
only if peace is guaranteed.
An era of peace and tranquillity has dawned in
southern Africa. A new South Africa has been born, to
the joy and jubilation of all the people of the subregion.
Mozambique has emerged from a costly civil war into
full-fledged democracy. Let me take this opportunity to
congratulate the people of Mozambique, under the able
leadership of His Excellency President Chissano, for their
momentous achievement. There cannot, therefore, be any
credible reason why Angola should be an exception to
this new era of peace and stability in our subregion. The
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol is in our view
critical in that it will have the effect of healing a wound
in our subregion that would otherwise fester and promote
reconciliation amongst the people of Angola.
Southern Africa is poised for a period of sustained
development with the establishment of peace in Angola.
Peace for Angola means peace for all of us in the
subregion and, indeed, the African continent as a whole.
It is for this reason that we are looking forward to
assistance from the international community in general
and the Security Council in particular for the people of
Angola in regaining lasting peace through the full
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol on Angola without
any equivocation or procrastination. My Government is
confident that the Council will rise to the occasion by
delivering the goods to the Angolan people and
10
Security Council 3499th meeting
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
humankind as a whole through the immediate deployment
of peace-keeping forces in Angola.
The President: I thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Zambia for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Portugal. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Catarino (Portugal): Mr. President, may I take
this opportunity to welcome your presence here today and
congratulate you on the manner in which Ambassador
Legwaila has been very ably steering the work of the
Council this month. A word of appreciation is also in order
for the excellent work of Ambassador Cárdenas as
President during the month of January, when important
steps were taken towards improving the transparency of the
Council and its links with the rest of the States Members of
the United Nations. For this he has our sincere thanks.
I would like to salute the Ministers of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) delegation, whose presence here
today attests to the importance that organization attaches to
bringing peace to Angola and supporting the work of the
United Nations towards that end.
To His Excellency the Minister of External Relations
of Angola, Mr. Venâncio de Moura, I would like to extend
a very cordial welcome.
Our role in the Angolan peace process is well known
to everyone, and as one of the observer countries, Portugal
played an active part in bringing the Lusaka Protocol into
the light of day. It is the successful end of that very long
and arduous process of negotiations that brings us here
today, as the Security Council authorizes the launching of
a new, enlarged United Nations peace-keeping operation in
Angola.
The success of the Lusaka negotiations is the result of
a number of factors, not least of which is how serious the
Angolan Government and UNITA were about bringing the
fighting in Angola to an end. But the unswerving
persistence, dynamic skills and sheer wisdom of Maître
Alioune Blondin Beye, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, was also — undoubtedly — a key
element in that success. Always supported by the three
observer countries, Maître Beye was able to transform dim
hope into feasible reality. On behalf of my Government,
our most sincere congratulations and appreciation go out to
him.
Another very important factor contributing to the
success of the Lusaka process was the work of the
neighbouring States in demonstrating, through their
solidarity with the Angolan people, that peace was
possible and that it was an objective worth striving for.
The very important contribution of the Government and
the people of Zambia in hosting the negotiations can
never be overestimated.
The Government of Portugal supports the draft
resolution of the Security Council authorizing the
establishment of the third United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM III). The negotiations are
over. It is now time to act. The tasks before UNAVEM
III, in the context of the “Acordos de Paz”, the Lusaka
Protocol and other relevant Security Council resolutions,
have been clearly set out by the Council. Let UNAVEM
III not fail because the international community did not
give it the capacity to fulfil these tasks.
While we understand the rationale behind a phased
deployment of UNAVEM III, we also believe that the
flexibility to deploy additional forces must be retained
and must not be allowed to be held hostage to delays
resulting from disagreements on whether one or another
of the conditions has or has not been met.
The Angolan Government and UNITA must
demonstrate that they understand what the United Nations
and the international community are doing towards
bringing peace to their country. They must show the
necessary will to cooperate in order to bring about a
successful implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and the
completion of the peace process. It is up to them to bring
peace to Angola.
But we must proceed with caution in establishing
conditions to be met before UNAVEM III can move on
to its next phase. By giving the parties the opportunity to
challenge whether those conditions have been fulfilled, we
are not only allowing for delays in the deployment of
additional personnel but also threatening to derail the
peace process itself.
Above all, UNAVEM III needs to be given a clear
mandate and the necessary means to achieve it. In
keeping with its constant support for the peace process in
Angola, Portugal stands ready to participate fully in that
peace-keeping operation. We will be ready to send
support units as well as military and civilian police
observers, and to participate in the force's command
11
Security Council 3499th meeting
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
structure. We appeal to the international community to
support UNAVEM III in any way it can.
We have all travelled a long way to see peace come
to Angola, but none more so than the people of that
country, who deserve a chance to live a life different from
one ravaged by war. The Security Council has taken a very
important step towards peace in Angola. Let it be a firm
and decisive one.
The President: I thank the representative of Portugal
for his kind words addressed to me and to my countryman
Ambassador Legwaila.
The next speaker is the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Lesotho, His Excellency Mr. Molapo Qhobela. I welcome
His Excellency and invite him to take a place at the
Council table and make his statement.
Mr. Qhobela (Lesotho): At the outset, let me
congratulate Botswana most warmly upon its assumption of
the presidency of the United Nations Security Council for
the month of February. Given his well-known and tested
leadership qualities and his diplomatic skills and rich
experience, we have full confidence that your country's
Ambassador will guide the work of the Council to a
successful conclusion during his tenure of office. He can
therefore count on my delegation's full support and
cooperation in the discharge of his onerous international
functions.
Last month's President, His Excellency Mr. Cárdenas,
Permanent Representative of Argentina to the United
Nations, discharged his duties and responsibilities with
diligence, and therefore deserves commendation.
The Kingdom of Lesotho subscribes fully to the
statement made by the Foreign Minister of the Republic of
Malawi on behalf of the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU). However, we wish
to offer a few observations and views of our own.
It is an honour for me, on behalf of the Government
and people of Lesotho, to take this opportunity to address
this body on an issue that remains of great concern to us in
the southern African subregion and the African continent at
large. It is of concern to us not only because it threatens the
very foundations of democracy but because it again touches
on the fundamental principle of the right of humanity to
life.
When the Government of Angola and UNITA signed
the Bicesse Agreement on 31 May 1991 in Portugal, the
whole world, particularly Africa, commended the event,
which — it was thought — could bring to the Angolan
people the peace, national reconciliation and democracy
they had long desired. The Angolan people, in turn,
demonstrated their acceptance of the objectives of that
Agreement by participating enthusiastically and in an
orderly manner in the legislative and presidential elections
of 29 and 30 September 1992, considered free and fair by
the international community. Unfortunately, the refusal by
UNITA to accept the electoral verdict and the
simultaneous launching of armed actions by UNITA
marked yet another cruel chapter in the history of that
country.
We welcomed the signing of the Lusaka Protocol on
20 November 1994. This was the product of lengthy
negotiations, which culminated in the agreement for a
cease-fire in Angola. We welcome this move, and wish to
express our hope that it will usher in a new era of peace,
national reconciliation and reconstruction in Angola, and
also contribute to the necessary climate for development
in the entire southern African subregion.
My delegation wishes to pay tribute to the Special
Representative of the United Nations Secretary-General in
Angola, Mr. Beye, for the patient and skilful manner in
which he discharged his mandate. We also wish to
commend President Chiluba of the Republic of Zambia
for the role he played in facilitating, and by being host to
the negotiations that led to, the signing of the Lusaka
Protocol.
Our task here today as emissaries of the OAU
Council of Ministers is to highlight the need for the
United Nations to support and consolidate the peace
process in Angola by prompt deployment of the third
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM
III) to ensure the implementation of the peace process and
to act as a deterrent against any possible violations of the
cease-fire that might result in a degeneration in the
present situation.
Already, some African States, like Zambia and
Zimbabwe, have declared their preparedness to participate
significantly in the peace-keeping effort by contributing
troops under UNAVEM III. We are informed that the
Republic of South Africa has offered to assist in the
clearing of land-mines under the umbrella of the United
Nations. It is in this regard that we would appeal for
12
Security Council 3499th meeting
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
these countries to be provided with the required logistical
support through UNAVEM III.
We wish at this stage to underscore the commitment
of the Angolan Government to reaching a peaceful and
negotiated settlement and to complying with the letter and
spirit of the Lusaka Protocol. Not only did the Lusaka
Protocol mark the beginning of a critical stage towards the
final resolution of the internal conflict in Angola, it also
reaffirmed the conviction of the Angolan Government that
there was no military solution to the post-electoral crisis in
that country. In this regard, the Kingdom of Lesotho hails
the Angolan Parliament for having passed a law granting
amnesty for crimes committed against the State's internal
security establishments, and other offences related thereto
committed in the context of the post-electoral military
conflict.
The humanitarian situation in Angola is desperate. A
large part of Angola has been sapped of its vitality and
bears the deep scars of years of war. Southern Africa, and
Africa in general, would appeal to the international
community to assist Angola with humanitarian aid and
technical and financial support in order to ensure that the
demobilized soldiers, displaced persons and refugees are
socially reintegrated and that the programme of national
reconstruction is implemented.
At this juncture, I should like to refer to the draft
resolution. It is our considered opinion that time is of the
essence in UNAVEM III's being implemented. It would
indeed be a pity if we missed the boat and had to prolong
the suffering of the Angolan people. We are further of the
opinion that many conditions set in the draft resolution tie
the hands of the Secretary-General in effectively and
efficiently implementing the mandate of UNAVEM III.
In concluding my few remarks, I wish to reaffirm the
solidarity of Lesotho and Africa with the people of Angola
as they forge ahead to enter the next millennium as a
citadel of peace and democratic stability. We hope that this
body will in its wisdom find it necessary to react speedily
to Africa's plea so that the brotherly people of Angola can
enjoy peace and prosperity in the years ahead.
The President: I thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Lesotho for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Spain. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Yañez-Barnuevo (Spain) (interpretation from
Spanish): Allow me first to convey the satisfaction of the
Spanish delegation at seeing you, Sir, preside over the
Security Council for the month of February. We are
aware of the symbolism of the Council's being presided
over at this meeting by an African country, a neighbour
of Angola. I am certain that your proven diplomatic
qualities will ensure the success and wise conduct of the
Council's work.
We also wish to congratulate Ambassador Cárdenas,
and the Argentine delegation as a whole, for the very
competent and effective manner in which he led the
Council in January.
Spain, which during its recent membership of the
Security Council worked with other members to make a
positive contribution to the Angolan peace process, wishes
on this occasion to join the other States Members of the
United Nations in welcoming the establishment of a new
peace-keeping operation, expanding the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM II) to become
UNAVEM III. This marks a new phase of the United
Nations presence in Angola, one which we hope will be
the final stage of a long peace process. This decisive
stage has been reached on the basis of the signing of the
Lusaka Protocol on 20 November 1994 between the
Government of Angola and UNITA, which was
accomplished with the assistance of the United Nations
through the efforts of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Mr. Blondin Beye, the observer States and
States of the region.
My delegation welcomes the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Angola, Mr. Venâncio de Moura, whose
presence underscores the firm political will of his
Government to comply with the commitments undertaken
in the “Acordos de Paz” and the Lusaka Protocol and to
ensure that these commitments are strengthened through
a significant United Nations presence in the country
throughout the period of implementation.
The decision of the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity to send a ministerial
delegation to New York to attend this debate
demonstrates the keen interest of the African continent in
ensuring that the national reconciliation efforts of the
Angolan parties are accompanied by a firm commitment
by the international community. We are pleased to note
the significant attendance by Foreign Ministers and the
depth of today's debate, which demonstrate great support
13
Security Council 3499th meeting
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
for the establishment of UNAVEM III and its rapid
deployment.
Spain, which has close ties of friendship and
cooperation with Angola, joins in the expression of good
wishes and active support, and is confident that the draft
resolution before the Council will be adopted unanimously.
We wish to emphasize the importance of the rapid
deployment of UNAVEM III in order to consolidate the
progress achieved in the peace process and to implement
the Lusaka Protocol. We understand that the provisions of
the draft resolution relating to the effective deployment of
the components of UNAVEM III are intended to ensure
that this will occur in the best possible conditions and with
the firm support and cooperation of the parties. We trust
that the Secretary-General will soon be able to inform the
Council that these requirements have been met.
We are all aware that the decision which the Security
Council intends to adopt today marks the beginning of the
final stage of the peace process in Angola, which may yet
encounter certain difficulties. We are convinced that the
commitment of the parties and the support of the
international community will make it possible to overcome
any obstacles, which we hope will prove to be minor, as
reconciliation allows any lingering suspicions or mistrust to
be set aside. A meeting between the President of Angola
and the President of UNITA would represent a very
important step in the right direction.
The series of important gestures made by both the
Government and UNITA to date — among which we stress
the smooth establishment of the Joint Commission in
Luanda, the two meetings held by the Chiefs of Staff of the
Angolan Armed Forces and UNITA, and the agreements
reached between them — are encouraging signs which
should help us to appreciate the will of the parties to fulfil
their respective commitments to the cause of peace, so
widely desired.
As the Spanish poet Antonio Machado said: “In
walking, we have no path before us; it is in walking that
the trail is blazed”. We believe that the parties resumed
their journey along that path by signing the Lusaka
Protocol. The international community is at their side and
encourages them through the draft resolution which the
Council is about to adopt.
It is Spain's earnest hope that the people of Angola,
who have endured the devastating consequences of a bloody
civil war, will be able to begin to build on the foundations
of reconciliation and reconstruction of the country, with
the assistance of the international community and the
United Nations. Angola is thus already participating in the
mainstream of democratization and progress which
pervades all of southern Africa and leads it towards a
better future.
The President: I thank the representative of Spain
for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of the
Netherlands. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Biegman (Netherlands): First, Sir, I should like
to offer you my sincere congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council.
The presence in our midst of many illustrious
visitors — the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity, as well as no fewer than 11 Foreign
Ministers of African States — is a reflection of the fact
that this is a momentous occasion. More than two years
after the first United Nations attempt to bring peace to
Angola failed, the guns are largely silent and we find
ourselves on the eve of a new, large-scale peacekeeping
operation. After 34 years of suffering, of the gruesome
ordeal of the struggle for independence, followed by
relentless civil strife, there is hope again for the Angolan
people.
My country has a long-standing relationship with
Angola in the field of development cooperation and
humanitarian assistance, and we have therefore witnessed
with particular interest the long and difficult road both
parties have walked to finally arrive at the Lusaka
Protocol. We were extremely pleased when, on
20 November last year, the Protocol was finally signed.
We commend the role that the Secretary-General, the
three observer States, Zambia, as host country of the
negotiations, and several other African States have played
in this respect. Most of all we pay tribute to the special
representative of the Secretary-General, Maître Beye,
who, apart from being a professional optimist, seems to
have endless patience and perseverance.
Of even greater importance is the fact that the cease-
fire, concluded shortly after the signing of the Protocol,
is holding, since agreements and cease-fires have been
concluded before in Angola, but did not last. The draft
resolution before us bears witness to the fact that the
international community has learned from previous
14
Security Council 3499th meeting
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
experience and is not naive any more about stated good
intentions by warring parties; it contains numerous
conditions for the deployment and continuation of activities
of the various components of a third United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM III), which are all linked
to the need for the parties to show good faith and the
necessary political will by effectively implementing the
commitments which they themselves have undertaken. The
Netherlands Government therefore urges the parties not to
allow any further delays, but scrupulously to comply with
the time-table envisaged in the Lusaka Protocol. On the
other hand, in order to avoid a dangerous vacuum, the
timely deployment of the peace-keeping forces — once the
conditions listed in the Secretary-General's report are
met — cannot be overemphasized.
In order to facilitate the peace process, an early
meeting between President dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi is,
in our view, crucial, and we call upon both leaders to make
every effort to realize such a meeting at their earliest
convenience.
It goes without saying that my Government
wholeheartedly supports the decision the Security Council
is about to take to establish UNAVEM III. Netherlands
military and police observers have served in UNAVEM II,
even during the fiercest hostilities, and will continue to
serve in UNAVEM III. We fully share the importance
attached in the draft resolution to the speedy establishment
of a comprehensive mine-clearance programme in Angola.
Among all the activities UNAVEM III is expected to carry
out, mine-clearance is of the utmost importance, as the
continuous presence of mines could greatly hamper the
implementation of other elements of the “Acordos de Paz”
and the Lusaka Protocol.
In 1994 my country contributed 10 million
Netherlands guilders — roughly $6 million — for
humanitarian assistance to the people of Angola. We
express the sincere hope that, through the efforts of both
the Angolan parties and UNAVEM III, our future assistance
and cooperation will not have to be limited to emergency
and humanitarian aid only, but our humanitarian assistance
to Angola will be continued in 1995.
Let me finally express the hope that on the road to
peace and national reconciliation all sides will be guided by
statesmanship, wisdom and above all generosity towards
their former adversaries. UNAVEM III will be there to
help, but it is ultimately for the Angolans themselves to
realize our common dream of a unified, peaceful,
democratic and prosperous Angola, where good governance,
multi-party democracy, power-sharing and respect for
human rights prevail. Let peace not become elusive once
more. The Angolan people deserve better — and much
better — than that.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Netherlands for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the Minister of State for African
Affairs of Tunisia, His Excellency Mr. Sadok Fayala,
whom I welcome. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr Fayala (Tunisia) (interpretation from French):
It is a great pleasure for me to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the current month. We wish you every success in the
performance of your noble duties. I also congratulate your
predecessor, the Ambassador of the Argentine Republic,
on his excellent work last month.
I wish to tell you first, Mr. President, of the great
interest that President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, current
Chairman of the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
takes in a final settlement of the conflict in Angola, and
of the OAU's determination to spare no effort, in
collaboration with the Security Council, to maintain and
consolidate peace in Angola and in Africa as a whole.
I should also like to take the opportunity provided
by my participation in this debate to congratulate the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Angola, Maître Alioune Blondin Beye, the countries
making up the troika of observers — the United States of
America, the Russian Federation and Portugal — and the
countries of southern Africa, particularly Zambia, for the
commendable efforts they have all made to promote a
settlement of the Angolan conflict.
The signing of the Lusaka Protocol and the
declaration of a cease-fire between the two parties were
crucial stages on the way to achieving a lasting peace in
Angola. The United Nations can rightly be regarded as
the architect of the peace process now going on in that
country. It sponsored the process from start to finish and
did everything necessary to ensure its success. What has
been achieved so far by the efforts of the United Nations,
the OAU, the members of the troika and all the countries
of the region guarantees that the Lusaka Protocol will
continue to be implemented on a solid foundation.
15
Security Council 3499th meeting
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
Furthermore, the setting up of a Joint Commission to
supervise the implementation of the peace accords will
ensure that any difficulties will be overcome that may stand
in the way of a final settlement of the Angolan conflict. In
this context, the prompt deployment of the new United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) would
certainly speed up the implementation of the Protocol, in
response to the expectations of the Security Council and the
international community as a whole. Likewise, the
supervision and verification of the disengagement of forces,
the monitoring and observance of the cease-fire, and the
verification of the withdrawal, quartering and
demobilization of troops are tasks that only the United
Nations can perform and which are vital if the peace
process is to be propelled forwards.
The Angolan people expect the Security Council to
continue to provide assistance until peace is restored in
their country, which, for 19 years now, has been ravaged by
a fratricidal war that has caused enormous losses and great
suffering. The Government of Angola and the leaders of
UNITA, both during and after the signing of the Lusaka
agreement, have made their willingness to further the peace
process clear. Further cause for satisfaction is the fact that
the cease-fire has been respected and that the parties have
committed themselves to ensuring the safety of United
Nations personnel. These are sufficient conditions for the
rapid deployment of UNAVEM III.
Moreover, the readiness of the President of the
Republic of Angola and the Head of UNITA to meet in the
near future and the offer by the Angolan Government to
provide logistic support to the UNAVEM forces provide
additional assurances that the United Nations operation will
be launched under very favourable circumstances.
The consolidation of peace in Angola is a priority
matter that requires cooperation from us all. The
reconstruction of the country, the repatriation of refugees,
the return of displaced persons, the de-mining operations
and the reintegration into civilian life of demobilized troops
are major challenges that call out for more assistance from
the international community.
We welcome the Secretary-General's arrangements for
the humanitarian relief programme that the United Nations,
in cooperation with the specialized agencies, intends to
implement at the present stage of the peace process. The
role of UNAVEM III is crucial in this context as it will
enable relief to be delivered to the needy and will
strengthen coordination between the various humanitarian
activities.
The Council of Ministers of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), at its sixty-first regular session in
Addis Ababa — from 23 to 27 January 1995 —
reaffirmed its total support for the peace process under
way in Angola on the basis of the “Acordos de Paz” and
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council. In order
to ensure the success of this process, the Council of the
OAU dispatched the African ministerial delegation that is
present here today, to ask the Security Council to
authorize the establishment of UNAVEM III and the rapid
deployment of troops.
The presence of the ministerial delegation also
provides an opportunity to reaffirm the OAU's desire to
continue and to strengthen its cooperation with the United
Nations, particularly in the area of preventive diplomacy,
through the OAU's central mechanism for the prevention,
management and settlement of conflicts in Africa. This
cooperation has proved very useful in a number of
situations, and the case of Angola once again provides us
today with an opportunity to observe a successful peace-
keeping operation conducted by the United Nations with
the participation of the African countries.
We hope that the Security Council will adopt a
resolution commensurate with the expectations of the
Angolan people, that will be equal to the task of
consolidating peace throughout southern Africa — and
throughout Africa as a whole — so that Africa can
embark irreversibly on the process of development.
The President: I thank the Minister of State for
African Affairs of Tunisia for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Brazil. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Valle (Brazil): Mr. President, as my delegation
warmly welcomes your presence here today, I
congratulate Ambassador Legwaila on his assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February. We are fully confident that under his wise and
skilled leadership the work of the Security Council will
be conducted in a highly effective way. He can count on
the full support and cooperation of the Brazilian
delegation. I also wish to take this opportunity to thank
his predecessor, Ambassador Emilio Cárdenas, and his
very competent staff for the manner in which they
conducted the business of the Council during the month
of January. I again express appreciation for the important
16
Security Council 3499th meeting
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
steps taken with regard to transparency, a trend that, we are
pleased to see, has also become a concern of the current
presidency.
Again, we are pleased to extend our warmest welcome
to His Excellency Mr. Venâncio de Moura, Minister of
External Relations of Angola. We would like to thank him
for the comprehensive statement he has just made. His
insights into the situation in his country and his analysis of
the next steps to be taken in the political, military,
humanitarian and economic fields are an indication of the
magnitude of the tasks to be accomplished in the pursuit of
lasting peace and stability in Angola. As in previous
statements he has made at the Security Council over the
last few years, his words stand for his Government's
unequivocal commitment to working with the international
community for the attainment of the objectives of peace
and national reconciliation in his country.
I also wish to express my Government's recognition of
President José Eduardo dos Santos' unfailing and constant
adherence to the cause of peace. His leadership and
political wisdom have been vital in the process that has led
to the signing of the Bicesse Accords and the Lusaka
Protocol.
Allow me also to express the great honour we feel at
participating in this important session in the presence of the
ministerial delegation from the Organization of African
Unity led by His Excellency the Honourable Mr. E. C. I.
Bwanali, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Malawi.
The presence of so many dignitaries from African
countries signifies Africa's firm support for and solidarity
with the Government and people of Angola at a time when
a major decision is to be taken at this Council on the next
stages of the protracted Angolan peace process. The
decision taken at the recent meeting of the OAU Council of
Ministers in Addis Ababa clearly reflects that organization's
resolve to participate actively in matters pertaining to peace
and stability in Africa.
These are indeed momentous times for the history of
Angola. Through the various phases of the prolonged
Angolan conflict we have managed to arrive at the
threshold of its final solution. After many years of conflict,
Angolans can finally expect to experience living in peace,
cherishing the moment that their country will be free of
war, fear and insecurity.
We very much welcome the decision to be taken today
to establish a new peace-keeping mission — UNAVEM
III — aimed at assisting Angolans in restoring peace and
achieving national reconciliation on the basis of the
Bicesse Accords and the recently signed Lusaka Protocol.
This is a decisive step by the international community in
the quest for lasting peace and stability in Angola.
The deployment of 7,000 military personnel — in
addition to the 610 military and police observers — with
an initial mandate of 18 months is a decision that
constitutes a critical turning point in the Angolan peace
process. The objectives and mandate of UNAVEM III are
neither easy nor simple. They will involve activities in the
political, military, police, humanitarian and electoral
fields. It is worth mentioning that this is the first new
peace-keeping operation the United Nations has set up in
Africa since the successful conclusion of the peace
process in Mozambique and the peaceful transition in
South Africa.
Under the Lusaka Protocol, the United Nations
troops are called upon to perform a series of vital tasks.
These range from monitoring and verification activities to
controlling quartering areas, ensuring that armed elements
remain separate during the demobilization process, and
collecting weapons.
At this point in the peace process, not a moment
should be lost in the deployment of UNAVEM III's
infantry units. In his report, the Secretary-General quite
rightly stated — and the Council in its wisdom has
concurred with him — that United Nations infantry units
should be deployed promptly in Angola. A step in the
right direction was authorizing the immediate dispatch of
the planning and support elements needed to prepare that
deployment and the subsequent deployment of additional
elements for the establishment of operational quartering
areas for UNITA forces. This reflects the international
community's clear support for the peace process and
makes a concrete contribution to creating the necessary
circumstances under which the infantry units will be
better able to discharge their mandate.
The momentum reached with the signing of the
Lusaka Protocol, followed by the positive initiatives
leading to the creation of a basis for mutual understanding
and trust, must be fully maintained. Fortunately, the
international community is doing its part with the
establishment of a sizeable peace-keeping operation and
by granting it the flexibility it needs to achieve results
within a reasonable time without imposing undue
preconditions or an overburdened timetable for results.
17
Security Council 3499th meeting
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
To accomplish the complex task before it, the
Organization can profit and learn from the experience
acquired in the recently and successfully concluded
operation in Mozambique. That operation clearly shows
that, to be effective, peace-keeping operations must be
adequately staffed and equipped and that unnecessary
delays in their deployment should be avoided at all costs.
Brazil has always supported a peaceful solution to the
conflict in Angola. Our ties with that sister country have
deep historical and cultural roots. In accordance with this
position, the Brazilian Government is ready to accept an
invitation to become a major contributor to the Angolan
peace process at this crucial juncture. At this moment, we
are in a position to take the necessary internal measures to
send a full infantry battalion, an engineering company and
two medical units to Angola without delay.
These are times for hope and optimism. Peace in
Angola will constitute yet another major achievement
within the process that began in South Africa and that has
just been completed in Mozambique — a process we expect
to be extended to other countries in the continent. Now it
is the time to begin the task of reconstructing the country
so that the immense potential with which Angola has been
endowed can be used to further the cause of the
development and welfare of its brave people.
The President: I thank the representative of Brazil for
the kind words he addressed to my countryman,
Ambassador Legwaila.
The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Namibia, His Excellency Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab. I welcome
Mr. Gurirab and invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Gurirab (Namibia): Let me at the outset, albeit
belatedly, extend my best wishes to one and all for a
splendid new year and share with you my own dream for
a world completely at peace, with prosperity for all. This
ought to be our common yearning: that 1995, the United
Nations Year for Tolerance, will usher in a change for the
better in old habits and in the ways we have been doing
things up till now.
Allow me, Sir, to congratulate your country on its
assumption the presidency of the Security Council for this
month, a month when, by happy coincidence, the question
of Angola is being discussed. You, Sir, will no doubt be
playing a crucial role in helping find a lasting solution to
the Angolan conflict. As the leader of the Southern African
Development Community, Botswana is well placed to
bring its accumulated wisdom and diplomatic excellence
to bear upon the deliberations of the Council. We in
Namibia have strong sentiments towards you personally,
towards your Ambassador to the United Nations, and
towards your great country, whose history and destiny are
so closely tied up with Namibia's own fortunes and fate.
You can always count on my support and on the
cooperation of my delegation.
I wish also to congratulate your predecessor, His
Excellency Ambassador Cárdenas of Argentina, on having
successfully presided over the Council in January.
My thanks go also to the indefatigable and
imaginative Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-
Ghali, for his hard work, and especially for his excellent
report (S/1995/97 and Add.1), which provides useful
information on the situation in Angola and details for the
deployment of a third United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM III). In the same vein, I would like
to commend my brother and colleague, Maître Alioune
Blondin Beye, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for the patience, perseverance and diplomatic
skill he displayed during the protracted negotiations that
culminated in the Lusaka Protocol.
The signing of the Lusaka Protocol was a significant
victory and a breakthrough for us all, especially for the
Angolan people, who have for so long been yearning for
peace and normalcy in their lives.
President Chiluba of Zambia was a sage adviser and
a lightning-rod behind the scenes, encouraging, cajoling
and inspiring the negotiators — and not least the observer
delegations too — to turn set-backs and frustrations in the
negotiations into challenges and opportunities on the basis
of the step-by-step consensus-building that eventually
produced the expected result. The Government and the
people of Zambia wholeheartedly gave President Chiluba
the support he needed to carry on with this noble task.
We salute President Chiluba for his critical role, and we
express gratitude to his people for their generosity and
their commitment to helping their Angolan neighbours to
end the human tragedy in their country.
As Angola's neighbour, Namibia has a strong, direct
interest in finding a lasting solution to the conflict in that
sister country. In our continued search for peace in
Angola, the President of the Republic of Namibia, His
Excellency Mr. Sam Nujoma, accompanied by me and
other senior Government Ministers, visited Angola on
18
Security Council 3499th meeting
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
3 February 1995 for discussions with His Excellency
President José Eduardo dos Santos and his Ministers. We
left Angola fortified in the knowledge that the Angolan
Government is interested in a lasting peace in that country.
Namibia is seriously considering making a meaningful
contribution to the peace process in Angola, including the
implementation of UNAVEM III.
We have made repeated offers for similar
consultations with the leadership of UNITA and have
invited Mr. Jonas Savimbi to come to Namibia for
discussions. Neither we nor others in the region have been
successful so far in this regard. I wish to take this
opportunity to renew our invitation to Mr. Savimbi to visit
Namibia and to find a way to turn a new page and be able
to interact with other African leaders, in the interest of
peace, stability and regional cooperation.
Africa has repeatedly expressed appreciation to the
members of the Security Council and other United Nations
Member States, in particular the troika — Portugal, the
Russian Federation and the United States of America — for
the pivotal role they have played in the Angolan conflict.
That conflict has been long and difficult, but the United
Nations did not abandon its mission or leave the Angolan
people to their own fate. As the Council embarks on the
larger mission of the deployment of UNAVEM III, it is the
view of the Government of Namibia that the Secretary-
General should be allowed sufficient latitude and flexibility
to be able to carry out the mandate entrusted to him
effectively.
What this means is that the United Nations and, in
particular, the Security Council should adopt uniform
standards and approaches in situations of conflict and
peacemaking that involve the Organization. International
peace-keeping and regional conflict management and
resolution are laudable undertakings that require effective
coordination and generous funding by the entire
international community.
The Organization of African Unity (OAU) Council of
Ministers, at its sixty-first session, held in Addis Ababa,
decided, inter alia, to send a high-powered delegation of
several African Foreign Ministers, together with Mr. Salim
Ahmed Salim, our able and dedicated Secretary-General, to
take part in this important debate. We are here to join
hands with the members of the Council and the Secretary-
General to speed up the deployment of UNAVEM III in
Angola so that there is no delay. Its deployment will serve
both as an effective deterrent to likely violations of the
cease-fire and as a concrete confidence-building measure in
the eyes of the Angolan people themselves. The Angolan
Government and UNITA have made a commitment to
peace and reconciliation, starting with the cease-fire
which, while so far satisfactory, still remains susceptible
to threats or actual violations, whether deliberate or
accidental.
We can now clearly see the light at the end of the
tunnel. It is high time cooperation and brotherhood
replaced blood-letting and enmity in Angola.
Namibia welcomes the ongoing meetings between
the Chiefs of Staff of the Angolan Armed Forces and
UNITA as positive steps. Such high-level meetings will
strengthen the cease-fire before and after the deployment
of UNAVEM III and will help create the necessary
confidence-building measures. In this context, the face-to-
face meeting between President dos Santos and Mr.
Savimbi, which we hope will take place soon, will usher
in a new phase in Angola and further strengthen the
transition from war to peace.
The draft resolution before the Council seeks
specifically to authorize the creation and early deployment
of UNAVEM III in Angola in accordance with the
Lusaka Protocol, and this is what the OAU Ministerial
delegation has come here to support. In this context, I
wish to place on record my commendation to the
chairman of the OAU ministerial delegation, the Foreign
Minister of Malawi, my colleague and brother the
Honourable Mr. Bwanali, for his sterling leadership of
this mission, and also to say to my other colleagues that
our working together to serve Africa in this case is an
example that our continent should emulate in other
conflict situations in Africa. It goes without saying that
Namibia also shares the concerns and preoccupations
which the Foreign Minister of Angola, my good friend
and colleague Mr. Venâncio de Moura, expressed in his
important statement. It is my sincere hope and expectation
that the collective wisdom of the Council will help
overcome those concerns.
On 15 July 1993, I addressed the Council on the
issue of Angola. I implored the international community
to consider providing massive assistance for the
reconstruction of Angola. In his current report, the
Secretary-General states that Angola is reported to be the
most land-mine-infested country in the world. It is
estimated that in Angola there are between 9 and 15
million land-mines and pieces of unexploded ordnance
that have been broadcast throughout the country over the
three decades of conflict.
19
Security Council 3499th meeting
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
I also pointed out then that the successive reports of
the Secretary-General had revealed massive destruction of
cities, economic infrastructure, public utilities, hospitals and
schools. What was true in 1993 is even truer after two more
years of war.
I wish once again to appeal to the international
community for generous assistance for the reconstruction of
Angola. Non-governmental organizations will have an
important role to play in providing humanitarian assistance
to the Angolan people. In 1993 I made an appeal for a
pledging conference for the reconstruction of Angola to be
considered. I reiterate that appeal today. In this regard, I
welcome the initiative of the Department of Humanitarian
Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat, which has already
issued an appeal for the clearing of land-mines — a
necessary condition for the resettlement of the displaced
population and for normalization of their lives.
Lastly, successful reconstruction of Angola will be the
surest and most secure way of guaranteeing peace and
reconciliation in Angola, as well as accelerating the
Southern African Development Community's objectives of
regional integration, trade, reconstruction and development.
The President: I thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Namibia for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
South Africa, His Excellency Mr. Alfred Nzo, whom I
welcome. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Nzo (South Africa): It is indeed an honour for me
to participate in these proceedings today as South Africa's
representative on a delegation of the Organization of
African Unity. Since an African issue is being considered
today, it is particularly appropriate that the Security
Council's work is being guided this month by a fellow
African Member State, the Republic of Botswana.
I wish at the outset to associate myself with the
statement made by the Foreign Minister of Malawi on
behalf of the ministerial delegation of the Organization of
African Unity. It needs to be emphasized that a peaceful
settlement of the Angolan civil conflict is not only essential
for the people of Angola themselves, but also of major
importance to political stability and economic development
in southern Africa as a whole.
For these reasons, the South African Government
welcomed the signing of the Lusaka Protocol on
20 November 1994 by the Angolan Government and
UNITA. The South African Government has also
subsequently noted with satisfaction the first steps that
have been taken in the implementation of the accord. We
are pleased to note that the cease-fire is generally
respected. The United Nations Secretary-General's Special
Representative for Angola, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye,
has played a pivotal role in this process and deserves
great credit for his dedication and perseverance. States in
the region played an important role in the process —
particularly Zambia, which hosted protracted negotiations.
I also wish to refer to the substantial role that has been
played by the observer States — the troika of Portugal,
the Russian Federation and the United States of America.
Yet it is the Angolan Government and UNITA that
deserve our particular congratulations on reaching an
agreement to end the civil conflict. We must accept that
the durability of the peace process in Angola is largely
dependent on the political will of the Angolan people
themselves. In this respect, we are encouraged by the
prospects of a meeting between President dos Santos and
Mr. Savimbi. This meeting will no doubt further enhance
the peace process.
The South African Government is of the opinion that
the people of Angola need not only the encouragement
but also the concrete support of the region and the
international community at this decisive stage of their
history. In this regard, a crucial aspect in the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol is the role of the
United Nations in Angola. The South African Government
believes that an effective United Nations presence is
needed on the ground, together with a realistic and
adequate mandate. It is therefore essential that such a
United Nations force be established and deployed without
delay.
Members of the Council are aware that our presence
here today follows from the meeting of the Council of
Ministers of the Organization of African Unity in Addis
Ababa from 23 to 27 January. The Council of Ministers
requested that the Security Council should decide today
to establish the third United Nations Verification Mission
in Angola (UNAVEM III) as well as on an early
deployment of its forces. As a member of the delegation
of the Organization of African Unity here today, I wish
to emphasize my Government's support for this position.
The Angolan peace process has entered a crucial phase;
it urgently needs to be consolidated and strengthened.
Only an expanded United Nations force with a broadened
mandate will be able to bring the necessary support to
20
Security Council 3499th meeting
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
bear on a process which remains fragile. The South African
Government therefore agrees with the recommendations
contained in the most recent report of the Secretary-General
on UNAVEM II, especially the recommendation that a new
United Nations operation, with the mandate and strength
described in the report, should immediately take over from
UNAVEM II. We are therefore pleased that these
recommendations are embodied in the draft resolution to be
adopted today.
Let me conclude by saying that such an expanded
United Nations presence will be able to count on the
practical support of the South African Government, which
in principle remains prepared to play a role when called
upon to do so.
The President: I thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of South Africa for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Algeria. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Lamamra (Algeria) (interpretation from French):
I begin, Sir, by expressing the warm congratulations of the
Algerian delegation on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council. Your professional and human
qualities guarantee the success of the Council's work at a
time when the international community is preparing to mark
further significant progress in the southern part of the
African continent — which includes your country,
Botswana — in the establishment of peace and stability
which Namibia, South Africa and Mozambique have
embraced one after the other, to general satisfaction.
I wish to convey my profound gratitude to your
predecessor, Ambassador Cárdenas, for the effective way in
which he led the Council last month.
The recent meeting of the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity fully appreciated the
significance and scope of the Lusaka Protocol of
20 November 1994 and the promising prospects thus
opened up for the restoration of peace, stability and security
in Angola. In dispatching a strong delegation comprising
several Foreign Ministers and the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity to participate in this debate,
Africa has committed itself as a whole to the success of the
process of national reconciliation in Angola and to the strict
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, with the invaluable
assistance of the United Nations. Moreover, the very
signing of the Lusaka Protocol was the result of efforts,
including those of the United Nations, focusing on a
regional negotiating mechanism led by the Secretary-
General's Special Representative, Maître Alioune Blondin
Beye, to whom I am pleased to pay a well-deserved
tribute.
The Lusaka Protocol, an extension of the Bicesse
Accords of May 1991, embodies the will of the Angolan
Government and of UNITA to make full use of political
means to put an end to a particularly devastating
fratricidal conflict. It is thus an important development,
marking the point of no-return in the Angolan people's
march towards the achievement of a notably better
national future.
Indeed, despite the precarious situation and the
difficulties inherent in moving from confrontation to
cooperation on the path to national reconciliation, the
steps taken by both parties and the stages that have
already been passed have greatly helped to meet the
conditions for the systematic implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol, with a United Nations presence, whose
human and material resources can measure up to its tasks.
The cease-fire entered into force on
22 November 1994. In the view of the observers of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM
II), it has been generally effective, and any violations that
may have been committed are considered minor. The
Joint Commission, established in implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol and chaired by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, has held several
meetings and is accomplishing its work satisfactorily. The
meeting of the Chiefs of Staff held on 10 January allowed
important decisions to be taken with a view to
guaranteeing respect for the military provisions of the
Lusaka Protocol, particularly by initiating a
disengagement of the forces of the two parties and thus
contributing to the consolidation of the cease-fire and to
a climate of mutual trust. The expected meeting between
President dos Santos and Mr. Jonas Savimbi should
strengthen this climate of trust and give decisive
momentum to the peace process.
The international community and the United Nations
should, in the words of the Secretary-General in his most
recent report on Angola, respond positively to this
challenge. The United Nations should not only assist in
the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol in order to
speed up the peace process, but also coordinate and
facilitate humanitarian activities linked to that process.
21
Security Council 3499th meeting
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
The task is both urgent and essential. We must assist
refugees and internally displaced persons to return to their
homes. We must ensure the reintegration into civilian life
of the demobilized soldiers and de-mine parts of the
territory, in order to allow the safe movement of persons
and goods and help the economy to recover. These are
areas of work which are equally crucial for strengthening
peace and stability in the country.
In his conclusions, the Secretary-General very clearly
indicates that the situation in Angola is encouraging and
that the dynamic of peace is well under way there. On this
basis and to consolidate the process, the Secretary-General
proposes that a new United Nations operation, UNAVEM
III, immediately take over from UNAVEM II, whose
mandate expires today.
Algeria endorses these conclusions, especially since,
as the Secretary-General has emphasized, the conditions
set by resolution 966 (1994) of 8 December 1994 for
deploying a new United Nations operation in Angola —
in particular, respect for the cease-fire — have been met.
UNAVEM III should be deployed as soon as possible, for
any delay or additional conditions could raise unnecessary
obstacles to progress in the peace progress. To
consolidate such progress and make it irreversible requires
a clear message and a firm commitment from the
international community.
The President: I thank the representative of Algeria
for the kind words he addressed to me.
Several speakers remain on my list. In view of the
lateness of the hour, I shall now, with the concurrence of
the members of the Council, suspend the meeting until
3.30 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.25 p.m.
22
United Nations S/PV.3499 (Resumption)
95-85131 (E) This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Section,
room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fiftieth Year
3499th Meeting
Wednesday, 8 February 1995, 3.30 p.m.
New York
President: Mr. Merafhe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Botswana)
Members: Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Cañas
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wang Xuexian
Czech Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Rovensky
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mérimée
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Graf zu Rantzau
Honduras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Martínez Blanco
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wibisono
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fulci
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Gambari
Oman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Al-Khussaiby
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Bakuramutsa
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . Mr. Gomersall
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Albright
Agenda
The situation in Angola
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM II) (S/1995/97
and Add.1)
Security Council 3499 (Resumption)
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
The meeting was resumed at 4.15 p.m.
The President: The next speaker is the representative
of Zimbabwe. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Mumbengegwi (Zimbabwe): We warmly
welcome you, Mr. Minister, and congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council during
these very important deliberations. Although this is only
Botswana's second month on the Council, your
Ambassador's celebrated successes in peace-keeping,
peacemaking, mediation and reconciliation in Namibia and
South Africa, and his vast experience in the field of
diplomacy, give us all immense confidence that the Council
is destined for a very productive month. In the same vein,
allow me to pay tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador
Emilio Cárdenas of Argentina, for his particularly able and
diligent stewardship of the Council during the month of
January.
Allow me also to extend a warm welcome to the
Foreign Ministers of States members of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and to the Secretary-General of that
organization. Their presence here clearly demonstrates and
underlines Africa's ardent desire for the speedy resolution
of the conflict in Angola. Their presence, participation and
wise contributions to these deliberations constitute a most
important and significant boost to the peace process.
The Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali,
must be congratulated for his tireless efforts to resolve
conflicts around the world. In that connection, he has
placed before the Council a clear and insightful report on
Angola with precise and constructive recommendations.
There can be no doubt that the signing of the Lusaka
Protocol on 20 November 1994 was a major step towards
the establishment of peace and stability in Angola. In this
respect, the Secretary-General is correct in his assessment
that the Lusaka Protocol was a clear manifestation of the
earnest desire of the people of Angola to resolve their
differences by political means. Let us pay tribute to
President Frederick Chiluba and to the Government and the
people of Zambia for successfully hosting the delicate
negotiations and for facilitating the peace process. At the
centre of this delicate process was the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Alioune
Blondin Beye, who deserves our special appreciation for the
great skill and admirable patience with which he conducted
the slow, arduous and difficult negotiations.
There can be no doubt that the success of the peace
process in Angola ultimately depends on the people of
Angola themselves. The important statement made by the
Foreign Minister of Angola before the Council this
morning bore eloquent testimony to this. However,
assistance from the international community is essential.
The report of the Secretary-General before the Council
states that the cease-fire that came into force in
November 1994 has been holding. The parties to the
conflict have thereby demonstrated their firm commitment
to peace. In so doing, they have satisfied the requirements
set by previous Security Council resolutions. The time has
now come for the Security Council to honour its
commitments and immediately deploy the required force,
in full, to oversee and verify the implementation of the
agreements reached by the parties.
In his report the Secretary-General is very clear as
to what needs to be done. He observes that both the
Government of Angola and UNITA are respecting the
cease-fire, have shown commitment to ensuring the safety
and security of United Nations personnel and have
committed themselves to the Lusaka Protocol and national
reconciliation. In the light of these observations, the
Secretary-General, in paragraph 60 of his report,
recommends that a new United Nations operation in
Angola, the third United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM III) immediately take over from
UNAVEM II, that it have the mandate and strength
described in the report and that it be initially established
for a period of 12 months.
The message from the Secretary-General is loud and
clear. The parties have shown their commitment to peace.
It would be a serious mistake to continue to test their
patience any further. The Security Council should
therefore deploy UNAVEM III without undue delay.
We take heart at indications in the Secretary-
General's report that the request for troops for UNAVEM
III is fully subscribed. This is both an auspicious
development and a clear vote of confidence in the
Angolan peace process. The Security Council should
therefore seize the moment and avoid mistakes of the past
which could well derail the delicate peace process.
The President: I thank the representative of
Zimbabwe for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Senegal. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
2
Security Council 3499 (Resumption)
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
Mr. Cissé (Senegal) (interpretation from French): I
must first offer my regrets for not arriving in the Chamber
earlier. I was in consultation along with the other members
of the African delegation.
I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate
Mr. Legwaila on his assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and to thank him for his efforts in
conducting the Council's affairs this month.
Allow me also to express my delegation's appreciation
to His Excellency Mr. Emilio Cárdenas, Ambassador and
Permanent Representative of Argentina, for the talent and
devotion he displayed in presiding over the Council's work
in the month of January.
The international community welcomed the signing of
the Lusaka Protocol, on 20 November 1994, by the
Angolan Government and UNITA. That agreement, which
was the culmination of a long and complicated negotiating
process, was a crucial turning point in the fratricidal
conflict that has ravaged Angola for so long.
I wish to pay tribute to the efforts made throughout
this process by the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, His Excellency Maître Alioune Blondin
Beye, by the three observer States — the United States of
America, Portugal and the Russian Federation — and by
the countries of the region, particularly Zambia and its
leaders, that made an invaluable contribution to the
successful outcome of the Lusaka talks. It is now up to the
Angolan leaders to break with the past and resolutely set
out on the road to peace, national reconciliation and the
construction of a better future for all the sons and daughters
of Angola.
In this regard, the statement made this morning before
the Council by His Excellency Mr. Venâncio de Moura,
Minister of External Relations of Angola, shed some light
on the situation prevailing in his country since the
establishment of the cease-fire and gives us grounds for
optimism. By the same token, the Secretary-General, in his
report of 1 February 1995, notes encouraging and revealing
signs of the parties' will to respect the cease-fire and carry
the Lusaka peace process to a successful conclusion.
It has always been our view that frank and sincere
dialogue — based on respect for commitments entered into
in the framework of the Bicesse Accords, for the choice
made by the Angolan electorate in the September 1992
elections and for the recent Lusaka Protocol — is the best
way to guarantee the establishment of the peace to which
the Angolan people so deeply aspire. The example of
Mozambique is proof that, with a genuine desire to forge
ahead, there is no obstacle to peace and national
reconciliation that cannot be surmounted.
Taking advantage of the impetus created by the
signing of the Lusaka Protocol, the Council of Ministers
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), meeting in
Addis Ababa from 23 to 27 January 1995, decided to
send a ministerial delegation to attend this meeting of the
Security Council and reaffirm full support of the Council
of Ministers for the peace process in Angola, based on
the “Acordos de Paz”, the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council and the results of the first multi-party
elections.
On behalf of His Excellency Mr. Moustapha Niasse,
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Senegal — whom I have
the honour to represent in the OAU delegation — I
should like to associate myself with the statement made
by His Excellency Mr. E. C. I. Bwanali, the Minister of
External Affairs of Malawi, as chairman of the OAU
delegation.
We believe that deploying the third phase of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM
III), as provided for in the draft resolution now before the
Council, will contribute to helping the parties re-establish
peace and achieve national reconciliation in Angola. None
the less, the will and renewed commitment of the
international community will not in themselves be enough
to restore peace in Angola. It is essential that the Angolan
leaders demonstrate their unwavering desire to settle the
conflict and restore peace in their country by peaceful
means.
Alongside the efforts at the political and military
levels, it is just as urgent for the necessary conditions to
be created for launching the new United Nations
humanitarian programme, which must be put into effect
if peace in that country is to be consolidated.
Allow me to take this opportunity to appeal to the
international community to contribute generously to the
inter-agency programme for Angola that has been set up
by the Secretariat's Department of Humanitarian Affairs.
For its part, my country will spare no effort to
continue participating in the restoration of civil peace and
national harmony in Angola.
3
Security Council 3499 (Resumption)
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
In conclusion, I should like to pay a well-deserved
tribute to the courageous and dedicated United Nations
personnel, particularly those in the Unit for Coordination of
Humanitarian Assistance, who risk their lives every day in
the course of the tremendous efforts they make to carry out
their mission.
The President: I thank the representative of Senegal
for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of the United
Republic of Tanzania. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania): I
am most grateful for the opportunity to address the Security
Council. Let me begin, Sir, by extending to your country
my delegation's sincere congratulations on Botswana's
assumption this month of the presidency of a Council that
is about to take a very important decision on the situation
in Angola. Tanzania is confident that under your and your
Ambassador's able leadership the Council will succeed in
discharging its onerous responsibilities for international
peace and security. I should also like to extend our
appreciation to your Ambassador's predecessor, Ambassador
Emilio Cárdenas of Argentina, for the fine work he did
during January.
For more than 30 years, peace has eluded the people
of Angola. The devastating impact of the war on the
people's lives and on the country's economic and social
infrastructure has been immense, claiming the highest
casualty rate of any conflict in the world — 1,000 deaths
daily. As a result, hundreds of thousands have perished,
thousands have been crippled for life, and nearly
3.5 million people have been displaced, made refugees or
orphaned. At the same time, most of Angola's useful land
has been turned into a wide expanse of dangerous
minefields.
It is against this backdrop that the international
community has always applauded any move, especially
since the Bicesse Accords, that appeared to promise the
people of Angola some respite and an opportunity for
peace. Therefore, the signing of the Lusaka Protocol on
20 November 1994 must rightly be seen as the culmination
of the arduous and protracted efforts of the international
community in support of the negotiating process aimed at
bringing about a lasting peace in Angola.
The Security Council meets today to follow up on the
progress made since the adoption of Security Council
resolution 966 (1994) of last December, two months ago
today. Fortunately, unlike in the past, the current report of
the Secretary-General (S/1995/97 and Add.1) bears good
tidings on Angola. This is a refreshing departure from the
all-too-familiar gloomy political and military picture
painted of the Angolan situation. Even with a measure of
guarded optimism, it is the view of the Secretary-
General that there is — and I quote —
“improved cooperation on the ground with troops of
the Government of Angola and the Uniâo Nacional
para la Independência Total de Angola (UNITA)”.
(S/1995/97, para. 3)
The Secretary-General's observations were
reaffirmed today by Mr. Venâncio de Moura, External
Relations Minister of Angola, when he made his
important statement in this Chamber. It is clear that the
people of Angola are tired of war and very much want to
give the Lusaka Protocol a chance so that they can at last
live in peace and engage in national reconciliation and the
reconstruction of their rich country.
In this connection, Tanzania commends most warmly
the Government of Angola for persistently seeking to
negotiate in good faith and for offering to contribute in
kind towards an expanded United Nations presence in
Angola. Indeed, we have come this far in the Angolan
peace process largely because Luanda has been very
accommodating. We equally welcome on board UNITA
forces which, like the Government, have indicated their
commitment to full respect for and implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol, the Bicesse Accords and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. We hope that there
will be no backtracking along this path.
The very presence in our midst of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) ministerial delegation is a firm
demonstration of Africa's solidarity with the people of
Angola and of its desire to contribute to the peace
process. This is also an opportune moment to reaffirm
that the climate in Angola is inexorably headed towards
a lasting settlement and that Africa looks forward to
peace at last in southern Africa. The examples of South
Africa and, more recently, Mozambique should augur well
not only for Angola but also for all theatres of conflict in
the continent.
Tanzania could not agree more with the positive
thrust of the Secretary-General's report, and particularly
with the last chapter, which describes the signing of the
Lusaka Protocol as
4
Security Council 3499 (Resumption)
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
“a critical turning point in the Angolan peace
process.” (S/1995/97, para. 54)
The Angolan parties on the ground are doing their utmost
to ensure that the cease-fire holds. The Heads of the
Angolan armed forces and the UNITA forces have since the
cease-fire regularized their contacts and are pledged to
cooperating with and assisting the third United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III). The long-
awaited meeting between President Eduardo dos Santos and
Jonas Savimbi should also go a long way towards assuring
the international community of the entire Angolan people's
resolve to pursue the peace process.
Now that it is clear that everything is almost in place
in Angola — as is so eloquently stated in the Secretary-
General's report — the international community owes it to
itself and to the long-suffering people of Angola to
immediately take prompt and effective action to consolidate
the process. In this connection, my delegation would like to
express the hope that the Council will endorse the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that a new United
Nations operation in Angola — UNAVEM III — should
take over from UNAVEM II without any further delay and
with the commensurate mandate and strength, as well as the
necessary resources.
Allow me to conclude with a word of appreciation to
the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, and to
his indefatigable Special Representative, Mr. Alioune
Blondin Beye, for their perseverance in efforts to find a
workable solution to the long-standing question of Angola.
It is my delegation's hope that their efforts, along with
those of the entire United Nations system, will not diminish
as the international community mobilizes support for
UNAVEM III, with its heavy political, military and
humanitarian responsibilities. The role of Zambia and the
observer States — Portugal, the Russian Federation and the
United States of America — in facilitating the Lusaka talks
also deserve our unalloyed commendation.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United Republic of Tanzania for his statement and for his
kind words addressed to the presidency of the Council.
The next speaker is the representative of Guinea-
Bissau. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
Mr. Toure (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from
French): On behalf of the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Guinea-Bissau, who was to be part of the ministerial
delegation of the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
but has been unable to attend this meeting, and on behalf
of the delegation of Guinea-Bissau, I should like to
express my warmest and most heartfelt congratulations to
Botswana on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council of the United Nations. We are familiar
with your Ambassador's talents as a negotiator and his
experience of international problems, as well as his
profound commitment to everything related to the
equilibrium of societies and to peace. We are therefore
convinced that, under his auspices, our work will be
crowned with success.
We express our deep gratitude to and admiration of
your predecessor for the work accomplished under his
presidency.
We also congratulate the Secretary-General, Mr.
Boutros Boutros-Ghali, on his exhaustive and clear report
on Angola and the deployment of the third United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III). He
can count on our support.
Praise is also due to the members of the Security
Council for their resolute action to find solutions to
critical world problems which disturb us deeply, and for
the excellent initiatives they have taken to assure the
success of the work on Angola under way in the Security
Council.
The tragedy being played out in Angola has been
described at length in the Council Chamber in all its
political, economic and social dimensions. The countries
of Africa, rightly fearing the disastrous effects of this
tragedy on their already weakened economies, deem it
wise to make every effort to avoid further risks and to
bring an end to this tragedy, which has lasted too long.
Despite their efforts and sacrifice, the past years
have been a lost period for the development of their
country. The socio-economic situation has been
completely undermined by the effects of war and
especially by the continued fratricidal battles, which drain
financial resources and thereby stifle the economy and
destroy many human lives.
That is why the African countries, at their most
recent ministerial meeting, clearly expressed their
unfailing solidarity with the people of Angola in their just
struggle to safeguard their national independence and
territorial integrity, while supporting the achievements of
the Bicesse and Lusaka agreements. That meeting was
5
Security Council 3499 (Resumption)
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
also an opportunity for the Ministers to reiterate their full
support for respect for the most fundamental rights of all
human beings and to promote the advent of an era of
democracy and reconciliation in Angola. All the States of
Africa pledged to make their contribution to the peace
process under way and to the strict implementation of the
agreements concluded for a lasting peace, which is the
reason for the welcome presence here of a ministerial
delegation composed of eminent sons of our continent.
The Republic of Guinea-Bissau welcomes the
measures taken by the Angolan Government and the
competent institutions of that country to achieve national
reconciliation, by, inter alia, the promulgation of a law of
amnesty for offences committed in the framework of the
post-electoral crisis and by agreeing to contribute
effectively to the success of the deployment of UNAVEM
III and provide the necessary assistance. We also commend
and encourage the Government of Angola and UNITA to
pursue their efforts to honour the commitments made in the
framework of the Lusaka Protocol. We are gratified by the
efforts made by the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Mr. Blondin Beye, and by the three States
observers to the peace process in Angola, as well as by
certain neighbouring States, particularly Zambia, that
contributed to the success of the Lusaka peace talks.
As members of the Council are aware, the people of
Angola and of Guinea-Bissau have longstanding bonds of
history, culture and fraternal struggle. That is why my
Government and the people of Guinea-Bissau fully support
the peace process in that brotherly country.
Guinea-Bissau endorses the important resolutions of
the Security Council and the results of the multi-party
elections supervised by the international community, which
we consider to have been free and fair. My Government
firmly supports UNAVEM III and is ready to provide,
within its means, whatever contingent may be requested of
it in order for that Mission successfully to fulfil its
mandate.
For the tireless and commendable efforts which it
unceasingly makes in the search for viable solutions to the
many conflicts in Africa, and especially the conflict in
Angola, the Organization of African Unity deserves our
gratitude, particularly for its initiatives to promote national
reconciliation and the establishment of peace in Angola.
Since its founding, it has constantly been the political
framework in which the historic commitment to the
maintenance of peace and the liberation of all Africa has
been affirmed. The Government and the people of Guinea-
Bissau are, and will remain, loyal to the philosophy of
their immortal leader, Amílcar Cabral, for a free,
independent, sovereign and peaceful Africa.
The President: I thank the representative of Guinea-
Bissau for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of
Mozambique. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): At the outset, I wish to
extend to you, Sir, our warmest congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of February. We are delighted to see you, Mr.
Minister, presiding over our deliberations. We have no
doubt that your country's presidency assures the
successful outcome of the Security Council's work this
month. Let me pledge my delegation's determination to
work closely with you in the discharge of your duties.
I should also like to pay special tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Emilio Cárdenas of Argentina,
for the brilliant manner in which he presided over the
Council's business last month. I reiterate my
Government's deep gratitude for his leadership in the
convening of the highly successful meeting on the
situation in Mozambique in January.
I wish to seize this opportunity to express once again
our appreciation to the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, not only for his competent
leadership of the Organization, but also for his untiring
efforts and his dedication to the cause of international
peace and security. The Government and the people of
Mozambique, of course, remain indebted to him for the
constructive role he played in the successful completion
of the mission of the United Nations Operation in
Mozambique (ONUMOZ).
The Council is meeting once again to discharge its
responsibilities at an extraordinary time in the history of
the people of Angola, a time when peace and stability are
within their grasp. My delegation has carefully examined
both the report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM) and the
draft resolution before the Council. We also listened with
keen attention and interest to the statements made today
by His Excellency Mr. Venâncio de Moura, Minister for
External Affairs of Angola, and by His Excellency
Mr. E.C.I. Bwanali, Minister for External Affairs of
Malawi and Head of the ministerial delegation of the
6
Security Council 3499 (Resumption)
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
Organization of African Unity (OAU) to this meeting. We
thank the Ministers for giving us a vivid picture of the
situation prevailing in the sister country of Angola. Their
statements underscore the urgency and determination with
which the international community at large and the Council
in particular must address the issue before the Council
today: the establishment, as a matter of high priority, of a
peace-keeping operation for Angola.
In that regard, my delegation particularly wishes to
welcome and support the proposal made by the Secretary-
General in his report to the effect that
“a new United Nations operation in Angola,
UNAVEM III, immediately take over from UNAVEM
II”. (S/1995/97, para. 60)
As a matter of fact, my Minister of Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation, Mr. Leonardo Santos Simão, speaking before
the Council on 27 January 1995, stressed the importance of
this issue, as follows:
“May I take this opportunity to underline the
importance we attach to the early deployment of the
third United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III). Our recent experience [with the
deployment of a United Nations force in our country]
has shown that the sooner such a verification
mechanism is established and deployed, the better for
the success of the peace process. I would therefore
urge the Council to look into this matter more
diligently and expeditiously.” (S/PV.3494, p. 5)
The relevance and urgency of this action by the
Council can not be overestimated. The signing of the
Lusaka Protocol last November was the culmination of a
long and delicate process of negotiations to address the war
situation in Angola and to contribute to bringing about
peace and stability not only in that country but also in the
entire region of southern Africa. We strongly believe that
peace in Angola can no longer be delayed. More than ever,
the United Nations and the international community at large
are duty-bound to extend the hand of solidarity to the
people of Angola and their legitimate Government in their
quest for peace and stability. In assisting the Angolan
people, we attach utmost importance to the observance of
the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations as well as to the principles of sovereignty, and of
non-intervention and non-interference in the internal affairs
of the Republic of Angola, all in line with the “Acordos de
Paz” and the Lusaka Protocol. We are of the view that the
international community can assist States Members of the
United Nations while fully respecting those principles.
In this context, we cannot agree that the deployment
of any peace-keeping operation should have any strings
attached. We therefore express our support for the
Angolan delegation's view that some paragraphs of the
draft resolution ought to be revised in order to enjoy the
full agreement of the Government of Angola.
We are happy to note that the Council is considering
the establishment of a comprehensive, wise peace-keeping
operation in Angola, which would include not just
political and military aspects, but also humanitarian and
mine-clearance dimensions. In its endeavours to face the
challenges of humanitarian assistance, the Government of
Angola will no doubt need the support of the international
community. In particular, the role of the United Nations
will be of great importance in providing a proper
framework for the effective coordination of humanitarian
aid. We consider the mine-clearance programme to be
essential for the resettlement of returnees and displaced
persons. The success of the programme is crucial to
efforts to rehabilitate the infrastructure in the countryside
and promote agricultural production in rural areas.
Mozambique is linked to Angola by long and special
ties of brotherhood and friendship. We are united to
Angola not just by a common historical past and by a
common language; more than that, we are united to that
sister country because our peoples fought together for the
independence of their countries, because together we
forged our national identities and together we resisted
destabilization and aggression. Even in our search for
peace, the Angolan peace process and the Mozambican
peace process trod the same path; they experienced the
same hurdles; they faced the same uncertainties.
A few days ago, in this very Chamber, the Council
celebrated the successful conclusion of the mission of
ONUMOZ in my country. But so long as peace is not a
reality in Angola, the success achieved in Mozambique
can be considered neither complete nor solid. That is why
my delegation wishes to reaffirm its unconditional support
for and solidarity with the people and the Government of
Angola. We reiterate our readiness to do our best to assist
in the efforts for peace, harmony and national
reconciliation in that sister country. My delegation wishes
to urge every State Member of the United Nations to do
the same.
7
Security Council 3499 (Resumption)
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
The President: I thank the representative of
Mozambique for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Sweden. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Osvald (Sweden): Mr. President, let me first of
all say that my delegation finds it particularly fitting that
you, as Foreign Minister of Botswana, should be presiding
over this important meeting. We are sure that under the
presidency of Botswana this month the Council will be in
good hands.
The participation today of an Organization of African
Unity (OAU) ministerial delegation, headed by the Foreign
Minister of Malawi, is also a telling sign of the importance
of the occasion and of the support for and commitment of
the OAU and its member States to the successful
conclusion of what we hope will be the final step towards
a lasting peace in Angola. I was very pleased to see the
Foreign Minister of Angola among us, and my delegation
appreciated his interesting statement.
Since the time of Angola's independence, Sweden has
been actively engaged in development cooperation and
other forms of support for development and peace in
Angola.
The people of Angola have for too long already
suffered the plight of a devastating civil war. We therefore
greeted the signing of the first peace accord, as well as that
of the Lusaka Protocol of November last year, with special
relief and satisfaction. That Protocol and the subsequent
cease-fire provide the necessary basis for a process leading
to a lasting peace. However, the situation remains
uncertain. As has been proved on many occasions, formal
undertakings by parties involved in a conflict are not
necessarily enough. Agreements must be respected by all
concerned and they must be implemented. The events of
1992, when UNITA resorted to arms after defeat in the
general elections, must not be allowed to happen again.
A successful peace process requires strong
determination and mutual trust between the parties. If this
is not the case, no United Nations mission, no matter how
well planned and equipped, can succeed in its task.
It is a good sign that the military commanders of both
sides have met, but it seems not to be enough. Direct talks
between President dos Santos and the UNITA leader, Jonas
Savimbi, are necessary for any real process towards
national reconciliation. Sweden therefore calls on both
parties to do their utmost to ensure that the peace process
moves forward.
In this connection, we would like to express our
thanks and admiration to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Blondin Beye, for his vigorous
efforts for the Lusaka process and its implementation, as
well as for his help in improving the political atmosphere
in Angola.
The Lusaka Protocol assigns a crucial role to the
United Nations. We therefore welcome the Secretary-
General's assessment that the respect for the cease-fire
shown by the Government of Angola and UNITA and
their commitment to ensuring the safety and security of
personnel have made it possible for him to recommend
that the third United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III) now take over from UNAVEM II. It is
also encouraging to learn that many Member States, not
least neighbouring countries, have indicated a readiness to
contribute a significant number of units and observers to
the new operation.
Sweden participated with military and police
observers in UNAVEM II. The Government has decided
to provide 20 military observers to UNAVEM III.
The Swedish Government intends to continue to
support the peace process and the rebuilding of the
country in ways that are found most suitable.
Humanitarian relief programmes will continue, but
assistance will increasingly be directed towards basic
needs such as the strengthening of transport facilities,
logistics and so on.
The number of mines dispersed is a serious problem,
causing continuous suffering and death, as well as
preventing the return of normal life. A decision has
therefore been taken in cooperation with the Angolan
Government and the World Food Programme to begin
mine-clearance operations to be carried out by Swedish
military personnel.
The Swedish Government also takes a positive
attitude towards examining the possibility of sending
Swedish military experts to start up demobilizing centres
or, alternatively, to assist in demobilizing operations.
What we now hope for, and indeed expect, is the
full commitment of the parties to the process towards real
8
Security Council 3499 (Resumption)
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
and lasting peace and security in Angola. Sweden, for its
part, is ready to make its contribution towards this goal.
The President: I thank the representative of Sweden
for the kind words he addressed to me.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless I
hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the
vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): Let me begin by
congratulating the Permanent Representative of Botswana
on his assumption of the office of president of the Security
Council for the month of February. My delegation feels
sure that under the Presidency of Botswana, the affairs of
the Security Council are in very good hands. We also wish
to thank his predecessor, Mr. Cárdenas, Permanent
Representative of Argentina, for his successful and efficient
conduct of the business of the Security Council during
January.
My delegation is delighted to welcome the high-
powered ministerial delegation from the Organization of
African Unity (OAU). Its presence with us today
underscores the importance which Africa attaches to the
acceleration of the peace process in Angola and to the full
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, which was
informed and influenced by the conclusions reached in the
“Acordos de Paz”.
We also welcome in particular the Honourable
Mr. E.C.I. Bwanali, the Foreign Minister of Malawi, who
is Chairman of the OAU ministerial delegation, and also the
Honourable Mr. Venâncio de Moura, Foreign Minister of
Angola, whose Government has demonstrated its
commitment to the Lusaka Protocol and to the “Acordos de
Paz”.
Clearly, there are indications on the ground to assure
us that the enterprise we are about to undertake in the
United Nations Verification Mission in Angola (UNAVEM
III) portends a viable prospect. The first indication is the
fact that the cease-fire agreed to last November is generally
holding. Second, after the trauma of a long-drawn-out
conflict, the parties now seem determined to pursue the
cause of peace in the higher interest of national survival,
national reconciliation and national reconstruction.
Thirdly, under the veritable leadership of the
Secretary-General's Special Representative, Ambassador
Blondin Beye, and with the efforts of the Chief Military
Observer, Major-General Chris Garba, the otherwise fluid
situation in Angola now shows a clear possibility of
stabilizing. Fourthly, there is the solid commitment of the
Government and people of Angola to the prompt
deployment of UNAVEM III by offering to make a
substantial contribution in kind to the operational costs of
the new peace-keeping operation. We commend this
gesture and trust that it will induce similar cooperation
and willingness on the part of the international
community to assist the ongoing peace process in Angola.
My delegation is particularly grateful to the
Secretary-General for his excellent report (S/1995/97),
dated 1 February 1995, which has provided valuable
insights into the continuing problems in Angola in the
political, military, civil and humanitarian spheres. After
decades of internecine civil war, it is conceivable that the
people of Angola are now fully prepared to let go the war
psychosis in favour of the pursuit of peace. Such conflict
situations cannot but have deleterious consequences for
the country's basic infrastructure, civil society and
economic development. It is against this backdrop that our
current authorization of UNAVEM III finds its form,
legitimacy and consistency.
Through the mandate of UNAVEM III, the United
Nations seeks to provide a credible force level that can
contend with the enormity and complexity of the problem
on the ground within a time-frame that will not imply a
perpetual United Nations presence in Angola. At the same
time, UNAVEM III is mandated to ensure that there is
constant monitoring of the state of play in Angola,
including the strict observance of the cease-fire as well as
progress in the implementation of the peace process. This
deliberate mix of obligations with responsibility, in the
view of my delegation, enables the international
community to be fully involved in all stages of the
UNAVEM III operation.
At the core of the current mandate is the flexibility
that the Secretary-General must retain to determine the
course, content and timing of the deployment of military
forces and civilian personnel as the situation on the
ground in Angola may warrant. In our view, the
deployment must in no case commence any later than
31 March 1995. We do not expect the imposition of any
additional layer of requirements that could constrain the
Secretary-General in carrying out his responsibilities
9
Security Council 3499 (Resumption)
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
under the mandate to be approved by the Security Council
for UNAVEM III.
As for the duration of the mandate itself, our preferred
option is for an initial period of 12 months, in line with the
Secretary-General's objective recommendation and
consistent with the realities on the ground. We can,
however, agree to the six-month initial period proposed in
the current draft, but only on the understanding that the
United Nations is not about to terminate its presence in
Angola after only six months, rather, that it is prepared to
undertake additional periods of extension, based on actual
performance, to enable the political process to take root.
A critical element in this effort is the need to create a
conducive environment for the political process to
materialize. It is in this context that we welcome the call
for a meeting between the President of Angola and the
leader of UNITA as soon as possible. We are confident that
President dos Santos is ready for this meeting, and we urge
Mr. Savimbi to join him for it without further delay. Such
a high-level meeting would provide additional impetus to
the peace process and constitute an enabling and
confidence-building measure between the parties. In the
long term, since the issue in Angola appears to be largely
one of pure power-sharing, my delegation believes that the
objective should be that all Angolans, without exception,
should have equality of opportunity and equality of access
to decision-making within a political framework. That, in
essence, is the true value of democracy and the prerequisite
for a sustainable democratic process.
The magnitude of the social dislocation and disruption
that have occurred in Angola requires that all efforts be
made to salvage the situation and assist the Republic to
reconcile, rehabilitate and reconstruct itself. In this regard,
the international community has a continuing role to play.
We commend, meanwhile, the efforts of those States and
organizations that have so far assisted these efforts, and we
urge them to continue. We request those that have not yet
done so to make such contributions and urge them to
endeavour to do so on an assured and continuing basis.
In conclusion, my delegation expresses its full support
for the draft resolution before the Council. We are
particularly gratified that the resolution reaffirms the
Security Council's commitment to both the sovereignty and
the territorial integrity of Angola. In our view, there is no
paragraph in the draft resolution we are about to adopt that
derogates from the sovereign rights of the Angolan
Government — that is, in the maintenance of law and order
and the preservation of the territorial integrity of the
country — either before, during or after UNAVEM III.
Finally, my delegation hopes that today's adoption of
this draft resolution will represent for the Council a
critical watershed and an important step towards the
establishment of a durable peace in Angola, a country
which, after all, has been at war with itself for far too
long and whose people deserve, now more than ever
before, the opportunity to resume normal, productive
lives.
The President: I thank the representative of Nigeria
for the kind words he addressed to the presidency.
Mr. Wang Xuexian (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): The Chinese delegation sincerely welcomes His
Excellency the Foreign Minister of Botswana to the
United Nations to preside personally over this meeting
and congratulates him on his country's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February. We wish you, Sir, complete success in carrying
out your noble duties.
I should also like to thank Ambassador Emilio
Cárdenas of Argentina for the remarkable manner in
which he directed, with his trademark efficiency and
promptness, the work of the Council last month.
I also wish warmly to welcome to today's Council
meeting the Foreign Minister of Angola and the other
Foreign Ministers from the delegation of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU), and thank them for their
important statements.
The Angolan peace process is at a critical juncture.
The Lusaka Protocol, which was finally signed by the
Angolan Government and UNITA at the end of 1994 after
long and hard negotiations, and the entry into force of the
cease-fire agreement thereafter, have laid a favourable
foundation for that peace to which the Angolan people so
ardently aspire. The determination of the two Angolan
parties to engage in national reconciliation and end their
conflict by peaceful means has set an example for the
settlement of other conflicts and disputes in Africa. It is
our ardent hope that both Angolan parties will maintain
the cease-fire and unswervingly bring to fruition the grand
cause of national reconciliation in accordance with the
timetable set forth in the Lusaka Protocol, thus making
their contributions to peace and stability in Angola.
10
Security Council 3499 (Resumption)
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
The establishment of the third United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) is not only strongly
desired by the two parties and by the people of Angola, but
is also a concrete expression of the actions of the
international community to support and consolidate the
Angolan peace process. OAU's sending such a large, high-
level delegation to New York to participate in the
consideration of the Angolan question in the Security
Council has demonstrated the readiness of African countries
and OAU to contribute at least their share to the settlement
of conflicts in Africa. This is highly commendable. The
United Nations and the Security Council should attach great
importance to resolving African problems and to
strengthening cooperation with OAU so as to help Angola
set out along the road towards rebuilding peace at an early
date.
The post-cold-war world is far from tranquil. We
urgently need a peaceful and stable environment in order to
promote our common development and improve people's
standards of living. That need is all the more pressing and
actual in today's Africa, for without peace and stability in
Africa, world peace and stability will remain elusive.
Africa needs no external interference, but it does need
assistance and cooperation. The Chinese Government and
people have always set great store on strengthening
cooperation with the African countries. We have been
following closely, and supporting, the efforts of the
Angolan people towards an early end to the war and for a
lasting peace. We also sincerely support OAU in its efforts
to safeguard political stability in Africa and actively
participate in international affairs, particularly the political
settlement of African conflicts.
The Angolan people, which is now in the throes of a
critical transition, need continued strong support from the
international community. The draft resolution before us
reflects the objective situation and Angola's need. The
Chinese delegation will therefore vote in favour.
The President: I thank the representative of China for
the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian): I am pleased to welcome you, Sir, as the
representative of the country that occupies the presidency
of the Security Council this month, and I am pleased to
wish you, as well as the Permanent Representative and the
delegation of Botswana, every success in the important
undertaking at hand.
We are grateful to the Permanent Representative of
Argentina for the large amount of work he did as
President of the Security Council last month. I am also
happy to welcome here the ministerial delegation of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), which includes
Ministers for Foreign Affairs, in particular, the Minister
of External Affairs of the Republic of Angola, Mr.
Venâncio de Moura. The participation in this Security
Council meeting of such a representative delegation from
the African regional organization underlines the
importance, not only for Angola but for Africa as a
whole, of the issue before us today.
As one of the troika of observer States, Russia
supports the immediate transition from the second United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM II) to
the third (UNAVEM III), which will have a broader
mandate for implementing the measures set out in the
Lusaka Protocol. The further consolidation of the still
very fragile peace in Angola requires the Security
Council's immediate approval of the mandate of
UNAVEM III with a phased and effective deployment of
the peace-keeping operation. This should be done, of
course, as economically as possible with regard to
financial, material, human and other resources. This
decision by the Security Council will make it possible to
reinforce the cease-fire and the atmosphere of trust in
Angola and will give a new and powerful impetus to the
settlement process within Angola that should completely
transform it for the better.
The draft resolution agreed on in prior consultations
is realistic, balanced and fully in keeping with the goals
of strengthening peace and stability in Angola, and also
meets with the criteria for launching a new peace-keeping
operation. It is significant that the draft resolution has
been drawn up strictly in accordance with the timetable
agreed on by the Government of Angola and UNITA
within the framework of the Lusaka Protocol, that it
contains no preconditions and that it creates the necessary
basis for the most rapid possible phased deployment of
UNAVEM III's basic force. Accordingly, the Russian
delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution.
The success of the peace-keeping operation in
Angola will be critically dependent not only on the timely
deployment of adequate United Nations forces in Angola,
but also and especially on the Angolan parties' taking
consistent and constructive positions and on their resolve
to follow the timetable for implementation to the letter.
The Angolan parties, especially UNITA, must
demonstrate the necessary political will to fulfil the
11
Security Council 3499 (Resumption)
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
obligations they have entered into in the interests of
strengthening the peace and achieving national
reconciliation so sorely needed by the Angolan people, who
have experienced the horrors and suffering of two decades
of fratricidal war. In this connection, we place our hopes in
the personal meeting between the President of Angola,
Mr. dos Santos, and the leader of UNITA, Mr. Savimbi;
that meeting, as the draft resolution notes, could build the
necessary political momentum for the successful
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol.
For its part, the Russian Federation, which has already
seconded military observers to the United Nations Mission
in Angola, will continue to do all it can, both bilaterally
and multilaterally, to promote the process of restoring peace
and stability in Angola, a country with which Russia has
strong ties of friendship and cooperation.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Russian Federation for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Martínez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from
Spanish): Sir, please accept my delegation's sincerest
congratulations on Botswana's assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month. We are sure that with the
experience and diplomatic skills of Botswana's Permanent
Representative, we shall successfully complete our tasks.
My delegation wishes to assure him of its full support.
We also express our gratitude for the outstanding work
of Ambassador Emilio Cárdenas of the Argentine Republic
last month.
My delegation also wishes to welcome the Ministers
of Foreign Affairs of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), particularly His Excellency the Minister of External
Affairs of Angola, Mr. Venâncio de Moura, who have come
to the Council to support and contribute to the peace
process in Angola. We believe that if we could rely on the
resolute support of regional organizations in the search for
solutions in those regions of the world where conflicts are
taking a considerable economic and human toll on the
countries involved, such conflicts would find no fertile
ground in which to grow. In this respect, we express our
deepest gratitude to OAU for its efforts in Angola and in
other regions of Africa where difficult situations stemming
from internal political conflicts persist. We call upon it to
do in the future, in other countries or regions of the
continent where conflicts persist, what is now being done
for Angola.
My delegation considers the signing of the Lusaka
Protocol of 20 November 1994 the culmination of the
conflict in Angola. In adopting it, the parties clearly
demonstrated their desire to resolve the conflict and
restore peace in their country by peaceful means. For that
reason, we appreciate the efforts both of the Government
of Angola and UNITA to uphold the agreed cease-fire.
Although the implementation of the Protocol has not been
perfect and has been delayed in certain aspects, the
overall outlook is rather positive and encouraging.
My delegation is grateful for the Secretary-General's
report on the second United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM II), submitted to the Council in
accordance with paragraph 8 of resolution 966 (1994).
The report gives a wide-ranging and comprehensive
picture of the current situation in Angola, and we
therefore support both its content and its appeal for the
prompt provision of the humanitarian assistance Angola
needs.
In his report, the Secretary-General has
recommended that the United Nations mission in Angola
should continue following the progress achieved in the
political realm through the “Acordos de Paz”, the signing
of the Lusaka Protocol and the commitment by the parties
to implement and abide by the Council's resolutions. My
delegation gives its broadest support to that
recommendation and therefore also supports the draft
resolution now under consideration, which establishes the
third United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III) peace-keeping operation, with an initial
mandate in force until 8 August 1995.
It is also the wish of my Government to see the
Lusaka Protocol implemented without further delay so
that the leaders of Angola can get their country moving
along the path of peace, democracy and development.
This, if properly fulfilled, would give justification for the
provisions of paragraph 10 of the draft resolution: the
intention to conclude the mandate of UNAVEM III when
the objectives of the Lusaka Protocol have been achieved.
Thus, once the mandate of UNAVEM III comes to a
close, the destiny of Angola will lie exclusively in the
hands of the Angolans themselves.
We therefore believe that the draft resolution should
be seen not only as an incentive but also as cause for
profound reflection so that the parties involved in the
conflict in Angola may act in all seriousness and looking
to the future of their country.
12
Security Council 3499 (Resumption)
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
We appeal seriously to the leaders of Angola to come
to the firm conclusion that, once the mandate of UNAVEM
III is over, if they do not help themselves to resolve their
own internal political problems it will not be easy for the
international community to come to their aid. We trust that
those leaders will act with prudence, maturity and a high
sense of patriotism and that they will put Angola in its
rightful place in the international scene.
The President: I thank the representative of Honduras
for his kind words addressed to the presidency.
Mr. Mérimée (France) (interpretation from French):
The French delegation is pleased to see you, Sir, presiding
over the Security Council on this important occasion for
Africa, and we are pleased also that the Council is in the
hands of your country's Ambassador during the month of
February.
At the same time, I should like to convey to the
Argentine delegation our great appreciation of the good
work done by Ambassador Cárdenas during the month of
January.
France would also like to welcome the impressive
delegation from the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
which is honouring us by participating in this Council
meeting on Angola. The delegation's presence shows how
interested Africa as a whole is in the question of Angola.
For us, this is an additional guarantee that should make it
possible for the Angolans to put an end to a fratricidal war
and return to the path of democracy and progress. In this
connection, my Government welcomes the role that OAU
intends to continue to play in resolving the Angolan
conflict. The involvement of regional organizations in
solving crises is indeed a great advantage and vital to the
success of the United Nations.
The Security Council will shortly be adopting a draft
resolution establishing the third phase of the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III). This
operation will include more than 7,000 personnel.The draft
resolution provides a full framework for United Nations
actions over the next two years. Indeed, UNAVEM III, as
established, will have a clear mandate enabling it to
underpin the efforts of the Angolan Government and
UNITA to implement the Lusaka agreements signed on
15 November last until presidential elections are held and
the elected President of the Republic assumes office.
In the mandate, nothing has been overlooked.
UNAVEM III will perform political, military, police,
humanitarian and electoral duties. We note also that
special attention is given to mine clearance operations —
which, inter alia, will make it easier for refugees to
return — and to supplying the Angolans with
information. My Government is also glad that the
Secretariat has learned from past experience and that a
United Nations radio station will soon be brought into
service in Angola.
In adopting this draft resolution, the Council is not,
however, giving carte blanche to the Angolan
Government and UNITA. In 1992, the electoral process,
monitored by the United Nations, was not enough to put
an end to the Angolan crisis. This failure must not be
repeated.
The United Nations involvement in Angola, having
gone on for more than three years, should now enjoy full
cooperation from the Angolan Government and UNITA.
This cooperation is a prerequisite for the deployment of
the infantry battalions that will be the mainstay of
UNAVEM III. Moreover, the Security Council states that
it intends to review the United Nations role in Angola
should the Secretary-General report that the cooperation
required from the parties falls short or is slow in coming.
For my delegation, this provision is no mere formality.
The Angolan Government and UNITA negotiated the
terms of the Lusaka agreement with a certain fierce
resolve. In this connection, we pay tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Alioune
Blondin Beye, who, with his patience and skill, was able
to bring the two parties together to sign the document.
We now hope that the Angolan Government and UNITA
will show the same fierce resolve in fulfilling the
obligations that they have taken upon themselves.
The Security Council has been kept scrupulously
informed of the course of the negotiations. The draft
resolution provides that it should also be scrupulously
kept abreast of the details of their implementation.
Ten years ago Southern Africa was riven by every
conflict imaginable. Peace and democracy have gradually
triumphed in this part of the continent — first in
Namibia, then in South Africa, then in Mozambique. Now
only Angola is left. The Angolan people have shown
many a time and oft that they want peace and national
reconciliation. We hope that the opportunity they are now
being given to end the war will enable them finally to
turn over a new page in their history. My country, for its
part, will do its utmost to ensure that this is so.
13
Security Council 3499 (Resumption)
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
The President: I thank the representative of France
for his kind words addressed to me and to my country's
Ambassador.
Mr. Fulci (Italy): I should like, first of all, to join
other representatives in expressing my warmest
congratulations to you, Sir, and my thanks for presiding
over our work today. Your authority, your prestige and
your experience are certainly helping to bring to a
successful conclusion a most important debate on an
African country — Angola.
I should like to take this opportunity also to express
my good wishes to our dear friend Ambassador Legwaila,
who is chairing the Security Council during the month of
February. We all know that, in view of all his professional
and human qualities, the work of the Council will be
greatly enhanced.
May I also express sincere thanks to the President of
the Security Council last month, the Ambassador of
Argentina, whose presidency was really exemplary to many
of us — not only because it was brilliant, but also because
it was most productive, and in a timely manner. That is
something that the Security Council greatly needs.
The draft resolution which the Security Council is
about to adopt authorizes full deployment of the United
Nations peace-keeping operation in Angola in support of
the agreement reached at Lusaka. This agreement ends the
civil war that has afflicted Angola in the 20 years following
its independence. Divisions and hatred became so deeply
rooted during this period that restoring mutual trust is
probably the most difficult challenge of the current phase.
Thus, in the view of my Government, the deployment of a
peace-keeping mission with broad dimensions and a
detailed mandate, as envisaged in the draft resolution, is
both necessary and fully justified.
A prerequisite to the operation's success, however, is
full adherence by the parties to their commitments. In this
sense, the exchange of letters between the President of
Angola, His Excellency Mr. José Eduardo dos Santos, and
the President of UNITA, Jonas Savimbi — which was
brought to the Council's attention yesterday — represents
an encouraging development indeed, since it marks the
opening of a direct dialogue at the highest political level.
We hope that a meeting between the two leaders can take
place soon so as to symbolize the beginning of a new era
in the life of Angola.
We believe that the time has come for the Angolan
parties to redirect their many resources towards fulfilling
the needs of the people. As the late President of the
Italian Republic, Sandro Pertini, said in his inaugural
speech several years ago,
“Now is the time to empty the arsenals and to
fill the granaries!” May I add that, with its latest
allocation, my country has committed a total of
about $60 million in humanitarian assistance to
Angola over the past three years alone, and it
intends to continue to do its part.
Among the most bitter fruits of long years of civil
war and hatred is the unprecedented proliferation of
land-mines in Angola. The figures given by the
Secretary-General in his report — 10 million mines
buried throughout the country — are simply appalling.
The Italian Government strongly supports the coordinated
and comprehensive programme outlined by the Secretary-
General with regard to the de-mining action. When one
considers that land-mines kill or maim some 500 people
every week in the world, one realizes that the need for
de-mining becomes even more urgent in order to save the
lives of thousands upon thousands of innocent civilians,
especially women and children.
In the final analysis, this is a problem with broad
regional implications — let us think of Mozambique —
and potential global repercussions. Beyond the initial
emergency phase, de-mining training will take on
enormous importance in giving countries afflicted by this
phenomenon autonomous means to combat it. The Italian
Government has consolidated experience in this sector
and has already intervened in various crisis areas.
Needless to say, our knowledge and expertise are at the
disposal of the Angolan people, as they were for the
people of Mozambique.
In his report, the Secretary-General foresees the
establishment of a de-mining school to be established by
the Central Mine Action Office. In time, this school could
acquire a regional dimension and become a point of
reference for countries in need. This proposal, we believe,
deserves careful consideration in the framework of the
numerous initiatives being examined by the United
Nations. I wish to repeat here that the Italian Government
and the Italian mission here in New York are at the full
disposal of the Foreign Minister of Angola, Mr. Venâncio
de Moura, of the Permanent Representative of Angola,
Ambassador Van Dunem “Mbinda”, and of course of the
14
Security Council 3499 (Resumption)
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
Secretariat, in order to establish useful links to provide
more help and expertise.
Finally, among the confidence-building measures for
Angola, the Secretary-General's proposal, which is taken up
in the draft resolution, to establish a radio transmitter within
the framework of UNAVEM III seems particularly
important. Previous experience has taught us that radio
communications have a fundamental importance, both in the
negative sense, when they amplify distorted news and
provocations, and in the positive sense, when, under
responsible management, they help disseminate correct
information. We thus invite the Secretary-General to pursue
the direction indicated in his report.
To conclude, I would like to salute the African
Foreign Minsters who have been with us at the United
Nations yesterday and today. Their presence in New York
at this stage is physical proof not only of the unity of
African countries, but also of the fact that a consensus is
emerging on the need for a coordinated approach in which
the United Nations, the Organization of African Unity,
subregional organizations and national Governments all
have a crucial role to play in peace-keeping in Africa.
This said, I am glad to inform the Council that Italy
will vote in favour of the draft resolution before us.
The President: I thank the representative of Italy for
his kind words addressed to me and my countryman,
Ambassador Legwaila.
Mr. Graf zu Rantzau (Germany): I should like to
take this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on your
country's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We are privileged indeed to have you preside over
the Council, on whose work the outstanding professional
and human qualities of Ambassador Legwaila have already
left their mark.
I should also like to thank Ambassador Cárdenas for
the exemplary manner in which he and his delegation
conducted the proceedings of the Council. Furthermore, it
gives me great pleasure to welcome the ministerial
delegation of the Organization of African Unity, its
Secretary-General and, in particular, the Minister for
External Relations of Angola. I would like to thank them
for their substantial statements, which underline the
importance which the Organization of African Unity
attaches to the situation in Angola and to African solidarity.
The signing of the Lusaka Protocol on
20 November 1994 and the agreement on a cease-fire two
days later are encouraging events in the recent tragic
history of Angola. Since then, despite mutual accusations
by the Angolan Government and by UNITA of cease-fire
violations, the cease-fire has generally been observed.
The decision of the Security Council to restore
UNAVEM II to its previous level certainly played an
important role in the consolidation of the cease-fire. But
another important factor was the cooperation between the
Government of Angola and UNITA. The meetings of
their Chiefs of Staff and the regular meetings of the Joint
Commission have been important confidence-building
measures. Yet there is one crucial confidence-building
measure still missing: a meeting between President dos
Santos and Mr. Savimbi. Such a meeting must take place
as soon as possible.
We have carefully studied the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the Council establish an enlarged
peace-keeping operation, UNAVEM III, in Angola. In the
decision of the Council, two aspects have to be
considered. On the one hand, a sizeable United Nations
presence in Angola will certainly assist the peace process
and help to successfully implement the provisions of the
Lusaka Protocol. On the other hand, the situation in
Angola remains fragile. We cannot be absolutely sure
whether the parties will continue to demonstrate the
political determination to abide by the commitments they
undertook in Lusaka.
Another more practical but none the less substantial
aspect of the Council's decision is that, if peace-keepers
are to be deployed, there must be not only a peace to be
kept, but other conditions as well, to lend meaning to the
peace-keepers' task. The timetable agreed upon by the
parties in the Lusaka Protocol has already slipped
considerably. In this respect, the approach outlined in the
report of the Secretary-General and reflected in the draft
resolution to authorize UNAVEM III immediately but to
deploy the infantry units only gradually seems to us to be
sensible.
I should also like to highlight two other important
elements of the draft resolution: the importance, given the
magnitude of this problem in Angola, of expeditiously
establishing a well coordinated and comprehensive mine-
clearance programme, and the importance of establishing
a United Nations radio station in consultation with the
Government of Angola.
15
Security Council 3499 (Resumption)
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
As an element for future consideration I should like to
mention the necessity of finding a solution to the problem
of the financing of political parties. This is an important
matter. Experience in Mozambique, where the Government
originally undertook the obligation to provide financial and
other means to RENAMO, has shown this aspect to be
particularly relevant in a peace process.
Let me now return to the underlying question of
authorizing UNAVEM III. Only the Government of Angola
and UNITA can make UNAVEM III a success. Only their
willingness to achieve peace and their commitment to
making the Lusaka Protocol work can lead to long-lasting
peace for Angola. If the cooperation required of the
Angolan parties is not forthcoming, the Security Council
will have to reconsider the role of the United Nations in
Angola.
We have carefully considered the various arguments.
There are obvious risks if the international community gets
involved in a new peace-keeping operation in Angola. But
we think that the international community is right to incur
those risks to help achieve a real and lasting peace in
Angola. We shall therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution.
The President: I thank the representative of Germany
for the kind words he addressed to me and to our
Permanent Representative to the United Nations,
Ambassador Legwaila.
Mr. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda) (interpretation from
French): My delegation is delighted, Sir, to see you
presiding over this meeting of the Security Council. We
wish also to convey our sincere congratulations to
Ambassador Legwaila on his assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of February. We are
convinced that his wisdom and competence will ensure that
the work of the Council yields fruitful and positive results.
My delegation assures you of its full cooperation.
We wish also to congratulate the previous President,
the Ambassador of Argentina, on the way in which he
conducted the work of the Council in January.
The delegation of Rwanda pays tribute to the
Secretary-General for his excellent report dated
1 February 1995 on the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM II).
We also take this opportunity to pay a heartfelt tribute
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mâitre Blondin Beye, for his fine work in the quest for a
just, equitable and lasting peace in Angola.
We warmly welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Angola as the Council considers the question
of his country. The delegation of Rwanda also welcomes
the members of the ministerial delegation dispatched by
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) on this day,
8 February 1995. The Government of Rwanda knows the
importance of OAU involvement in the settlement of
regional conflicts in Africa. My Government appreciates
the key role of that organization in negotiations between
the various conflicting parties in Rwanda. That is why we
are convinced that, with adequate material and financial
support, the OAU can be an African tool with a role
complementing that of the organs of the United Nations.
In the historic record of cooperation between the
United Nations — in this case the Security Council —
and the Organization of African Unity, 8 February 1995
will stand as a memorable date for present and future
generations because of its special mark on the peace
process in Angola.
The historic content of the report before the Council
enables the delegation of Rwanda to feel the steady wind
of optimism wafting over Angola and over the Council's
work on this item since the adoption of resolution
966 (1994) on 8 December 1994. We note with pleasure
the international community's relief at the positive
outcome of the peace process, a process long hampered
by stumbling blocks that nearly discouraged the architects
of national reconciliation in Angola.
The brother African country of Angola, long the
victim of an unrelenting civil war and of enormously
lethal events, has just provided eloquent proof that it is
always possible to reconcile warring brothers who want
to bury the hatchet the better to work together to build a
peaceful, democratic and prosperous nation.
In that context, my delegation pays tribute to the
leaders of the Angolan Government and of UNITA for
their clear-sightedness, courage and ability to
compromise, which led to the “Acordos de Paz” and to
the signing of the Lusaka Protocol. The whole world now
sees the signing of the Lusaka Protocol as the keystone of
the Angolan peace process.
At a time when the international community has
taken regretful note of the fact that the majority of least-
developed countries and many of the world's conflicts are
16
Security Council 3499 (Resumption)
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
to be found in Africa, the delegation of Rwanda welcomes
the positive developments in the political situation in
southern Africa: in Pretoria, Maputo and Luanda.
In the case of Angola, we welcome the prospect of a
meeting between President José Eduardo dos Santos and
Mr. Jonas Savimbi, a historic meeting that will affect the
future of peace in a country that had long been a victim of
the East-West conflict, conducted through African proxies.
That situation was confirmation of the African saying that
when elephants clash, it is the grass that suffers.
The rebuilding and the socio-economic development
of Angola can never succeed on territory said to hold the
world's greatest concentration of land-mines. The Rwandese
delegation therefore hopes for the very rapid deployment of
UNAVEM III, which can hasten mine-clearance, and the
demobilization and socio-professional reintegration of
UNITA troops not retained in the national army.
Now that the hour of national reconstruction and of
the strengthening of democracy has come in Angola, the
delegation of Rwanda wishes to commend all those vital
forces that are writing a glorious page in the history of
modern Africa by putting an end to a 20-year-long
fratricidal war.
However late it was in emerging, the example of
Angola will remain memorable in the annals of African
history and of United Nations diplomatic history, much to
the joy and happiness of the Angolan people and of the
international community.
The immensity of the task of national reconstruction
for the socio-economic development of Angola requires the
mobilization of multifaceted assistance from the
international community for that country.
The delegation of Rwanda hopes that the arms
merchants who, from near or far, contributed to the
destruction of Angola will become builders of its
reconstruction and socio-economic development.
It is also to be hoped that the international community
will step up its humanitarian assistance, which will then
quickly become development assistance for the
socio-economic recovery of Angola.
In order to contribute to making irreversible the
coming of the era of peace, stability and democracy in
Angola, my delegation supported UNAVEM II and on
8 December 1994 expressed a desire for the rapid
deployment of UNAVEM III.
As regards the principal objectives and mandate of
UNAVEM III, the delegation of Rwanda supports its
establishment in order to back the parties in their efforts
to restore peace and to achieve national reconciliation in
the country in the spirit of the “Acordos de Paz”, of the
Lusaka Protocol and of the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.
We deplore the delay in the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol and hope that the remaining military and
police observers authorized in the framework of
UNAVEM II will soon be deployed in order to help
monitor respect for the cease-fire.
My delegation, which is optimistic regarding the new
era of peace and political stability in southern Africa,
supports the idea of the rapid deployment of UNAVEM
III and will therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution.
The President: I thank the representative of Rwanda
for the kind words he expressed to our Ambassador.
I shall now put draft resolution S/1995/117 to the
vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Botswana, China, Czech Republic,
France, Germany, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy,
Nigeria, Oman, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 976 (1995).
I shall now call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements following the voting.
Mrs. Albright (United States of America): Mr.
Minister, we are honoured by the fact that you have
chosen to chair this important meeting. We congratulate
Botswana on its ascension to the presidency of the
Council and look forward to working closely with
Ambassador Legwaila as he wisely guides us through this
month's work.
17
Security Council 3499 (Resumption)
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
We are also most appreciative of the outstanding
management of the Council by the Ambassador of
Argentina last month. His efficiency and humour were
invaluable to our work.
I should also like to welcome the Foreign Ministers of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) to our
proceedings. We very much appreciate their presence and
support.
Finally, I should like to welcome our good friend, the
Foreign Minister of Angola, to these very important
proceedings.
Today the Council has taken an important step to
support peace in Angola and the tide of democracy
sweeping southern Africa.
The Lusaka Protocol, signed on 20 November 1994,
has, we hope, brought an end to the long civil strife that
has plagued Angola. It is an agreement that meets the
legitimate concerns of both Angolan parties. It provided
concrete guarantees of UNITA's political and physical
survival, through its participation in all sectors of the
Government, the military and the police. And it ensures that
UNITA will voluntarily relinquish its armed forces and
assume its legitimate role as an opposition political party.
The Lusaka Protocol and the efforts of the Angolan parties
to fulfil their commitments are vital and promising steps on
the road to a lasting peace in Angola. The third United
Nations Verification Mission in Angola (UNAVEM III) will
form an integral part of that process.
However, there is disturbing news today that Mr.
Jonas Savimbi is casting doubt on the Lusaka Protocol. The
resolution, in its twelfth preambular paragraph, stresses the
need for President dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi
“to meet without delay with a view to building the
necessary political momentum for the successful
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol”.
That meeting now becomes more critical in the light of
Mr. Savimbi's remarks. We strongly urge both leaders to
meet immediately.
My Government wishes to emphasize that any
deployment of infantry units in UNAVEM III cannot
proceed without the Secretary-General's report that the
Lusaka Protocol is being effectively implemented.
Therefore, our message to all parties is very clear: do not
make a serious mistake at this crucial time. Do the right
thing for your people and for the future of your country.
This resolution represents the international community's
confidence in the Angolan people. We hope that in the
coming days it will not be undermined by any of their
leaders.
The mission of UNAVEM III has clear objectives,
as described in the Lusaka Protocol: to monitor
disarmament and demobilization of combatants, to assist
military and police integration and to facilitate the
incorporation of UNITA into the Angolan Government.
When these objectives have been achieved, UNAVEM III
will end its mandate. We have been clear in stating in the
resolution our expectation that all of this can be
accomplished within two years. We mean to hold the
Angolan parties to their commitment to complete the
process.
The people of Angola deserve our support in helping
to end the war. The Lusaka Protocol offers a genuine
opportunity to construct a lasting peace, and the
coordinated involvement of a United Nations peace-
keeping force is vital to its implementation. A return to
peace will help protect the impressive democratic
movement throughout southern Africa and provide an
opportunity for the Angolan people to realize the
economic potential of their rich land. Despite the war,
Angola provided major oil exports. Diamond mining and
excellent agricultural lands offer the hope of prosperity.
Peace will end the bloodshed and waste that Angola has
endured for more than 30 years.
But we have to be vigilant in providing this support.
The United Nations and UNAVEM can assist the process
of political reconciliation, but it is up to the parties
themselves to demonstrate by their actions the political
will to fulfil the Lusaka Protocol. That is why we think
it important that the Secretary-General inform the Council
every month of progress in deploying UNAVEM III and
in implementing the Lusaka Protocol, and why it is
important to express our intention to review the role of
the United Nations in Angola if the cooperation required
from the parties, upon which UNAVEM III is based, is
substantially delayed or not forthcoming. It cannot be
stressed often enough that the parties must take action to
live up to their commitments. The Lusaka Protocol clearly
sets out a timetable, on which the parties have already
fallen more than a month behind. Both the Government
and UNITA must, to quote the Lusaka Protocol,
“furnish the United nations with details concerning
their respective forces to include number of men,
18
Security Council 3499 (Resumption)
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
composition and type of force, type of equipment and
specific location.” (S/1994/1441, annex, p. 13,
para. (c))
As the Protocol itself notes,
“This will allow the United Nations to install the
appropriate verification, monitoring or control
mechanisms.” (ibid.)
The Protocol signed by the parties themselves lays out
what they must do. But, as we have seen in the past, and in
Mr. Savimbi's remarks today, the parties are sometimes
reluctant to carry out their agreements. This recalcitrance
must end, for without the input and active cooperation of
the parties, the peace-keeping effort we are about to embark
upon can have no more success than past efforts, and it will
not be sustained by this body.
We also need to ensure that the support of the
international community is used effectively by the Angolan
parties and that the United Nations presence does not
become an excuse for failure to move forward. The initial
mandate of the operation will be for six months, and the
Council will be in a position to review progress before
reviewing the mandate. The peace process detailed in the
Lusaka Protocol is scheduled to be completed in May 1996.
We have in this resolution declared the Council's
expectation that UNAVEM will conclude its operations by
February 1997 — that is giving the Angolans enough time
to hold elections scheduled to take place once the peace
process has been completed.
The Angolan Government has offered to help offset
the cost of UNAVEM III, including by providing free or at-
cost petroleum, aircraft and buildings, in addition to the
usual waivers of customs duties and other fees. The
resolution we have adopted calls for active exploration with
both parties of substantial additional contributions to help
cover the costs of peace-keeping. It also requests the
Secretary-General to report information on such
contributions. It is fitting and fair that the rich natural
resources of Angola be made available to support
UNAVEM III.
In closing, let me reiterate my Government's
determination to key our support for this operation in
Angola to the actions of the Angolans themselves. If
Angola's leaders are prepared to make peace by taking
concrete steps towards disarmament and demobilization of
troops, then the United States will support efforts to keep
that peace. If they are prepared to help offset the significant
costs of this operation, we will continue to support it. For
we have learned elsewhere that United Nations peace-
keeping can be effective only when the psychology of
war gives way to a commitment to peace. My
Government hopes that such a transformation has truly
taken hold in Angola.
Many have worked hard to mediate an end to
decades of civil war and to foster reconciliation in
Angola. Peace in Angola would end Africa's longest-
running conflict, one that has cost up to a million lives,
crippled 100,000 people and left 7 million refugees and
displaced persons. With our decision today we have
advanced substantially the prospect that the hope of the
Lusaka Protocol, and the promise of peace in Angola,
can be realized.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United States for the kind words she addressed to me.
Mr. Gomersall (United Kingdom): May I first
congratulate the delegation of Botswana on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February and warmly welcome you here today, Mr.
Minister, to preside over this important debate. Our
sincere thanks also go to Ambassador Cárdenas of
Argentina and to his delegation for the excellent way in
which they presided over the Council's work in January.
May I also welcome the Minister of Foreign Affairs
of Angola and extend the British Government's
recognition and respect to the Ministers of Foreign Affairs
from the Organization of African Unity (OAU) Council
of Ministers, whose presence here reminds us how much
the hopes of Africa ride upon United Nations engagement
in the solution of African problems. May I also express
the British Government's support for the OAU's own
distinctive role, particularly in preventive conflict
resolution.
The Security Council's decision today substantially
to increase the United Nations operation in Angola
underlines its commitment to support the people of
Angola in their long search for peace and national
reconciliation. It represents the Council's trust that the
signing of the Lusaka Protocol on 20 November 1994 and
the coming into force two days later of a cease-fire were
a clear demonstration of the parties' commitment to a
peaceful solution to Angola's problems. It is encouraging
that the Secretary-General has now, three months later,
been able to report that the cease-fire is generally holding
and that the parties have reaffirmed their commitment to
19
Security Council 3499 (Resumption)
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
the “Acordos de Paz”, to the Council's resolutions and to
the Lusaka Protocol. We commend and thank the Secretary
General, and in particular his Special Representative, as
well as the personnel of UNAVEM II, the Government of
Zambia and the three observer States to the Angolan peace
process for their persistence and patience, which have
brought us to today's new phase.
The Council has kept faith with the people of Angola
during the civil war that followed UNITA's rejection of the
results of the 1992 elections. But experience of Angola has
taught us to be cautious. As Council resolutions have said
repeatedly, the people of Angola are ultimately responsible
for the future of their country. The United Nations can help
them, but it cannot do so if they will not help themselves.
As many have said here today, peace cannot be imposed on
the people of Angola. Therefore, the Government of Angola
and UNITA must demonstrate, by their deeds as well as
words, that the international community has made the right
decision. An early meeting between President dos Santos
and Mr. Savimbi, following on from the successful
meetings of the Chiefs of Staff, would indeed send the right
signal in this regard.
The Secretary-General has stated in his report that he
will not be prepared to proceed with the deployment of the
main infantry components of UNAVEM III unless he can
determine that the parties have implemented certain
essential tasks set out in the Lusaka Protocol. The Council
firmly agrees. As the resolution we have just adopted
makes clear, it is not prepared to countenance further
substantial delays or lack of cooperation from the parties,
and would, in those circumstances, review the role of the
United Nations in Angola. The Council also expects that
the mission of UNAVEM III will be completed without
undue delay, in accordance with the schedule set out in the
Lusaka Protocol, and it believes, rightly in my
Government's view, that this can and should be done before
February 1997, two years from now.
We welcome the substantial improvement in the
humanitarian situation in Angola. We support the
Secretary-General's call for donors to respond generously to
meet the humanitarian needs of the Angolan people. My
Government has contributed around $36 million in
humanitarian aid since the United Nations launched its
major international appeal in 1993. We shall continue to do
what we can to help.
The situation in Angola is not the only one in Africa
on the agenda of the Security Council. Regrettably, war
afflicts several African countries. Paragraph 17 of the
present resolution encourages cooperation between the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity and
recalls the contribution that regional organizations can
make to crisis management and conflict resolution. We
very much agree, and it was with this in mind that the
British Foreign Secretary launched an initiative in the
most recent General Assembly session to enhance the
capacity for preventive action and peace-keeping in
Africa. Since then, there have been fruitful discussions
with African countries, the OAU, the United Nations, and
some non-African countries, held in Accra, Cairo and
Harare, of practical proposals in the areas of conflict
prevention and support for African peace-keeping nations,
including greater cooperation in training and logistic
support.
My Government also sees this resolution as a
reaffirmation by the international community of its
commitment to United Nations mechanisms to resolve
conflicts that are beyond the means or ability of
individual nations to solve. But we cannot be oblivious to
the clouds that will hang over United Nations peace-
keeping as a whole if important donors cannot follow
through by financing the operations that they themselves
have played a leading role in establishing. We are well
aware of the powerful testimony that our colleague from
the United States has presented on the role which the
United Nations plays in furthering international security
and in shouldering missions and financial burdens that
would otherwise fall, in much worse form, upon
individual Governments. We can only hope that her
arguments will be heeded before we all have to draw very
painful conclusions for the type of operation which we
are unanimously supporting today.
Finally, the United Kingdom is very conscious of the
potential which a lasting peace in Angola could unlock,
not only in Angola itself, but in the region of southern
Africa as a whole. We hope to be able to play our own
part practically, as we have in the Council hitherto, in
helping the Government and people of Angola to realize
their commitments and their hopes for a better future. We
were glad to be able to contribute a contingent to the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda, and we
are currently considering a request from the United
Nations to contribute to UNAVEM III in Angola.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United Kingdom for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): Let me begin, Sir, by
congratulating your Ambassador on his assumption of the
20
Security Council 3499 (Resumption)
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February and by expressing my delegation's deep
satisfaction at seeing you, Mr. Minister, presiding over the
Council today. We have every confidence that, given your
long experience, you will guide the work of the Council
most effectively.
I should also like to express to the Ambassador of
Argentina our appreciation for the skilful way in which he
conducted the work of the Council in the month of January.
His presidency last month marked an efficient beginning of
our work for 1995.
Furthermore, my delegation would like to welcome the
Foreign Ministers of the States members of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) to our meeting.
Indonesia commends His Excellency Mr. Venâncio de
Moura, Minister of External Relations of the Republic of
Angola, for his valuable remarks this morning. The
presence here of all those Ministers emphasizes the need
for the immediate establishment and deployment of a
United Nations peace-keeping operation while the search
for peace in Angola is intensified.
With regard to the question under consideration, my
Government wishes to convey its thanks to the Secretary-
General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for his comprehensive
and detailed report (S/1995/97) on the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM II). In particular,
we welcome the very good prospects and solid logistical
planning for the future work of UNAVEM III, contained in
that document.
Furthermore, my delegation wishes to express its
appreciation to the Secretary-General's Special
Representative in Angola, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye,
especially for his efforts to improve the political climate in
Angola and to prepare the way for a meeting between
President dos Santos and Mr. Jonas Savimbi.
We take note of the positive developments indicated
by the agreement of the Government of Angola and of
UNITA to meet, and also by the signing of the Lusaka
Protocol on 20 November 1994. We especially welcome
reports that the parties have been observing a cease-fire
which is generally holding. This encouraging process was
also reflected clearly in the insightful statement made by
His Excellency Mr. Venâncio de Moura this morning.
Hence, we hope that the concrete evidence of the
acceptance of the Lusaka Protocol by the Government of
Angola and UNITA will soon be manifested in the full
implementation of the accord. We further hope that the
parties will take all the decisive and necessary steps to
assure the accord's implementation, for through such an
undertaking an atmosphere conducive to attaining peace
will be created, thus giving impetus to national
reconciliation.
In this regard, I should also like to bring to the
Council's attention the fact that certain constitutive
elements of the Lusaka Protocol, such as de-mining and
the quartering, disarming and demobilization of troops,
under UNAVEM I and UNAVEM II, have yet to be
implemented. This would seem to indicate that there is a
greater time lag in operations in the field than the report
on UNAVEM II may suggest. This pertains to a recent
increase in the number of military observers, deployment
of United Nations military and police elements country-
wide and the setting up of outstations in some critical
areas.
Indonesia urges that those operations be carried out
immediately and that the Mission's pace be quickened. To
do so, it is imperative that the international community
lend its active support and enable such features of the
Mission to be successfully carried out in keeping with the
agreed timetable of the Lusaka Protocol.
We wish to stress that substantial additional funds
remain to be obtained from the donor community. In this
connection, my Government would like to thank the
Secretary-General for the addendum to his report,
containing cost estimates for the enlargement of the
United Nations operation in Angola, while we also
appreciate the continued support of the Government of
Angola for all elements of UNAVEM II.
My delegation voted in favour of the resolution
establishing UNAVEM III, expressly for the purpose of
keeping to the agreed timetable leading to long-lasting
peace and development in Angola. We support the
Secretary-General's proposal to establish a further
enlarged United Nations operation in Angola, because we
find it to be a practical tactical action which would assist
the parties in restoring peace, achieving national
reconciliation and beginning the restoration of the
economy and infrastructure.
Therefore, my Government would like to stress the
importance of the Secretary-General's recommendation
that UNAVEM III should immediately take over from
UNAVEM II. The speed with which UNAVEM III is
deployed will be crucial for maintaining the momentum
towards peace in Angola. In this regard, the commitments
21
Security Council 3499 (Resumption)
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
of both the Angolan Government and UNITA to implement
the “Acordos de Paz”, the Lusaka Protocol and the relevant
Security Council resolutions are essential to that effort.
Although my Government is aware that
implementation has fallen behind schedule, this must not
allow any party even to hope to renew the conflict. We
were encouraged to hear the Honourable Mr. Bwanali,
Foreign Minister of Malawi, say this morning, as leader of
the OAU Council of Ministers delegation to this meeting,
“that the situation is different this time around and
that the Angolan people are tired of war.”
(S/PV.3499, p. 6)
We therefore recommend that all the parties concerned
cooperate in expediting the electoral process which was
disrupted in 1992. The holding of the second round of
presidential elections, which will take place after the United
Nations has declared that the requisite conditions have been
met, ought to be seen as a cherished symbol of the
normalization of Angola's national life, a goal which can be
realized if the people of Angola so decide.
Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): Allow me to welcome
you, Mr. Minister, to the Security Council and to
congratulate you most warmly on your assumption of the
presidency for the month of February. We are fully
confident that you and your capable Permanent
Representative will conduct the work of the Council in an
effective and efficient manner.
I should also like to pay a well-deserved tribute to
Ambassador Cárdenas of Argentina and members of his
delegation for their excellent work last month.
It also gives me great honour and pleasure to welcome
the Council of Ministers of Foreign Affairs and the
Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU). Their presence in our midst today is indicative of
the importance of the issue before the Council. We deeply
appreciate their contributions to this debate and express the
hope that such démarches will be repeated in the future, in
other serious and more complicated conflicts in Africa, in
the interest of furthering the cause of peace and security in
Africa as a whole.
The signing of the Lusaka Protocol between the
Government of Angola and UNITA on 20 November 1994
and the cease-fire agreement between the two parties mark
the beginning of a new era in the history of the Angolan
conflict. I should like, through you, Mr. President, and
through the Foreign Minister of Angola, who is with us
today, to congratulate the Government and the people of
Angola, as well as UNITA, on this historic event. By
signing this important document the two parties have said
“Enough” to the destructive war which raged in their
countries for two decades and which claimed thousands
of lives and caused widespread destruction of their
infrastructure, State property.
In the past we have had the opportunity to welcome
this positive development, and today we should like to
welcome the fact that, two months after the signing of the
Lusaka Protocol, the cease-fire is still holding, without
major violations, and that the Joint Commission
established at Lusaka is continuing its work aimed at
creating an atmosphere of mutual trust and confidence
between the parties. We sincerely hope that the
anticipated meeting between President dos Santos and Mr.
Savimbi will soon take place with a view to building the
necessary political momentum for the successful
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol.
Although the status quo in Angola is a cause for
optimism that peace will be restored to that country, it is
vital that the two parties continue to demonstrate the
political will and the commitment necessary for the
achievement of peace and national reconciliation through
strict and timely compliance with the “Acordos de Paz”,
the Lusaka Protocol and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in the interests of durable peace, security and
economic and social development in their country.
The resolution that we have just adopted, which has
authorized the establishment of the third United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) to assist the
parties in the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol,
demonstrates the resolve of the international community
to continue its support for the Angolan peace process.
But, in the meantime, this resolution must send to all the
parties the clear message that the international community
will not entertain any delay in the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol. We deemed it appropriate that the draft
resolution should contain such a provision. We therefore
hope that all parties in Angola will take today's Security
Council message seriously and in the spirit of national
reconciliation, peace, brotherhood, coexistence and
harmony, in the interests of building a new democratic
Angola.
In conclusion, I should like to express my
delegation's appreciation to the Secretary-General, Mr.
Boutros Boutros-Ghali, to his Special Representative in
22
Security Council 3499 (Resumption)
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
Angola, to the three observer States of the Angolan peace
process and to all the States of the Organization of African
Unity — in particular, Zambia, which hosted the peace
negotiations — for their invaluable and effective
contribution to finding a just, durable and lasting solution
to the conflict in Angola. We are pleased to note that their
concerted efforts have borne fruit.
The President: I thank the representative of Oman for
his kind words addressed to me.
Mrs. Cañas (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish):
I should like at the outset to welcome you, Sir, to
congratulate you, together with Ambassador Legwaila, on
Botswana's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council, and to express my delegation's readiness to
cooperate in the discharge of your duties, which we are
certain will be crowned with success.
I should also like to extend a welcome to, and to
express appreciation for the presence of, the delegation of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU), composed of the
Foreign Ministers of your country and of Lesotho, Malawi,
Namibia, South Africa, Tunisia and Zambia, the
representatives of Guinea-Bissau and Senegal and, of
course, Foreign Minister Venâncio de Moura of the
Republic of Angola, who is with us at the Security Council
table. The presence of such an important delegation, as well
as the important peace-keeping operation that the Security
Council has just established, reflects the support that the
international community has been lending to the peace
process in Angola since 1988, as well as the renewed hope
on this occasion following the signing of the Lusaka
Protocol by the Government of Angola and UNITA.
Having left behind 20 years of brutal civil war, which
began as the independence process in Angola was getting
under way, the people of that country deserve to take in
peace the path of reconciliation and reconstruction. The
United Nations has actively supported this process, and
today it is prepared to take an important further step. But
at the same time the Government of Angola and UNITA
should be aware that it is they who bear primary
responsibility for crowning this process with success. On
their continued commitment and implementation of the
agreements reached will depend to a great extent the
support that the international community is prepared to
lend. We believe that this process would be significantly
strengthened by a direct meeting between President dos
Santos and Mr. Savimbi.
In this context, we should also like to highlight in a
very positive way Angola's offer, detailed in its letter
circulated as document S/1994/1451, relating to the
contribution in kind that it has committed to the
application of the Lusaka Protocol and to the third United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III). We
attach special importance to this effort, in the light of the
great humanitarian crisis experienced by that country.
We should like most especially to thank the
Secretary-General for the very complete report that he has
submitted; we find especially useful the details of the
mandate and the concept of the operation. We wish to
emphasize that the information on the cease-fire and the
parties' repeated commitment to respect for and fulfilment
of the “Acordos de Paz” and the steps established by the
Lusaka Protocol were determining factors in the Council's
advances towards establishing the third phase of the
Verification Mission. This United Nations peace-keeping
operation is the most ambitious and complex to have been
created for nearly two years.
The resolution that we have just adopted provides,
through the establishment of UNAVEM III, the necessary
framework for the Government of Angola and UNITA to
fulfil promptly and completely the provisions of the
“Acordos de Paz”, the Lusaka Protocol and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. Accordingly, we hope
that the parties will take all necessary steps to avoid any
further delays, and we hope that the UNAVEM III
planning and support elements will be deployed promptly,
thus allowing the rapid arrival of infantry units and other
components of the force, when conditions permit.
In the light of the experience gained in other peace-
keeping operations, we would particularly emphasize the
need for the rapid introduction of a broad and well
coordinated programme of mine clearance. We know that
this is a grave long-term problem that the Angolan people
will have to face, and the sooner we begin the task the
better. The support of the international community in this
regard is essential.
Aspects relating to public information also seem to
us important in this new phase of United Nations work in
Angola. We hope that concrete steps will be taken along
these lines, in close cooperation with the Government of
Angola.
The machinery for Security Council follow-up
established in this resolution are also important, since,
without depriving the Secretary-General of the flexibility
23
Security Council 3499 (Resumption)
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
that he needs for the management of a peace-keeping
operation, they will enable the Security Council to manage
the political aspects properly and with the necessary
urgency.
The Argentine Republic, in addition to being another
South Atlantic coastal State and working together with
Angola in the Zone of peace and cooperation of the South
Atlantic, has close ties of friendship and cooperation with
that country. Accordingly, since it gained its independence
in 1975, we have been cooperating with it, and from the
very beginning of UNAVEM, in 1988, we have
continuously contributed military and police personnel. This
commitment by Argentina to Angola continues and will be
expanded in UNAVEM III. The era of peace and hope that
is now beginning for Angola will undoubtedly provide
opportunities for greater cooperation between our peoples.
With the cycle that is beginning, a well-founded hope
arises for an era of peace, stability and prosperity for
southern Africa. That region of the African continent has
every potential to become an important axis of
development, whose benefits will undoubtedly extend
beyond its borders. The Argentine Republic expresses its
hope again today that this crucial opportunity will be fully
seized by the Angolan people, and is prepared to cooperate
to that end.
The President: I thank the representative of Argentina
for her kind words addressed to me and to our Permanent
Representative to the United Nations, Ambassador
Legwaila.
Mr. Rovensky (Czech Republic): First of all, let me
express my delegation's delight in seeing you, Sir, presiding
over today's important meeting of the Council. At the same
time, we congratulate your delegation on the assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February. You have our full support and confidence. I
would also like to express our high appreciation for the
effective and business-like manner in which Ambassador
Cárdenas of Argentina guided the affairs of the Council
during January.
Finally, let me welcome sincerely the Foreign Minister
of Angola and all the members of the ministerial delegation
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) to the Security
Council.
The signing of the Lusaka Protocol on
20 November 1994 opened the path towards peace and
stability in Angola. The resolution which the Council has
just adopted marks a very important step forward along
this path. By authorizing the establishment of the new
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM
III) peace-keeping operation, the international
community — and, on its behalf, the Security Council —
has firmly committed itself to aid the process of national
reconciliation in Angola.
But let me stress that even the best-drafted Security
Council resolution cannot in itself guarantee the success
of the political settlement in Angola and the return of
lasting peace and prosperity to this long-suffering African
country. It is none other than the Government of Angola
and the leaders of UNITA who bear primary
responsibility for the success or failure of the peace
process. It is up to them to make sure that the letter and
the spirit of the Lusaka agreements are scrupulously
adhered to in the months ahead. The United Nations and
its Security Council will of course support them in their
quest for lasting peace and reconciliation. However, this
role cannot but be a supporting one and should be
understood as such by the Angolan parties.
The Angolan parties also carry the primary
responsibility for the safety and freedom of movement of
United Nations and other personnel deployed under
UNAVEM III. We hope that the intended meeting
between the President of Angola, Mr. dos Santos, and the
leader of UNITA, Mr. Savimbi, will give new impetus to
the peace process.
The Czech Republic welcomes the first successful
steps taken by both parties in the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol. However, we are concerned by
indications that, a mere few weeks into the
implementation of the Protocol, the process is already
slipping behind schedule. It would hardly be acceptable
for this trend to continue. It is necessary for the Angolan
parties to implement the Lusaka Protocol in accordance
with the agreed timetable and even to try to accelerate the
whole process.
We believe that the OAU has an important role to
play in pushing the peace process in Angola forward.
Based on lessons from the past, the United Nations and
the OAU have to work together to bring peace, stability
and development to Angola and the region. After the
flourishing of peace and democracy in Mozambique,
successful national reconciliation and the strengthening of
democracy in Angola would represent another positive
example for Africa, which presently is the theatre of more
internal conflicts than any other part of the world.
24
Security Council 3499 (Resumption)
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
Based on the Secretary-General's overall positive
evaluation of the situation in Angola, as indicated in his
report, the Czech Republic, whose military observers
actively participated in UNAVEM II operations, fully
supports the deployment of UNAVEM III. We expect in
particular at this stage that the cease-fire arrangements will
be meticulously implemented by both sides in good faith.
The fact that a number of countries have expressed
their readiness to contribute their personnel and material to
UNAVEM III is an encouraging sign of confidence in the
process of national reconciliation in Angola. We are
grateful that this confidence is reflected in the language of
our resolution. We consider it important that the resolution
was drafted very carefully and that the Security Council
took into consideration all important elements needed not
only for an early launch of this new peace-keeping
operation, but also for its effective functioning and its
successful conclusion. We also underline that, in accordance
with this resolution, the Security Council will be ready to
review the role of the United Nations in Angola if the
cooperation required from the parties is not forthcoming or
is substantially delayed.
We do not forget the fact that many Angolan civilians
are in urgent need of humanitarian assistance. We urge both
parties to create, with the assistance of international
humanitarian organizations, conditions which would
facilitate the return of thousands of displaced Angolans to
their homes.
In conclusion, I should like to convey our deep
appreciation to the Secretary-General, the troika of observer
States — Portugal, the United States of America and the
Russian Federation — and the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, for having
contributed greatly to the success of the negotiating process.
The President: I thank the representative of the Czech
Republic for his kind words addressed to me.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Botswana.
The Botswana delegation welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM II), contained in document
S/1995/97. I wish to pay a special tribute to the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative for Angola, Mr.
Alioune Blondin Beye, for the excellent work they have
done in the search for peace in Angola. We are meeting
here today to launch UNAVEM III thanks to their
resilience and tenacious efforts to find a solution to the
Angolan conflict.
The presence here today of the African Foreign
Ministers and the Secretary-General of the Organization
of African Unity is a clear indication of the importance
which Africa attaches to the Angolan conflict. The Lusaka
Protocol and the “Acordos de Paz” which preceded it are
the blueprints for the settlement of one of the most brutal
and destructive conflicts in Africa. It is our hope that our
Angolan brothers will, this time, faithfully adhere to the
spirit and letter of the commitments they have made in
these declarations of intent.
We also hope that they will leave no stone unturned
to ensure that UNAVEM III becomes the success that the
United Nations and our tortured continent want it to be.
Nobody, and certainly none of us in southern Africa,
wants to hear anything about UNAVEM IV. UNAVEM
III is Angola's last chance. It is our last chance.
The will of the international community to stay the
course with repeated, and costly, peace-keeping operations
has been tested beyond what is humanly acceptable.
Angola forms an integral part of southern Africa; it pains
our hearts to see the people of Angola continue to kill
each other with abandon in a region that is now otherwise
free of war, a region now marked by good governance
and the rule of law.
We want for the people of Angola what we cherish
most in Botswana: peace and stability, freedom and
development. In other words, we desire for the people of
Angola exactly the good things in life that we desire for
ourselves. We want Angola to become another political
success story in our region, following in the footsteps of
Malawi, South Africa and Mozambique. That would make
southern Africa a strong and viable economic proposition.
As I have already stated, there is general “peace-
keeping-operation fatigue” among members of the
international community. This is perfectly understandable:
peace-keeping operations, by their nature, are very
expensive enterprises with no immediate benefits or
returns. They are prone to breakdowns, as the experience
of the United Nations in Angola, Rwanda and Somalia —
to mention but three cases — has amply demonstrated.
They also become wasteful in material terms, and a
source of frustration. They divert scarce resources that
could otherwise be released for social and economic
development. It is for those reasons that our Angolan
25
Security Council 3499 (Resumption)
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
brothers must understand why UNAVEM III must on no
account fail.
I have so far placed the onus for the success of
UNAVEM III on the people of Angola. I believe, however,
that the international community has an inescapable role to
play in the progress of Angola towards stable and lasting
peace, national reconciliation and reconstruction. After all,
some Members of the United Nations may be as
responsible as the people of Angola for the colossal
destruction and mayhem that have unquestionably befallen
that country. In that context, the international community
should get its act together and assist the people of Angola
in achieving peace.
In that regard, we wish to urge the Security Council
to guard against making the United Nations Mission in
Angola a victim of stringent conditionalities that could
impede its implementation. We should realize that the work
of the United Nations in Angola is not going to be easy.
Failure or success will depend to a large extent on the
patience, understanding and cooperation of all involved.
There will be no easy solutions. The fact that we are
discussing the deployment of UNAVEM III today is a clear
indication that we are not dealing with a normal situation.
It calls for the exercise of restraint and flexibility in
monitoring the situation on the ground. In other words,
isolated and sporadic violations of the cease-fire provisions
should not be used as a pretext for the withdrawal of the
Mission.
We should also realize that each peace-keeping
operation is unique and that the experience gained in one
peace-keeping operation is not necessarily directly
replicable in others. Each peace-keeping operation is an
experience in itself. This should not be taken as advocacy
of or a licence for an open-ended peace-keeping mission.
We have noted the concerns of those who advocate “sunset
provisions” in all peace-keeping operations. There is no
problem with that approach so long as it is universally
applied. It would surely help make the parties to a conflict
understand that the United Nations does not have an infinite
amount of time at its disposal for such operations. At the
same time, however, we should guard against being overly
cautious, to the extent that we might threaten the success of
the Mission.
In short, all we are saying is that we should not
unintentionally impede the progress of UNAVEM III with
too many conditionalities. We should also ensure that we
have in place post-conflict peace-building measures, which
are an indispensable condition for the stabilization of the
country. Thus, the staged implementation of the operation
at the beginning should be followed by phased withdrawal
of the Mission to help the people of Angola build mutual
trust and confidence and live peacefully together as good
neighbours.
To that end, there should be a continued, strong
United Nations presence in Angola beyond the expiry of
the mandate of UNAVEM III to help the people of
Angola adjust to a new life. We are happy that
paragraphs 37 to 39 of the Secretary-General's report
cover some of these concerns.
Let me highlight once again the primary
responsibility of the people of Angola and their leaders
for the successful implementation of the provisions both
of the “Acordos de Paz” and the Lusaka Protocol. This
could be their last chance to receive the support of the
international community in the search for a peaceful
solution to their problem.
Equally, the United Nations has a responsibility to
the people of Angola. There should be no attempt or
threat to withdraw the Mission for flimsy reasons at any
stage in the implementation of the provisions of the
present resolution. It is the collective responsibility of all
involved to usher Angola into a new era of peace and
stability. We should do everything in our power to ensure
that we succeed this time.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The Minister of External Relations of Angola has
asked to make a statement. I call upon him now.
Mr. de Moura (Angola) (interpretation from
French): I asked to speak in order to thank the members
of the Security Council, my fellow Ministers and all the
other guests of the Council who have made statements
since this morning, more than 30 in all. Once more, we
thank them all for their contribution to this debate, which
culminated in the adoption of a new resolution on Angola.
On behalf of the Angolan people and its Government, we
thank the Council and Africa for all their efforts to
establish peace and national reconciliation among
Angolans.
After meeting since this morning, the Security
Council has adopted resolution 976 (1995). We assure
members of our commitment to all resolutions of the
Security Council, especially their positive elements. But,
26
Security Council 3499 (Resumption)
Fiftieth year 8 February 1995
while reiterating our thanks for all the efforts of members
of the Council and of the Secretary-General, we are obliged
to note that my Government regrets that the resolution
includes a provision that we view as a violation of the
Lusaka Protocol, agreed upon by the Angolan parties with
the assistance of a number of members of the Security
Council.
This violation, which began with the Lusaka Protocol,
should be a warning, because the Security Council will
recall what happened with the Bicesse accords, when an
element called “triple zero” was introduced, from
31 May 1991 until elections were held; those elections,
under international supervision, resulted in the present
Government. When we see the reintroduction of this
provision in paragraph 12 of the resolution, we are
compelled to conclude that once again new elements have
been introduced, in violation of the Lusaka Protocol,
agreed to by the parties, elements that might harm the
legitimate Government.
But let us be optimistic, while ensuring that the
violence of 1992 does not recur. Once again, we reiterate
our firm and sincere commitment to the positive aspects
of the resolution that has just been adopted and to the
implementation of the compromise reached with the
signing of the Lusaka Protocol.
The President: There are no further speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of
its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.
The meeting rose at 7.05 p.m.
27
