United Nations S/PV.3654
96-85490 (E) This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fifty-first Year
3654th Meeting
Thursday, 18 April 1996, 9 p.m.
New York
President: Mr. Somavía . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Chile)
Members: Botswana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Nkgowe
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Qin Huasun
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Elaraby
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dejammet
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Eitel
Guinea-Bissau . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Queta
Honduras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Martínez Blanco
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wibisono
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fulci
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Włosowicz
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Park
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Gatilov
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Mr. Plumbly
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Albright
Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 13 April 1996 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/1996/280)
Security Council 3654th meeting
Fifty-first year 18 April 1996
The meeting was called to order at 9.30 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 13 April 1996 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/1996/280)
The President (interpretation from Spanish): In
accordance with the decision taken by the Council at its
3653rd meeting, I invite the representative of Israel to take
a seat at the Council table; I invite the representative of
Lebanon to take a seat at the Council table; I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Colombia, Cuba,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan, Kuwait, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Morocco, Pakistan, Saudi
Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey and the
United Arab Emirates to take the seats reserved for them at
the side of the Council Chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Yaacobi (Israel)
and Mr. Moubarak (Lebanon) took seats at the
Council table; Mr. Farhadi (Afghanistan), Mr.
Lamamra (Algeria), Mr. García (Colombia), Mr.
Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba), Mr. Takht-Ravanchi
(Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Bataineh (Jordan), Mr.
Abulhasan (Kuwait), Mr. Azwai (Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya), Mr. Thanarajasingam (Malaysia), Mr.
Snoussi (Morocco), Mr. Kamal (Pakistan), Mr.
Allagany (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Hallak (Syrian Arab
Republic), Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia), Mr. Tanc (Turkey)
and Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates) took the
seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Bahrain, Canada, the Comoros,
Djibouti, Iraq, Ireland, Japan, Mauritania, Norway, Oman,
Qatar, the Sudan and Yemen, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Buallay
(Bahrain), Mr. Karsgaard (Canada), Mr.
Djimbanaou (Comoros), Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti), Mr.
Hasan (Iraq), Mr. Campbell (Ireland), Mr.
Takahashi (Japan), Mr. N’diaye (Mauritania), Mr.
Biørn Lian (Norway), Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman),
Mr. Al-Ni’mah (Qatar), Mr. Yassin (Sudan) and Mr.
Obadi (Yemen) took the seats reserved for them at
the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now resume its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/1996/292, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Algeria, Bahrain, Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the
Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, the United
Arab Emirates and Yemen. The Comoros has joined as a
sponsor of the draft resolution.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1996/304, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by France, Germany, Honduras,
Italy, Poland, the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.
I should like to draw the attention of members to
document S/1996/295, letter dated 17 April 1996 from the
Permanent Representative of the United Arab Emirates to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting the text of resolution 5573 issued on 17 April
1996 by the Council of the League of Arab States.
Members of the Council have received photocopies
of a letter dated 17 April 1996 from the Permanent
Representative of Italy to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council, transmitting the text
of the declaration by the Presidency on behalf of the
European Union on the situation in the Middle East,
which will be issued as document S/1996/299.
It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the two draft resolutions
before it. If I hear no objection, I shall put the draft
resolutions to the vote now.
2
Security Council 3654th meeting
Fifty-first year 18 April 1996
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/1996/292.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
China, Egypt, Guinea-Bissau, Indonesia
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Botswana, Chile, France, Germany, Honduras, Italy,
Poland, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
result of the voting is as follows: 4 votes in favour, none
against and 11 abstaining. The draft resolution has not been
adopted because it did not obtain the required majority.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I shall
now put to the vote the draft resolution in document
S/1996/304.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Botswana, Chile, China, Egypt, France, Germany,
Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy, Poland,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
1052 (1996).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements following the voting on the two
draft resolutions.
Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): At
last, eight days after the beginning of the Israeli aggression
against Lebanon, the Security Council has met to adopt a
resolution calling for an immediate cessation of military
operations which are a flagrant aggression against a country
which was a founder Member of the United Nations.
The Egyptian Government has stated, and repeats
again today, that it absolutely rejects the Israeli aggression
against Lebanon. The people and Government of Egypt
support the brother people of Lebanon in their tragedy;
we support them in all international forums, including the
Security Council and the General Assembly, giving
Lebanon our full support for the defence of its people, its
territorial integrity and its sovereignty.
Before turning to Egypt’s position on the two draft
resolutions, I should very briefly like to speak about the
manner in which the Council has dealt with this matter
since the Israeli aggression began. It has been marked by
a negativism which will no doubt have unfortunate effects
on the maintenance of international peace and security,
particularly, in the Middle East region.
Lebanon requested an emergency meeting of the
Council on Sunday, 14 April, but differences in the
positions of members of the Council led to a delay in a
favourable response being made to the request. Deferring
a decision by the Council for eight days has enabled the
aggressor to continue its aggression, flouting the
principles of international law and of the Charter of the
United Nations.
A very honest comparison of this case — in which
Lebanon called on the Security Council to take the
necessary measures under the Charter to protect it against
aggression, to protect its people against raids, carnage and
the forced displacement of thousands of innocent
civilians — with that of minor aggression against a
limited number of citizens of another State, when the
Security Council adopted immediate, specific measures,
strengthens the suggestion that the Security Council
applies double standards, depending on the State that is
the victim of aggression, its citizens and the country that
launches the aggression.
The draft resolution submitted by the Arab Group
shows the severity and scale of the tragedy being
experienced by the Lebanese people following the Israeli
aggression. The draft resolution co-sponsored by Egypt
within the Arab Group reflects the following fundamental
principles. First of all, it calls on Israel immediately to
cease its military action and to withdraw forthwith its
forces from all Lebanese territory; secondly, it calls for
strict respect for the territorial integrity, sovereignty, and
political independence of Lebanon; thirdly, it calls for the
implementation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 425 (1978); fourthly,
it strongly condemns the Israeli aggression, which has
3
Security Council 3654th meeting
Fifty-first year 18 April 1996
brought about high tolls of civilian casualties, led to the
displacement of civilians and a massive destruction of the
country’s infrastructure and of archaeological and cultural
sites; fifthly, it calls for participation in the reconstruction
of Lebanon and for help in meeting the humanitarian needs
of the civilian population; and, sixthly, it calls for redress
for Lebanon for the loss resulting from the Israeli
aggression.
Those are the main elements of draft resolution
S/1996/292, submitted by the Arab Group, which, as I have
said, show the severity and scale of the Israeli aggression,
aggression which cannot be tolerated or passed over in
silence by the Council. The credibility of the Security
Council is at stake here. The whole world is looking to the
Security Council as the body responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, pursuant to
Article 24 of the Charter.
In all frankness, I have to say that we find it very
difficult to be convinced by the positions of those that
opposed our draft resolution. What could prevent the
Council from calling for an immediate cessation of military
action and for strict respect for the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Lebanon? Is it shameful to condemn
aggression or to request compensation for Lebanon? It is
indeed deplorable that the Council was not able to adopt
this draft resolution. I should like to thank those States that
supported the draft resolution, thus standing on the side of
justice and law.
Turning to the draft resolution contained in document
S/1996/304, which was co-sponsored by a number of
States, I would first of all like to extend my appreciation
and sincere thanks to Ambassador Dejammet, Permanent
Representative of France, for his tireless and sincere efforts
on behalf of the French Government in the last few days,
efforts which led to this draft resolution. Although the
Egyptian delegation supported it, we should like to point
out that it does not contain all of the principles which
should apply with regard to the situation in Lebanon.
The resolution does not clearly condemn Israel, and it
does not deal with the question of the compensation to
which Lebanon in is entitled for the loss of human life and
the destruction of property. The resolution refers to Security
Council resolution 425 (1978), within the context of
relevant resolutions adopted by the Security Council.
Resolution 425 (1978) is indeed still in force, but it has to
be looked at as a whole. As I said, my delegation voted in
favour of the resolution we have just adopted, for it calls
for an immediate halt to hostilities and it reaffirms the need
to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Lebanon.
The resolution adopted a few moments ago by the
Security Council does not really cover the entire scope of
the Israeli aggression against Lebanon and does not live
up to our expectations for what the Security Council’s
reaction to the aggression should be.
Our hearts are heavy and we suffer when we look
upon the human tragedy that Lebanon has been
undergoing in the last eight days in full view of the entire
world.
We trust that the adoption of this resolution will
indeed lead to the cessation of the hostilities and the
military actions. We trust that the Security Council will
shoulder full responsibility for the implementation of the
resolution we have just adopted and that it will remain
seized of the situation in Lebanon at this decisive turning
point, so as to preserve some of its credibility, to ensure
the triumph of justice and the purposes and principles of
the Charter and to save the peace process in the Middle
East, which has been seriously jeopardized.
Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): It was my delegation’s
expectation that the formal consideration by the Security
Council on 15 April 1996 of the military incursions by
the Israeli armed forces into Lebanon would have a
salutary impact and result in the termination of its attacks.
To our disappointment, however, not only have military
actions continued, but they have in fact intensified, as
evident in the brutal shelling of the United Nations
Interim Forces in Lebanon (UNIFIL) compound earlier
today, which has taken the lives of yet more innocent
civilians. Clearly, in the face of these developments the
Council must shoulder its responsibilities, as enshrined in
the relevant provisions of the Charter, by taking
immediate and effective action.
In the absence of such response, the credibility of
the Council may be called into question. It is against this
backdrop that my delegation voted in favour of the draft
resolution and the resolution before us. We regret that no
consensus could be reached on the divergent positions
expressed by members of the Council, thereby precluding
the submission of a consolidated text. This occurred
despite the obvious need for the Council to send a clear
and unambiguous message for the cessation of hostilities.
The Indonesian delegation fully subscribes to the
common elements contained in both the resolution and the
4
Security Council 3654th meeting
Fifty-first year 18 April 1996
draft resolution, these being the call for an immediate
cessation of hostilities and respect for the territorial
integrity, sovereignty and political independence of
Lebanon within its internationally recognized boundaries. A
cessation of hostilities is an essential first step in stemming
further casualties and preventing the exodus of civilians,
thereby leading to the restoration of normalcy throughout
Lebanon. The call for respect for the territorial integrity,
sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon is a
further reiteration of the international community’s
principled position, as reflected in Security Council
resolution 425 (1978).
Also central to both texts is the recognition of the
need for action by Member States and the United Nations
to alleviate the sufferings of the civilian population caused
by the conflict. The images of innocent civilians killed or
maimed cannot but move the conscience of the international
community. We must act now.
My delegation would be remiss in its duty if it failed
to underscore the need to respect the safety, security and
unhindered movement of UNIFIL, as well as of
organizations engaged in humanitarian activities. It is
gratifying to note that that concern is one unanimously
shared by the Members of the Council.
While cognizant of the common threads between the
resolution and the draft resolution, we recognize all too
well the divergent elements which have proved to be
irreconcilable. For the Indonesian delegation, it is quite
clear where the onus of responsibility rests for bringing the
current hostilities to an immediate end. It is equally clear
that unless this is attained, the recent progress in the Middle
East peace process, which we have all recently witnessed,
would be in jeopardy.
Indonesia, for its part, has as a matter of principle
attached importance to dialogue and negotiations as a viable
modality to resolve conflict situations. With regard to the
situation in the Middle East, including the situation in
Lebanon, Indonesia has been consistent in its support of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and
425 (1978). In this context, we would like to reiterate our
conviction that the military action in Lebanon cannot but be
a violation of the aforementioned resolutions and in total
contradiction of the aims and objectives of the Madrid
peace process.
Mr. Martínez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from
Spanish): My delegation views with great concern the
escalation of hostilities along the Lebanon-Israeli border
and within Lebanon, which continues to cause human and
material losses among the civilian population and which
threatens the peace process in the Middle East and,
consequently, international peace and security.
The military actions against Lebanon constitute a
violation of its territorial integrity, its sovereignty and its
political independence within its internationally
recognized borders, and are a flagrant violation of the
United Nations Charter, of international law, of relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution 425
(1978), and of the 1949 armistice agreement between
Lebanon and Israel.
These hostilities must cease immediately. The
continued bombardments causing destruction and death in
Lebanon are contrary to international humanitarian law
and to the Fourth Geneva Convention. Their effect is to
further deteriorate the situation in the Middle East, and to
hamper the negotiations towards achieving a just and
lasting peace. My delegation therefore attaches the
greatest importance to the ongoing diplomatic efforts for
the achievement of a cease-fire.
My delegation is justly concerned by the
humanitarian crisis caused by the hostilities. The hundreds
of thousands of persons fleeing the conflict are creating
a real humanitarian emergency that must be attended to
immediately.
Similarly, my delegation is concerned for the safety
of the United Nations Interim Forces in Lebanon
(UNIFIL). Actions against UNIFIL affect the fulfilment
of its mandate. We regret that as a result of today’s
bombardment in their area, innocent civilians have died.
We appeal to all parties to ensure the safety of UNIFIL
and to allow for its freedom of movement.
Therefore, my delegation feels that the text of the
resolution, which we co-sponsored and which has been
unanimously adopted, is the appropriate response by the
Security Council in order to alleviate this crisis.
Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): Today the Security Council is once again
considering the question of Lebanon in order to issue a
response in this regard. We believe that it is imperative to
do so in order to demonstrate the hope of the international
community in general, and the Security Council in
particular, that there will be an immediate cessation of
hostilities in this region, so as to avoid any further
suffering on the part of civilians.
5
Security Council 3654th meeting
Fifty-first year 18 April 1996
The Chinese delegation expresses its profound concern
at the large-scale military offensive launched by Israel in
recent days in southern Lebanon, which has resulted in the
loss of innocent civilian lives, the massive destruction of
property and a large number of civilians’ becoming
homeless or refugees, consequently further escalating the
conflict in southern Lebanon and aggravating the already
tense situation.
We wish in particular to express our shock at the large
number of casualties suffered by civilians as a result of the
shelling that took place on 18 April in Lebanon. We
strongly condemn any action that violates international law.
We call upon all parties concerned to exercise restraint and
put an immediate end to all hostilities in order to achieve
a cease-fire, in an effort to ease the tense situation and
safeguard peace and stability in that region.
We believe that Lebanon’s sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity within internationally recognized
borders should be fully respected, and that the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 425
(1978), should be implemented.
The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) should not be obstructed in the implementation
of its mandate. The security and safety of its members
should be guaranteed by all parties concerned.
We call upon the international community, including
the United Nations and its agencies, to provide immediate
humanitarian assistance to the civilians of Lebanon in order
to alleviate their suffering.
On the basis of these considerations, we voted in
favour of the two draft resolutions.
The progress in the peace process in the Middle East
has not been achieved easily; therefore, it should be
treasured by the parties concerned. At such a sensitive and
critical moment, we hope that all the parties concerned will
exercise restraint and refrain from any action that may
further intensify the conflict and undermine the peace
process in the Middle East, so as to create conditions for
the achievement of a just, comprehensive and lasting
solution to the question of the Middle East at an early date.
Mr. Eitel (Germany): For the second time in four
days, the Security Council is discussing the situation in
Lebanon. This is not only justified but necessary, taking
into account the extent to which the situation in Lebanon
has deteriorated in the meantime.
An ever-increasing number of innocent civilians are
becoming victims of the violence. More and more people
are being killed every day.
During this Council’s formal meeting on Lebanon
held last Monday, Italy, on behalf of the European Union,
expressed concern regarding the security of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). Regrettably,
this concern has proved to be more than justified. We call
upon all parties concerned fully to respect the safety,
security and freedom of movement of UNIFIL.
Today’s shelling incident, in which more than 90
civilians were killed at a UNIFIL site, is particularly
shocking. We want to express our sincere condolences to
the families of the victims.
How do we get out of this situation? How can we
stop the suffering? The violence must come to an end,
and it must come to an end now.
International humanitarian law must be fully
respected. The safety and security of civilians and other
protected persons is of the highest priority, and must be
ensured.
There must be a political solution on the basis of all
relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolution
425 (1978). We believe that such a political solution, in
the framework of the peace process, will best be helped
by a decision of the Council that addresses the principal
problems and at the same time commands the widest
support. That is why we voted for the draft resolution
contained in document S/1996/304, and that is why, in
consequence, we had to abstain in the vote on the draft
resolution contained in document S/1996/292.
Mr. Queta (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from
French): Over the past few days, intensive bombardments
have been taking place along the Israeli-Lebanese border
and within Lebanon itself, leading to heavy losses of
human life and damage to property.
Guinea-Bissau, which itself has suffered from the
ravages of war, is gravely concerned at this military
escalation and, in general, at the deterioration of the
situation in the Middle East, the effects of which could
imperil the peace process. These hostilities, whose
consequences are becoming daily more serious and more
unforeseeable, must cease immediately.
6
Security Council 3654th meeting
Fifty-first year 18 April 1996
To this end, Guinea-Bissau will support all peace
initiatives. It encourages the initiatives being taken by
certain countries of the region, which we hope will take
into account the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, including resolution 425 (1978).
We deplore the incidents today, which have led to
dozens of deaths in Lebanon, and we express our full
solidarity with the families of the innocent victims.
We also express our sincere support for all those who
have been affected by the military activities in the area - in
particular, the hundreds of thousands of Lebanese who
have, regrettably, been forced into an exodus within their
own country.
In the light of the grave humanitarian situation, we
wish also make an urgent appeal to the international
community to come to the aid of the victims of the war in
Lebanon.
For all those reasons, we voted in favour of both of
the draft resolutions that were before us this evening in the
hope that this would make a major contribution to the
immediate cessation of hostilities and to the continuation of
negotiations on a just and lasting peace in the region.
Mr. Włosowicz (Poland): During the open debate on
the situation in Lebanon held in this Chamber last Monday,
the Polish delegation expressed its position with regard to
the armed hostilities in southern Lebanon and their broader
ramifications. What we are faced with today is an even
more complex situation which could have far-reaching
consequences for the parties involved, for stability in the
region and for international peace and security.
Like other members of the Security Council, the
Polish delegation was shocked by the news that arrived this
morning, of the tragic death of some 100 civilians who had
taken shelter in the compound of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and of the casualties
among UNIFIL troops. Let me take this opportunity to
convey to the Permanent Representative of Lebanon the
condolences of the Polish delegation on that tragic event. I
would also like to ask the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Force Commander of UNIFIL the assurances of our
sympathy and our support.
Today’s developments are yet further deadly
consequences of the use of violence in international
relations. The events sparked by the artillery assaults on
northern Israel have brought death and suffering to a great
many people, have caused the destruction of property,
including historic landmarks, and have threatened the
peaceful future of the Middle East. The time has come to
break this vicious escalation of the conflict.
We sincerely believe that the resolution we have just
adopted offers an appropriate solution to the current phase
of the crisis. First, it calls for an immediate cease-fire.
This is indeed a conditio sine qua non for creating an
atmosphere conducive to further steps towards
normalization.
Secondly, it expresses the Security Council’s support
for ongoing diplomatic efforts aimed at a peaceful
solution of the conflict. The Polish delegation attaches
great importance to the forthcoming talks of the United
States Secretary of State in the region. We also hope that
the action undertaken by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of France and by the Italian Foreign Minister, in her
capacity as President of the Council of Ministers of the
European Union, will bear fruit.
Thirdly, the resolution calls for strict respect for the
territorial integrity, sovereignty and political independence
of Lebanon within its internationally recognized
boundaries and for the security of all States in the region.
This provision of the resolution reflects the position of the
Polish Government, for which the rigorous observance of
these principles constitutes the cornerstone of modern
international relations.
Fourthly, the resolution places the humanitarian
situation in an appropriate perspective. This is an issue of
great significance for the Polish delegation.
Lastly, the resolution confirms the Council’s concern
about the security, safety and freedom of movement of
United Nations peace-keeping operations, in this case
UNIFIL. The Polish delegation has particular reason for
stressing this point, since more than 500 Polish soldiers
serve under the United Nations banner in Lebanon, and
since the operation is under the command of a Polish general.
The Polish delegation’s vote in favour of draft
resolution S/1996/304 reaffirms its support for the
peaceful coexistence of all States in the region and for the
continuation of the peace process in the Middle East.
Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): As my delegation
has already stated, in the formal meeting of the Security
Council on Monday, we are gravely concerned at the
continuing hostilities and the further deterioration of the
7
Security Council 3654th meeting
Fifty-first year 18 April 1996
situation in Lebanon, which has resulted in an increasing
number of civilian casualties and the destruction of
property. We were shocked at the news this morning of the
death of more than 60 innocent civilians and of the serious
injuries inflicted upon several United Nations personnel in
a compound of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL).
Given the gravity and urgency of the situation and its
possible negative impact on the overall Middle East peace
process, the Security Council must act promptly and
resolutely. It has already been seven days since the tragic
and senseless killing started. As the organ with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security, the Council should react to the situation in a
resolute and timely manner so that the hostilities can be
brought to an end immediately and so that the Middle East
peace process is not derailed.
The draft resolution contained in document S/1996/304
is a clear expression of the collective will of the members
of the Security Council. It also reflects the common wish
and firm resolve of the international community, in that it
calls for an immediate cessation of hostilities as well as for
strict respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of Lebanon as reaffirmed by
resolution 425 (1978), and in that it calls upon Member
States to respect the safety and security of civilians.
My delegation is satisfied to note that all the members
of the Council, including my delegation, were able to
accept that draft resolution. We take great pride in seeing
that the Council has been able to act in unison in dealing
with the extremely complicated issue at hand, which has
significant bearing upon the peace and stability of the entire
Middle East region. My delegation strongly believes that
united action by the Council will carry a clear and credible
message to the parties in particular and to the international
community as a whole.
It was for these reasons that my delegation voted in
favor of draft resolution S/1996/304. My delegation wishes
to take this opportunity to commend the delegation of
France for having so successfully promoted consensus
among the members of the Council, enabling us to act now
in unity and in a timely manner.
My delegation would like to add a word of
appreciation for the intensive diplomatic efforts being
conducted by France, Italy, the United States and others to
bring to an immediate end the senseless killing that has
been taking place for the past seven days. We are
convinced that the resolution we have adopted today will
shore up these efforts.
Although the major thrust of draft resolution
S/1996/292 was acceptable to the Korean delegation, we
were well aware that some elements were contentious
enough to be opposed by some members of the Council.
It was in this context that we strongly encouraged France
and others to promote a consensus text fully taking into
account the urgent need for the Security Council to take
action today. In our view, there was a window of
opportunity which members could have utilized to
promote a consensus text. However, it seems to us that
that opportunity was not fully explored. It was for that
reason that we decided to abstain in the vote on draft
resolution S/1996/292.
Mr. Nkgowe (Botswana): The position of my
delegation on the current situation in Lebanon was stated
during the open debate held on Monday, 15 April 1996.
We believe that the grave situation that now obtains in
Lebanon could have been averted had the Security
Council adopted a formal decision at the end of the
orientation debate. This is an extremely serious matter, to
which the Council should have reacted with the utmost
urgency. Lebanese people have been massacred in the
most brutal manner. The Israeli military actions have
definitely gone beyond the limits of Israel’s legitimate
right to self-defence.
The present Israeli military activities in Lebanon
constitute an outright invasion of that country. Bombs,
rockets and other missiles are being directly targeted at
the civilian population, resulting in death, suffering and
extensive destruction of property. Even the headquarters
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
has not been spared. UNIFIL buildings have been
damaged and some UNIFIL troops have sustained
injuries. The actions of the Israeli armed forces clearly
put the lives of the United Nations forces in serious
danger. We call upon Israel to respect United Nations
personnel at all times.
The Security Council cannot afford to watch
impassively the war tragedy that is unfolding in Lebanon.
The Council should always be ready to respond in a
timeously to situations that constitute a grave threat to
international peace and security. The parties should cease
hostilities immediately. In this regard, we welcome the
content of the operative paragraphs of resolution 1052
(1996), which we have just adopted. They list the priority
areas: immediate cease-fire, support for diplomatic efforts;
8
Security Council 3654th meeting
Fifty-first year 18 April 1996
respect for the territorial integrity and national sovereignty
of Lebanon; the safety and security of UNIFIL personnel,
and the need for humanitarian assistance.
It is our hope that the parties will comply with this
resolution. It no longer serves any useful purpose to argue
about who started the hostilities. The most important thing
at this stage is to end the fighting and give peace a chance.
Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
The Council is discussing the question of Lebanon three
days after our previous meeting on the same subject.
Fighting has continued. Hundreds of thousands of refugees
have been forced to take to the roads. Men, women and
children have been mown down. The French Government
has expressed its feelings about the appalling tragedy which
took place this morning. Today, as the Egyptian
Ambassador said at the beginning of this meeting, it is time
to act.
Diplomatic efforts have been taking place since the
beginning of hostilities; they must be supported. These
efforts are aimed at restoring lasting peace. We must first
stop hostilities — that was the Council’s immediate
objective. It was with that objective in mind that we
decided in voting on the two draft resolutions to vote for
the draft resolution contained in document S/1996/304,
which was capable of receiving a unanimous vote in favour,
because it is essential to create as broad support as possible
for an immediate cessation of hostilities by all the parties.
The President of the French Republic expressed the urgent
need for that today, saying:
“This spiral of violence in northern Israel and
southern Lebanon was, unfortunately, foreseeable, and
it is humanly unacceptable. I solemnly appeal to all
the parties involved in this conflict to establish a
cease-fire immediately. Since the onset of hostilities
initiatives have been undertaken, notably by France
and the United States. I ask all the parties involved to
accept an agreement on the basis of the various
proposals put forward, or to be put forward, to put an
end to this crisis. In that spirit, all who are working
for peace must unite their energies and their efforts.”
That appeal has just been confirmed by the unanimous
vote in the Security Council. I wish to express the very
deep and sincere gratitude of the delegation of France to
Ambassador Elaraby. This vote, cast despite the difficulties
and qualms to which he referred, reflects the constant and
unshakeable determination of a great and responsible
country — Egypt — to build peace.
This resolution supports the diplomatic efforts
carried out in this regard. It also reaffirms — and this is
equally important — a fundamental principle recalling all
the previous resolutions on the situation in the Lebanon,
including resolution 425 (1978) of 19 March 1978, which
established the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.
The Security Council is reaffirming its commitment to the
territorial integrity, sovereignty and political independence
of Lebanon within its internationally recognized borders,
as well as to the security of all States in the region, and
it calls upon all concerned fully to respect these
principles. That is equally essential.
This resolution contains necessary provisions to
protect the civilian population and to ensure the security
of UNIFIL, and it rightly insists on the need for
humanitarian assistance. France, which has for several
days endeavoured to provide assistance to the
Government of Lebanon, hopes that this request,
addressed by the Council to Member States, will be
followed by action, that humanitarian assistance will be
sufficiently generous to mitigate the suffering of the
Lebanese people, and that the Government of Lebanon
will be assisted in its efforts to reconstruct the country.
The Council’s unanimity, which has just been
expressed, will, we hope, give full weight and backing to
the resolution and enable it to produce results: the
cessation of hostilities by all the parties. We hope that the
unanimous support given this evening to the diplomatic
efforts under way will breathe fresh life into the peace
process.
Mr. Fulci (Italy): My delegation, like others, has
already had an opportunity, during the formal meeting on
Monday dedicated to the situation in Lebanon, to express
its thoughts and profound concern over what is happening
in the Middle East. On that occasion, speaking on behalf
of the European Union, we reconfirmed our commitment
to the implementation of Security Council resolution 425
(1978). Tonight I wish to reiterate that statement. Italy is
gravely concerned by the continuing escalation in military
activity in Lebanon, an escalation which has led to the
loss of many — too many — innocent lives, and caused
hundreds of thousands of civilians to leave their homes
and wander the roads as displaced persons.
I would ask the Permanent Representative of
Lebanon, Ambassador Samir Moubarak, to convey our
deepest condolences to the families of the victims of this
morning’s tragic incident at one of the bases of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), in
9
Security Council 3654th meeting
Fifty-first year 18 April 1996
which more than 100 innocent Lebanese civilians were
killed and more than 100 wounded.
Italy calls once more on all the parties to show the
greatest restraint and above all immediately to cease any
and all military activities. Confronted by the deterioration
of the situation, Italy, as President of the European Union
for the current semester, has immediately taken the
initiative of trying to define a European Union common
platform of action.
The Political Committee of the European Union met
in Brussels on 15 and 16 April. While recognizing the
serious situation created by Hezbollah terrorist activities, as
well as Israel’s right to ensure its own security, the Political
Committee expressed its most serious concern over the
level of Israel’s reprisals in Lebanon and over a possible
escalation of the violence, which could have negative
consequences for the civilian population and for peace in
the region.
The Political Committee therefore gave a mandate to
the Troika at the political level, headed by Deputy Minister
of Foreign Affairs Incisa Di Camerana, to make contacts in
Lebanon, Syria, Egypt and Israel for the purpose of urging
the parties to reach an agreement on an immediate cessation
of hostilities and of discussing ways to help the displaced
Lebanese civilian population. The European Troika was in
Damascus today.
In its contacts in the region, the Union intends to base
its action on the following elements: first, the immediate
cessation of all hostilities; secondly, reaffirmation of
Europe’s commitment to the unity, territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Lebanon, in conformity with Security
Council resolution 425 (1978) and the Taif Agreement;
thirdly, emergency humanitarian relief for the Lebanese
people affected by the fighting, especially refugees; and,
fourthly, condemnation of the acts of violence by Hezbollah
and reaffirmation of Israel’s right to security.
Italy continues to hope that the recent events, despite
their gravity and the irretrievable loss of so many human
lives, will not jeopardize the peace process, which remains
of fundamental importance to all Members of the United
Nations and to the entire world.
Finally, allow me to quote a statement of Mrs.
Susanna Agnelli, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Italy.
In a declaration issued in Rome a few hours ago, Minister
Agnelli said:
“The news of so many dead and wounded
Lebanese refugees and of the 120 wounded in the
UNIFIL camp has been received by the European
Union with shock and profound consternation. The
European Union believes that this escalation of
senseless violence, which is taking so many innocent
lives, must be absolutely stopped and renews its
appeal to all parties concerned to cease immediately
all military activities in the area.”
Mrs. Agnelli is flying to Beirut tomorrow morning
in her capacity as current President of the European
Council.
Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (interpretation
from Russian): Today the Security Council is once again
considering the tragic events in Lebanon. Two days ago,
at a formal meeting of the Council on this same issue, the
Russian delegation had an opportunity to lay out its
position on this question. Unfortunately, it must be said
that the situation has a clearly defined tendency to
escalate. The Israeli armed forces continue their
bombardments and shelling, resulting in many casualties
among the civilian population. A large-scale humanitarian
crisis is unfolding before our very eyes. The number of
refugees is already in the hundreds of thousands. The
fragile peace that had been established in long-suffering
Lebanon is now being destroyed. Invaluable historical
monuments are threatened.
This morning the world was shaken by the report of
the shelling by Israeli artillery of the headquarters of the
Fijian battalion of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, resulting in the deaths of over 90 Lebanese
civilians who had sought refuge in the area where the
United Nations forces were deployed. The United Nations
peace-keepers also suffered casualties.
The Russian delegation wishes to state that what is
currently happening in Lebanon is unacceptable, for
Israel’s actions are undermining the sovereignty of the
State of Lebanon, hurting the civilian population and
damaging civilian targets. The tragic situation that has
developed in Lebanon can have the most unforeseeable
consequences for the Middle East, threatening the process
of Arab-Israeli reconciliation. As a sponsor of the peace
process, Russian cannot but be disturbed by this.
In the current situation, it is essential to demonstrate
restraint. A peaceful solution is required that provides for
the cessation of the military action against Lebanon while
not allowing terrorist attacks against the territory of Israel.
10
Security Council 3654th meeting
Fifty-first year 18 April 1996
Our country is taking and will continue to take strong
political and diplomatic measures with a view to helping
put a halt to the present escalation of violence. This is the
approach of the Foreign Minister of Russia, Mr. Primakov,
in his intensive contacts with his foreign colleagues. We
also support similar steps being taken by other States. We
hope that all of these efforts will bear fruit.
Today the Security Council faced a difficult choice. A
group of Arab countries introduced a draft resolution that
did not receive the requisite number of votes in favour. In
principle, the Russian delegation agrees with most of the
ideas reflected in that draft resolution. But at the same time,
in our view, it does not give a full picture of the very
complex situation, passing over in silence such important
aspects as the need to provide guarantees for the security of
all States of the region and not to allow provocative
military actions by extremists from the territory of Lebanon,
which undermine the peace process and run counter to the
intensive diplomatic efforts under way. That is why the
Russian Federation was unable to vote in favour of the
draft resolution and abstained.
The second draft resolution is more balanced. We
would have preferred it to be worded more clearly and
precisely. Some things could have been called by their
names. However, the main point is that it does reflect
support for an unconditional cease-fire and for the efforts
to achieve peace. It clearly reconfirms all of the resolutions
adopted by the Security Council on Lebanon, particularly
resolution 425 (1978). Implementation of this resolution is
still the basic condition for achieving a genuine settlement.
We hope that the adoption of the resolution will help
to ensure an immediate cessation to the military actions and
to achieve a normalization of the situation in the Israeli-
Lebanese area. We see the main task as being to continue
the positive dynamics of the peace process in the Middle
East, and accordingly the Russian delegation voted in
favour of the resolution.
Mr. Plumbly (United Kingdom): It is a source of
satisfaction to my delegation that the Council has now
unanimously adopted a clear, strong and balanced
resolution, which we believe will underpin the efforts being
made to resolve the present crisis.
The British Government remains deeply concerned
about the situation as it affects both Lebanon and Israel. As
we noted in our statement here on 15 April, the British
Government has condemned the continuing rocket and other
attacks by Hezbollah on northern Israel, which started the
present crisis.
The British Government deeply deplores the loss of
innocent civilian lives in Lebanon, in particular the
terrible tragedy at the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) base earlier today. I would like to
extend the British Government’s condolences to the
wounded and to the families of all those killed during the
recent hostilities.
What we must do now is to focus on the future and
to do all that can be done to prevent further such
tragedies. What is needed — a point on which the
resolution is very clear — is an immediate cessation of
hostilities. To prevent the recurrence of hostilities and to
create a more stable situation, we must build on the 1993
arrangements. The United Kingdom fully supports the
efforts of the United States and France in this regard. My
Prime Minister had discussions to this end with Prime
Minister Hariri in London on 17 April and has been in
touch with President Chirac, President Clinton and Prime
Minister Peres.
The British Government is convinced that the
long-term solution to the problem will be the result of the
successful conclusion of the Middle East peace process.
We reaffirm our support for the implementation of
Security Council resolution 425 (1978). We call on all
parties to the peace process to redouble their efforts to
reach a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East.
Mrs. Albright (United States of America): The
United States joins in expressing deep sorrow and shock
at the loss of innocent civilian lives at a United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) site in Lebanon this
morning. We offer our condolences to the Government
and people of Lebanon. And we extend our sympathies to
the people of Fiji, whose peace-keepers were participating
in the UNIFIL mission and suffered casualties.
During the last few years, we have seen moments of
high hope and promise in the Middle East. We have
heard eloquent pleas for an end to blood and tears and for
an end to death, misery, suspicion and fear. We have
heard calls for a new era symbolized by the olive branch
and based on Anwar Sadat’s statement that
“there can be no happiness based on the detriment of
others.”
11
Security Council 3654th meeting
Fifty-first year 18 April 1996
Today, more than ever, we have reason to recall those
statements made in support of peace. We know that courage
is necessary to restore momentum to the path of peace. And
we know that those who pray for security and justice will
find it only through reconciliation and peace.
Earlier today, President Clinton called upon all parties
to agree to an immediate cease-fire. The Governments of
Israel and Lebanon have welcomed the initiative. And the
resolution we have just adopted also calls for a cessation of
hostilities by all parties. An end to the fighting is essential
if diplomatic efforts, in which Secretary of State
Christopher is fully engaged, are to move forward.
Undeterred by acts of terrorism, the goal of those efforts
remains the same. And they are made yet more urgent by
tragedies such as those that occurred today. That goal is a
comprehensive and lasting peace throughout the Middle
East.
Unfortunately, the draft resolution put before the
Council by Lebanon and others was not one that the United
States could support.
There should be no doubt that the actions taken by
Israel were in response to Hezbollah strikes launched from
Lebanese territory against civilian centres in Israel. The
draft resolution sponsored by Lebanon and others did not
mention this. It was one-sided and highly selective in its
discussion of the violence. By singling out Israel, and Israel
alone, for condemnation, it would have set back, not
advanced, negotiations towards an end to the fighting.
This is a time for the Council, and for nations around
the world, to renew the call for peace. We must do all we
can to see that an incident such as today’s will be viewed
in historic context, not as a trigger to a new round of
killing, but as the last explosion of sorrow prior to a new
era of reconciliation and hope.
That process requires from the parties restraint and a
willingness to confront directly the sources of violence.
And it requires from this Council a sense of fairness and
balance that is present in the resolution we have just
adopted, but not in the draft resolution put forward by
Lebanon and others today.
Let me add that our position on Security Council
resolution 425 (1978) is unchanged. None of the principles
in the resolution we have adopted can be fulfilled outside
the context of the peace process.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Chile.
With the resolution we have adopted, we are
unanimously making an urgent and specific appeal for an
immediate cessation of the hostilities that are tragically
affecting Lebanon and for the implementation of
resolution 425 (1978).
Calm should be imposed on the tragedy. It is a
matter of the lives of human beings, most of whom are
civilians and who, in the final analysis, are the innocent
victims of this sad and deplorable episode. Today’s events
in the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
camp are so horrible that there are no words with which
to condemn them. We urge Israel to put an immediate
end to its attacks in Lebanon.
Chile’s main concern in this debate has been the
innocent victims in Lebanon and the humanitarian crisis
in a country that is a friend of Chile’s. Our hearts are
now with that suffering people at another tragic moment
in its history.
This morning, as President of the Security Council,
I said that we could not let the day end without making
an appeal for the cessation of hostilities, and that is what
we have done this evening. However, we have not said
everything that could have been said in these
circumstances. The deaths of recent days and months in
the Middle East are excessive, as are the collective
punishment in Lebanon, the bombs in Israel and the
insecurity for everyone.
Chile rejects force as a means of political
solution — the anonymous force of terrorism and open
military force, as well as the constant threat of the use of
force.
We are all challenged to make the United Nations a
place where peoples of the world can place their trust and
where the rights of peoples are equally defended,
regardless of their power or their allies. I hope that some
day the Security Council will make its first priority the
security of people, the security of individuals, and that it
will be a true Council for the security of mankind. That
is not the current situation, and much remains to be done.
However, Chile hopes that the resolution we have
adopted will help promote an end to the violence, bring
peace to the souls of so many people of the region and be
12
Security Council 3654th meeting
Fifty-first year 18 April 1996
of assistance in the political process leading towards peace.
We are thankful to everyone who is attempting to achieve
that peace.
I now resume my function as President of the Council.
The Council has concluded its voting procedure. I
shall now call on those speakers invited under rule 37.
I call on the representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Moubarak (Lebanon): My delegation would like,
at the outset, to express its regrets and sympathy to the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
command for the casualties suffered by the members of the
Fijian battalion through the premeditated and clearly
deliberate shelling of their headquarters today by the Israeli
army.
We regret sincerely that the Council did not meet
immediately on Sunday, 14 April, on our request to put an
end to the Israeli aggression against Lebanon. We deplore
also that the Council did not act swiftly to put an end to the
Israeli aggression and that it took many days to take action
on the Arab draft resolution. We deplore the fact that the
Arab draft resolution was not adopted. That draft
resolution represents the firm and constant position of
Lebanon and the Arab world in particular, by calling upon
Israel immediately to cease its military action against
Lebanese territorial integrity, to withdraw forthwith its
forces from all Lebanese territory and to fully implement
all relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 425 (1978).
The draft resolution also condemns strongly the Israeli
aggression against Lebanon, which has taken a high toll in
civilian casualties and has led to the displacement of
hundreds of thousands of civilians and the massive
destruction of Lebanon’s infrastructure. Further, it requests
the Secretary-General to launch a massive plan of action to
assist the Government of Lebanon to overcome the
hardships resulting from the Israeli aggression, in order to
allow the Lebanese Government to sustain its reconstruction
efforts; and it considers that Lebanon is entitled to
appropriate redress for the destruction it has suffered, while
holding Israel responsible for adequate compensation for
such destruction.
We would like here to condemn the premeditated
massacre perpetrated by Israel against displaced civilians
sheltered in the Fijian headquarters, resulting in the
deliberate massacre of 110 civilians, with 150 wounded. All
of us have seen the savagery of Israel against the men,
women and children of my country. This amounts to
barbarity; it is in the best tradition of the distorted logic
of Israel. We knew that such an electoral campaign of the
Israeli Government in Lebanon would end in such
bloodshed.
We would like to express our deep appreciation to
the delegations of Indonesia, Guinea-Bissau and China,
which backed the Arab draft resolution presented by the
Egyptian delegation. This draft resolution embodies two
very basic principles: the solidarity of the Arab world in
respect of Lebanon and its constant position in favour of
finding a solution to the endemic cycle of violence in my
country, which is due in particular to Israel’s
non-implementation of resolution 425 (1978) of the
Security Council.
In this regard, I would like to recall that 24 hours
ago the Council of the League of Arab States, at the level
of Ministers for Foreign Affairs, adopted unanimously the
same text at the end of its special meeting, which took
place in Cairo.
We would also like to express our gratitude to the
President of the Security Council. We would like to thank
you, Ambassador Somavía, for the friendly and
responsible role you have been playing during all the
proceedings of the Council. My Government and my
delegation are very much aware of the positive role you
have played, and I would like to thank you very sincerely
for convening the Council in response to the Lebanese
complaint.
We would also like to express our gratitude to those
friendly delegations which have cooperated constantly
with us in trying to bring about the success of the Arab
draft resolution.
Finally, allow me to express my deep appreciation
and gratitude to the Arab Group, which has played a most
important, constant and helpful role in fully backing the
Lebanese position in the Council.
We would like to reaffirm again that the only way
to end the violence in Lebanon is through the full
implementation of resolution 425 (1978). It is up to the
Council to shoulder its responsibilities. This is our
constant position, and we believe that the Security
Council will act accordingly by implementing that
resolution and putting an end to the Israeli occupation of
13
Security Council 3654th meeting
Fifty-first year 18 April 1996
Lebanon, which is the cause of the violence taking place
today in Lebanon.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of Lebanon for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Israel, on
whom I now call.
Mr. Yaacobi (Israel): I believe that this is a very
difficult day for all of us.
We regret the loss of life among innocent people who
were unconnected to those fanatic terrorists and to those
hostile activities. As indicated by the spokesman of the
United Nations, the tragedy that occurred today was caused
because the Hezbollah launched Katyusha rockets at Israel
from locations a short distance away from the United
Nations position where innocent civilians had taken shelter.
We know that the Hezbollah have been cynically using
civilians as a shield. Today the head of the Hezbollah
political office admitted this himself. Now they are doing
the same with United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) units, not for the first time. Unfortunately, this is
how this tragedy happened today.
We send our sincere condolences to the families, and
our hopes and wishes for a quick recovery to the wounded
civilians and UNIFlL soldiers.
Unfortunately, we have not heard a word of
condemnation from some of the Members of the Security
Council who spoke tonight of those who initiated those
hostilities. Three hundred Katyusha rockets were launched
in the last few days targeting civilians in Israel. Many
were injured, thousands left their homes and many are still
living in shelters.
Prime Minister Peres announced today that we accept
President Clinton’s initiative to reach a cease-fire, to be
implemented as soon as the other party agrees to implement
it as well. We hope that the mission of United States
Secretary of State Christopher to our region will bear fruit
immediately, and that a cease-fire will be achieved without
delay. We appreciate the efforts by the European Union and
France in this respect as well. This, we hope, will put an
end to the situation which forced Israel to retaliate and to
use its right of self-defence against those who attacked
innocent civilians — men, women and children — in many
villages and towns throughout northern Israel. This is
necessary to clear the way for the resumption of the peace
process in the Middle East.
We believe that there is a coalition for peace which
represents the majority of the people in the Middle East
who share the desire for peace. We must join forces
against militant fanatic terrorists everywhere — in
Lebanon as well as in Egypt. We must overcome these
immediate hardships, clear the way and continue with the
peace process.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of Norway. I invite him
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Biørn Lian (Norway): In the Council debate
last Monday, I had the opportunity to express the deep
concern of the Norwegian Government with regard to the
critical and fragile state of the peace process in the
Middle East, and to urge the parties involved in the use
of force in southern Lebanon and northern Israel to stop
the spiral of violence. It is with profound regret that we
have witnessed today the tragic results of a lack of will to
exercise such restraint.
The people and the Government of Norway are
shocked by today’s shelling by the Israeli Defence Forces
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
position at Qaana in southern Lebanon and by other
recent Israeli actions, and we deeply deplore the heavy
losses of civilian lives and the immense human suffering
that have resulted from these actions. These actions are
totally unacceptable and are out of proportion to the
attacks by Hezbollah against targets in Israel. This
escalation of the conflict can only serve the purposes of
those who oppose peace in the region.
Norway is currently the most important contributor
of troops to UNIFIL. We strongly deplore the casualties
suffered by the Fijian contingent. It is totally unacceptable
to put United Nations personnel at risk through actions of
the kind we have witnessed today, and earlier during the
recent actions. We demand that Hezbollah put a stop to
its well-known and cynical practice of establishing
positions close to civilian or United Nations installations,
and we demand that the Israeli authorities take every
necessary step to prevent shelling of United Nations and
civilian targets.
The seriousness of the situation should be clear to
everyone. We urge both Israel and Hezbollah to cease
14
Security Council 3654th meeting
Fifty-first year 18 April 1996
immediately all military activities in southern Lebanon and
northern Israel and to conclude a cease-fire. We strongly
support the ongoing diplomatic efforts undertaken to this
end by the United States, France and Italy, on behalf of the
European Union.
It is against this background that I welcome and
support the resolution adopted unanimously by the Security
Council this evening.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): The next
speaker is the representative of Canada. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Karsgaard (Canada) (interpretation from
French): As this is my first opportunity to address the
Security Council during the month of April, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your conduct of the
Council’s affairs. We are convinced that thanks to your
skilful leadership, the Council will perform its duties in a
fruitful and effective manner. Allow me also to extend my
congratulations to the representative of Botswana,
Ambassador Legwaila, on the way in which he conducted
the deliberations of the Council during the month of March.
(spoke in English)
Canada speaks today under distressing circumstances.
We deeply regret the loss of civilian lives in Lebanon
resulting from the attacks today, and we convey our
heartfelt condolences to those who have suffered in these
tragic events.
Canada joins with others in calling for an immediate
cease-fire. We offer our strong support to those diplomatic
initiatives that are under way in the region and hope that
the parties will come to a negotiated agreement as soon as
possible.
Beyond the terrible human suffering wrought by
today’s attacks, we must also look to the state of the
Middle East peace process. Just a few months ago, the
elections in the West Bank and Gaza seemed to augur well
for peace and development in the Middle East.
We were appalled by the recent bomb attacks in Israel.
The task of countries dedicated to peace, Canada included,
has been made even more difficult by the escalation of
hostilities in southern Lebanon and northern Israel. Canada
firmly believes that the peace process is the best way of
resolving the conflict that has gripped the Middle Eastern
region. We call on all parties to resume negotiations
towards a just, comprehensive and lasting peace
settlement.
In supporting the peace process, Canada has always
considered that certain fundamental principles need to be
respected. One of these is Israel’s need for security and
well-being. At the same time, we believe that the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon is a
central part of the peace process, and we have
continuously upheld that principle. The implementation of
Security Council resolution 425 (1978), which could be
achieved through the peace process, is also crucially
important.
Finally, as a significant troop contributor to United
Nations missions around the world, in which Canadians
have risked, and some have lost, their lives, Canada
deplores the endangering of the Fijian battalion in the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). The
safety of peace-keepers is an essential condition to the
United Nations ability to carry out its peace-keeping
responsibilities.
We are pleased that the Security Council was able to
agree on the text adopted this evening. It is important that
all parties cease military activities and come to a
negotiated agreement to bring peace to the region.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of Ireland. I invite him
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Campbell (Ireland): The representative of Italy
outlined the views of the European Union on the current
situation in Lebanon in the Council debate that took place
last Monday. The European Union has repeatedly called
on all the parties to show the utmost restraint and to cease
all military activities in order to end the current cycle of
violence.
The tragic events earlier today in southern Lebanon
mark a grave deterioration of the current situation and one
which can only be viewed with the deepest concern by all
interested in securing a lasting peace in Lebanon and
throughout the Middle East.
The Government of Ireland earlier today strongly
condemned the attack on the headquarters of the Fijian
battalion of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), which resulted in a large number of civilian
deaths and injuries, as well as in injuries to UNIFIL
15
Security Council 3654th meeting
Fifty-first year 18 April 1996
personnel. Such attacks on United Nations facilities are
wholly unacceptable. My Government has conveyed its
sympathy to the injured and to the families of those killed
as well as to the Governments of Lebanon and Fiji.
We reiterate our call on all the parties to respect fully
the safety and security of UNIFIL, in which Ireland has
served as a major contributor for many years, so that the
Force can effectively carry out its mandate. We welcome
the clear language to that effect in the resolution that the
Council unanimously adopted this evening.
From the outset of the crisis in Lebanon, my
Government has been urging all parties to show the utmost
restraint and to end hostilities at the earliest opportunity.
We have also expressed our grave concern about the
growing humanitarian crisis in Lebanon arising from recent
developments.
Today’s events underline ever more clearly the need
for all parties to respond to the appeals, from whatever
quarter, for restraint and for an end to violence, which
assists only the enemies of peace. My Government is
seriously concerned that the spiralling of violence we are
now witnessing could, if not quickly halted, pose a serious
danger to the Middle East peace process. That must not
happen.
We welcome the resolution adopted by the Council
this evening, which, together with the ongoing diplomatic
initiatives, should achieve the urgent objective of ending the
current crisis and avoiding further casualties.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): The next
speaker is the representative of Japan. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Owada (Japan): In its previous intervention, at
the formal meeting of the Security Council on the situation
in the occupied Arab territories, held on 15 April, the
delegation of Japan expressed its grave concern over the
recent developments in Lebanon. These developments are
detrimental not only to the interests of those parties directly
involved in the Middle East peace process but also to the
cause of peace pursued by the international community as
a whole.
The recent violence in Lebanon is exacerbating the
already tense situation in the region; there is a very real
danger that it could jeopardize the peace process itself. We
in the international community must do our utmost to
prevent the situation from sliding into a vicious circle of
violence and retaliation.
Japan was greatly alarmed over the attacks on
northern Israel by Hezbollah and by the Israeli
counterattacks on Lebanese soil, which have resulted in
a large number of casualties, and has called for all the
parties concerned to exercise the utmost self-restraint. It
is particularly deplorable therefore that today’s shelling by
Israeli forces on the position of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) in southern Lebanon
has added tragically to the number of casualties, including
many civilians and UNIFIL personnel. This is a
development which cannot be justified, whatever its
background may have been. In order to prevent the
further deterioration of the situation, Japan once again
urges all the parties concerned immediately to cease their
hostilities and to exercise the utmost self-restraint.
Japan fully endorses the resolution just adopted by
the Security Council as an expression of the common will
of the international community. My delegation strongly
urges the parties concerned to comply fully with the
resolution as a first step towards the normalization of the
situation.
Japan renews its firm commitment to remain actively
involved in international efforts to support the Middle
East peace process. The Summit of Peacemakers in the
Middle East condemned terrorism unequivocally. As a
participant in that Summit, Japan is determined to join
international efforts to combat terrorism and to work to
ensure that the peace process is put back on track.
At the same time, Japan intends to continue to
extend its cooperation to Palestinians for their economic
and social development, which is essential to the creation
of conditions for lasting peace in the region.
Finally, I would like to express the deep condolences
of the Government of Japan to the families of those who
died in the attack, and its sympathy to all those who were
injured.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Parrilla (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish):
For more than a week the international community and
the United Nations have been witnessing one of the most
flagrant violations of the most fundamental rules of
16
Security Council 3654th meeting
Fifty-first year 18 April 1996
international law: Israel’s new, active aggression against the
people of Lebanon. There is not and cannot be any
justification of this aggression. As it did in this Chamber
only three days ago, Cuba condemns and calls for an end
to Israel’s aggression against the people of Lebanon.
We demand the following: Israel’s implementation of
General Assembly resolutions and Security Council
resolution 425 (1978); respect for the territorial integrity,
sovereignty, independence and internationally recognized
boundaries of Lebanon; compensation for damage; the
return of all the occupied Arab territories; and recognition
of the right of the Palestinian people to a State of its own,
with Jerusalem as its capital. We join in the appeal to the
United Nations and the international community to assist
the Lebanese people in their reconstruction efforts.
We regret that it was not possible for the Security
Council to adopt draft resolution S/1996/292, which had
been submitted by a group of Arab countries. In our view,
the credibility of the Security Council is at stake here. Its
credibility is already being undermined by its unjustifiable
omissions and excesses, by its lack of democracy, by the
irrelevance of its decisions and by its abandonment of them,
by its headstrong hastiness and by its unacceptable
delaying: in other words, by its adoption of a double
standard. We all know that the Security Council is very
often impotent in the face of the veto. We believe also that
a kind of “silent veto” is deployed with the mere threat of
a negative vote.
Because it is the truth, we must state that the real
source of this latest conflict is the historical impunity for
actions taken against Arab nations. The United Nations, for
legal, political and ethical reasons, is obliged to support the
rights of any State Member against aggression of this kind.
Cuba, which has for more than 35 years been the
victim of terrorist acts and acts of aggression that have cost
many of our people their lives, has condemned, and
continues to condemn, any act of terrorism. But no reason
of national security, no reason of state, no pretext
associated with international or regional peace and security,
and not even a terrorist act could justify aggression, state
terrorism, the occupation of territories, the massacre of
civilians, the violation of the rules of international
humanitarian law or unilateral measures that silently murder
children, women and elderly people.
The right of the Lebanese people deserves to be
defended. Nowadays, there is much debate over the public
image of this Organization; but the problem is not one of
image, but one of deeds. The events of recent days have
shown that the principles that gave birth to the United
Nations are still alive. They have also shown that the
practice of the United Nations should be changed only in
accordance with those principles and only in their service.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of the United Arab
Emirates. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates) (interpretation
from Arabic): It gives me pleasure, as Chairman of the
Arab Group for this month, to extend to you, Mr.
President, our sincere appreciation for your tireless efforts
in following the developments of the continued and
escalating Israeli aggression against the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of our sister country, Lebanon. That
aggression has so far resulted in the deaths of almost 200
people, in addition to hundreds of injuries and the
displacement of about half a million refugees.
In this context, I wish to reiterate our expression of
solidarity between all Arab countries and their support for
the Government and the people of Lebanon in their
painful crisis. The massacres have not yet ceased, and,
indeed, escalated this morning with the deliberate Israeli
bombardment of a known international area, the
headquarters of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon. That act of aggression resulted in the deaths of
several soldiers in the force, in addition to the deaths of
women, the elderly and unarmed children. I wish to
express our deep condolences to the Government and the
people of Lebanon and to the families of the fallen
members of the United Nations Interim Force.
On behalf of the Arab Group, I would like to
reiterate our strong condemnation of this act and our call
for Israel to comply fully with the norms of international
humanitarian law and the provisions of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949. The Security Council should
shoulder its responsibility and do its best to preserve
international peace and security. The Arab Group again
reiterates the need for Israeli aggression against Lebanese
territory to cease and the absolute necessity to respect
fully the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon.
We reiterate the need for the complete withdrawal of the
Israeli occupation forces to the internationally recognized
borders, in accordance with Security Council resolutions,
in particular resolution 425 (1978).
17
Security Council 3654th meeting
Fifty-first year 18 April 1996
I would also like to express our sincere
appreciation to all the members of the Council that
supported the draft resolution submitted by the Arab Group
— the Arab Republic of Egypt, China, Indonesia and
Guinea-Bissau. We also wish to express our deep regret
with regard to the position taken by the other members of
the Council, which abstained when voting on the draft
resolution, especially given the fact that the Arab Group’s
draft resolution is in complete accordance with the basic
principles of the United Nations Charter and Security
Council resolutions on the Middle East, in particular
resolution 425 (1978).
The elements contained in the Arab Group’s draft
resolution were prepared and submitted to the Council,
which should have adopted it in order to send a clear
message calling for the immediate cessation of Israeli
aggression against Lebanon and calling upon Israel to
withdraw immediately to the internationally recognized
borders, in accordance with relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 425 (1978).
We appeal to the international community to provide
without delay emergency humanitarian assistance to the
people of Lebanon in order to alleviate their suffering and
meet their humanitarian needs.
Finally, on behalf of the Arab Group, I call upon this
Council to continue to shoulder its responsibility in
following the grave developments in Lebanon and to take
the necessary measures to put an end to the aggression and
massacres, and to undo their consequences, in accordance
with international legitimacy and the provisions of
international law.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of the United Arab Emirates for the kind
words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Pakistan. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Kamal (Pakistan): We have once again assembled
today in the Security Council to consider the extremely
grave situation in Lebanon. Pakistan strongly deplores and
condemns the tragic incident of this morning, which has
resulted in the deaths of innocent civilians and Fijian peace-
keepers.
On 15 April, we expressed our deep concern over the
escalation of hostilities along the Israel-Lebanon border, as
well as inside Lebanon. We find the continuation of this
conflict reprehensible and deplorable and call for the
immediate cessation of hostilities by the Israeli forces.
This escalation of hostilities is neither justifiable nor
in keeping with the objective of obtaining a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
The continuation of these aggressive actions by Israel is
further increasing tensions in the region. These
premeditated and carefully planned aggressive actions
have resulted in civilian casualties, the displacement of
thousands of civilians and massive destruction of
Lebanon’s infrastructure.
Pakistan deplores and condemns the targeting and
killing of the civilian population. Pakistan has consistently
stressed that Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 425 (1978) continue to provide a viable and
just framework for the achievement of a durable and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. We also firmly
believe that, during the transitional period, Israel, as the
occupying Power under the Fourth Geneva Convention of
1949, remains obliged fully to respect and implement the
provisions of the Convention and relevant Security
Council resolutions in the occupied Arab territories.
Resolution 425 (1978) in particular calls for strict respect
for the territorial integrity, sovereignty and political
independence of Lebanon within its internationally
recognized boundaries. This resolution also calls upon
Israel immediately to cease its military action against
Lebanon and withdraw forthwith its forces from the
territory of Lebanon. Regrettably, this resolution remains
not only unimplemented but continues to be flagrantly
violated by the Israeli authorities.
The Government and the people of Pakistan are
extremely disturbed by these developments in Lebanon
and call upon the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibility to put an immediate end to these aggressive
actions by the Israeli forces. Israel must immediately
cease its military actions against Lebanon and withdraw
its forces from Lebanese territory. Pakistan also fully
supports the point of view that Lebanon is entitled to be
appropriately compensated for the destruction it has
suffered at the hands of the Israeli forces.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
18
Security Council 3654th meeting
Fifty-first year 18 April 1996
Mr. Takht-Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): May
I begin by expressing our sincere sympathy and
condolences to the people and the Government of Lebanon
and the bereaved families over the deaths of so many
innocent civilians in southern Lebanon, who perished as a
result of the deliberate attack of the Zionist army.
Three days ago, the Security Council convened to
discuss the Israeli aggression against Lebanon and its brutal
bombardment of civilian targets in that country. During that
meeting, my delegation elaborated on our position with
regard to the issue before the Council and warned that, if
the Security Council were not able or willing to take the
necessary steps in response to violations of international
law by the Zionist regime, the aggressor would be
encouraged to continue its aggression.
The crime committed by Israel today in southern
Lebanon is, unfortunately, the natural consequence of the
inaction of the Security Council. Had the Council avoided
double standards and reacted promptly and resolutely
against Israeli crimes a week ago, the Zionist regime would
not have dared to commit further crimes of this magnitude
with impunity.
Today’s barbaric act against a United Nations base in
Lebanon has resulted in the martyrdom of more than 100
civilians sheltering in that base, including many women
and children. Who is to blame? The Zionist regime,
which has been deliberately targeting civilian population
centres and economic installations in Lebanon, or those
who, through their acquiescence and silence towards
Zionist crimes or even blame of the victim rather than the
aggressor, have in fact given Israel the green light to
continue its barbarism?
The dangerous dimensions of the Israeli crimes in
Lebanon are so great that they require an urgent reaction
from the Security Council to prevent further massacres by
the Zionist regime in Lebanon. It is incumbent upon the
Security Council to condemn in the strongest terms the
continued Israeli aggression against Lebanon, which is the
primary reason for the continuation of the crisis in that
country, resulting in a high toll of civilian casualties. The
Council should also take effective measures to deal with
Israeli terrorism. Finally, the Security Council should
adopt the measures necessary to implement resolution 425
(1978). Any attempt to disregard or distort this resolution
is tantamount to legitimizing the occupation and therefore
detrimental to the credibility of the United Nations in
general and the Security Council in particular.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): There
are no further speakers. The Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The Council will remain seized of the matter.
The meeting rose at 11.35 p.m.
19
