United Nations S/PV.3698
96-86296 (E) This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fifty-first Year
3698th Meeting
Friday, 27 September 1996, 11 a.m.
New York
President: Mr. Cabral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Guinea-Bissau)
Members: Botswana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Legwaila
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Insulza
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wang Xuexian
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Moussa
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. De Charette
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Kinkel
Honduras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Urbizo Panting
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Alatas
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fulci
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Rosati
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Park
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Primakov
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Mr. Rifkind
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Albright
Agenda
The situation in the occupied Arab Territories
Letter dated 26 September 1996 from the Permanent Representative of Saudi Arabia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/1996/790)
Letter dated 26 September 1996 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/1996/792)
Security Council 3698th meeting
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
The meeting was called to order at 11.20 a.m.
Welcome to Ministers
The President (interpretation from French): I should
like, at the outset of the meeting, to acknowledge the
presence at the Council table of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Chile, His Excellency Mr. José Miguel Insulza,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt, His Excellency
Mr. Amr Moussa, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
France, His Excellency Mr. Hervé de Charette, the Vice-
Chancellor and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany,
His Excellency Mr. Klaus Kinkel, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Indonesia, His Excellency Mr. Ali Alatas, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation,
His Excellency Mr. Evgeniy Primakov and the Secretary of
State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United
Kingdom, His Excellency the Right Honourable Malcolm
Rifkind. On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to them.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the occupied Arab territories.
Letter dated 26 September 1996 from the
Permanent Representative of Saudi Arabia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/1996/790)
Letter dated 26 September 1996 from the
Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1996/792)
The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Algeria, Canada, Djibouti, Ireland,
Israel, Japan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Morocco,
Norway, Pakistan, Senegal, Tunisia and Turkey, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Levy (Israel)
took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Baali (Algeria),
Mr. Fowler (Canada), Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti), Mr.
Campbell (Ireland), Mr. Owada (Japan), Mr. Al-
Sabah (Kuwait), Mr. Moubarak (Lebanon), Mr.
Agam (Malaysia), Mr. Filali (Morocco), Mr. Biørn
Lian (Norway), Mr. Kamal (Pakistan), Mr. Ka
(Senegal), Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia), and Mr. Tanç
(Turkey) took the seats reserved for them at the side
of the Council Chamber.
The President (interpretation from French): I
should like to inform the Council that I have received a
letter dated 27 September 1996 from the Permanent
Observer of Palestine to the United Nations, which will
be issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/1996/797 and reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the Security
Council invite His Excellency, Mr. Farouk Kaddumi,
Head of the Observer Delegation of Palestine to the
fifty-first session of the United Nations General
Assembly and Head of the Political Department of
the Palestine Liberation Organization, to participate
in the current debate of the Security Council with
regard to the situation in the occupied Arab
territories, including Jerusalem, and the latest illegal
Israeli actions in Jerusalem.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
the Head of the Observer Delegation of Palestine to the
fifty-first session of the United Nations General Assembly
and Head of the Political Department of the Palestine
Liberation Organization, Mr. Farouk Kaddumi, to
participate in the current debate in accordance with the
rules of procedure and with previous practice in this
regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kaddumi
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
response to the requests contained in letters dated 26
September 1996 from the Permanent Representative of
Saudi Arabia and Egypt addressed to the President of the
Security Council, contained in documents S/1996/790 and
S/1996/792, respectively.
2
Security Council 3698th meeting
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents: S/1996/772,
S/1996/779, S/1996/786 and S/1996/791, letters dated 23,
24, 25 and 26 September 1996, respectively, from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General; S/1996/793, letter dated
26 September 1996 from the Chargé d’affaires ad interim
of the Permanent Mission of Israel to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General; and S/1996/795, letter
dated 26 September 1996 from the Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People addressed to the Secretary-General.
The President (interpretation from French): The first
speaker is the Head of the Observer Delegation of Palestine
to the fifty-first session of the United Nations General
Assembly and Head of the Political Department of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, on whom I now call.
Mr. Kaddumi (Palestine) (interpretation from
Arabic): For the past three days, the Palestinian people in
the occupied Palestinian territories have been brutally
assaulted by the Israeli army and police forces, which are
using armoured vehicles and helicopters against them. This
Israeli attack has resulted in the deaths of over 86 martyrs
and the injury of more than 1,000 people. It would seem
from these developments that these brutal Israeli measures
were planned in advance in the aim of undermining the
achievements of the political process on the Palestinian
track and of sending a warning concerning the other Arab
peace tracks.
Following the declaration of its political programmes,
the current Israeli Government took many provocative
actions, including the resumption of settlement activities
and the building of thousands of housing units. It has
confiscated ever more Palestinian land in order to construct
side roads to protect the security of the established
settlements, which now number 124 in the West Bank.
Using bulldozers, the Israeli authorities abruptly
destroyed the Borj Lukluk community centre for retarded
people in East Jerusalem. It closed down a number of
educational and cultural institutions, including Jerusalem
University. It isolated the city of Jerusalem from other
Palestinian territories and restricted the housing
development in Arab neighbourhoods.
This has occurred despite Israel’s pledges not to touch
the Palestinian institutions, as indicated in Mr. Peres’ letter
to Mr. Holst, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway,
in which he says,
(spoke in English)
“Dear Mr. Holst,
I wish to confirm that the Palestinian
institutions of East Jerusalem and the interests and
well-being of the Palestinians of East Jerusalem are
of great importance and will be preserved.
Therefore, all the Palestinian institutions in East
Jerusalem, including social, economic, educational
and cultural, and the holy Christian and Muslim
places, are performing an essential task for the
Palestinian population. Needless to say, we will not
hamper their activities. On the contrary, the
fulfilment of this important mission is to be
encouraged. This is a part of the agreements.”
The letter is signed by Mr. Peres.
(spoke in Arabic)
Israel has also withdrawn the identity cards of
Palestinian citizens in Jerusalem and prevented the
citizens of Gaza from attending Palestinian universities in
the cities of Jerusalem and Hebron. This Council has
received several letters that underscored these facts and
practices.
The current Israeli Government announced its
political programme to strengthen settlement activity and
to develop and expand settlements in order to receive
more new immigrants. It also endorsed the use of force
and repressive power by the army and security apparatus
to secure, as it claims, the security of Israel. The political
programme of the Israeli Government has emphasized the
preservation of a united Jerusalem as the eternal capital of
Israel under total Israeli sovereignty. This contravenes the
rules of international law and resolutions adopted in
international legality, which reject the annexation of
Jerusalem and any change to its status.
Moreover, the political programme of the Israeli
Government is based on a number of negative positions,
including no return to the 4 June 1967 borders; no
withdrawal from the Syrian Golan; no discussion of
Jerusalem; which is a foregone conclusion and not open
to debate; and no establishment of an independent
Palestinian State. That political programme has indicated
that the Israeli Government will define zones for security
and settlement, along with the self-rule zones, in which it
will build more and more settlements for the protection
and safety of Israel. Israel has made such threats more
3
Security Council 3698th meeting
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
than once. As this political programme was followed by
acts of provocation, ominous clouds started to gather over
the region. As soon as Israel announced the opening of the
tunnel in Jerusalem, the spark of conflagration was touched
off.
Furthermore, the economic siege that was laid against
the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territories
is still in place, intensifying the psychological pressure on
the people and aggravating living conditions.
Unemployment has reached 56 per cent. Israel has restricted
the movement of imports and exports, weakening the
economy of the Palestinian people, that it had destroyed in
the first place.
Thus, the Palestinian people continue to suffer heavy
losses; 4,500 Palestinian prisoners continue to languish in
Israeli jails. To this day, Israel has refused to allow the
return of displaced Palestinians who were forced to leave
their homes as a result of Israeli aggression in 1967.
Security Council resolutions and the accords reached with
Israel provide for a four-member committee composed of
the Palestine Liberation Organization, Egypt, Israel and
Jordan to discuss modalities for the return of displaced
persons to their homeland. Yet that committee has failed to
make any progress owing to the procrastination of the
Israeli authorities.
The Israeli Government’s slogan is “Peace for the sake
of peace.” That means emptying the negotiations of their
political contents, denying international legality and
ignoring the political provisions contained in President
George Bush’s initiative. It deliberately ignores the land-
for-peace formula. Mr. Netanyahu has called for
negotiations without preconditions, as if he thought political
negotiations could be founded on shifting sands, without
any principles or guidelines to govern them. That in itself
is enough to create a vicious circle of events and means
nothing other than an attempt to kill time.
Following Israel’s economic siege of the Palestinian
territories some thought that the issue was purely economic
and that it had no political foundations. The fact is that the
root cause was political, not economic, even though, owing
to the vast suffering caused the Palestinian people as a
result of increasing unemployment and the decline in per
capita income, its results have been economic indeed. The
Israeli occupation is the primary cause for these woes since
that occupation is the culmination of terrorism and a source
of tension because of the brutal, oppressive and harassing
measures Israel has enacted and its continuing blockade of
Palestinian territories, not to mention other violations.
Mr. Netanyahu appears to believe that an arrogant
use of power is an effective means of bringing the
Palestinians under control and safeguarding the security
of Israel. The entire world can bear witness to the fact
that the Palestinian police forces have maintained law and
order in the areas under their control in spite of all the
difficulties and odds they face. Today, Israeli tanks are
assaulting towns from which it had withdrawn and
attacking the Palestinian police forces that are maintaining
order in those towns. They are also using helicopters and
heavy machine-guns. Instead of invading towns, Israel
should have withdrawn its forces from Hebron,
implemented the redeployment plan and completed its
withdrawal from other Palestinian territories.
Yesterday in the General Assembly Hall we heard
several statements by heads of delegations that
emphasized time and again the need to preserve peace in
the Middle East. The thrust of those statements was that
the peace process must be kept on track. At the same
time, the rights of that region’s peoples to self-
determination, independence and security were also
stressed. We subscribe to the belief that peace cannot be
attained unless the Palestinian people realize their right to
self-determination and to build an independent State.
However, if the Israeli measures continue, the peace
process is in mortal peril and deaths would be inevitable.
An Israeli witness has said that current Israeli
practices do not lead to peace but, rather, serve to create
a vacuum in the Middle East region. We have heard Mr.
Peres himself say this on American television. Yet listen
to the words of Mr. Netanyahu addressing the Israeli
Knesset, words reminiscent of that 1940s European leader
who called for racial supremacy and spoke of security and
settlement:
(spoke in English)
“Zionism is not dead, even though in some
circles it has been relegated to quotation marks, we
have a wonderful youth waiting to mobilize for
national tasks. We will encourage the spirit. We will
encourage pioneering settlements in the Land of
Israel, in the Negev, in Galilee, in Judea and
Samaria and in the Golan. The settlers are the real
pioneers of our day, and they deserve support and
appreciation.”
(spoke in Arabic)
4
Security Council 3698th meeting
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
Is that not reminiscent of a similar speech delivered some
50 years ago? That is the true nature of the political
programme adopted by the Netanyahu Government of
Israel. Those are the measures that have led to this
explosion inside the occupied Palestinian territories.
I have just outlined the most recent developments in
the occupied Palestinian territories since the election of Mr.
Netanyahu, which has led to a greater number of seats in
the Knesset being occupied by increasingly radical and
extremist forces following the assassination of Mr. Yitzhak
Rabin, an assassination that demonstrated the depth of
fundamentalism and terrorism within Israeli society itself.
When United States President Bush put forward his
initiative on 6 March 1991, after the Gulf War, the
Palestinian National Council agreed to enter into the peace
process. We participated in the Madrid Peace Conference
in the hope that it would be a historic opportunity, one that
might not recur. The Palestinian National Council’s
approval revealed a genuine desire to achieve its goals. It
also underscored the Palestinian people’s genuine desire for
peace, which was also evidenced by the ensuing widespread
demonstrations throughout the entire West Bank in which
the populace placed roses in the bayonets and gun barrels
of the Israeli forces to express their hopes for peace and
coexistence.
After 22 months of political talks in Washington, D.C.,
with Mr. Shamir’s delegation, no progress had been
achieved. Then came the Oslo Agreement, which broke the
log-jam and roused hopes that the peace process would
achieve tangible and concrete progress on the ground.
The Palestinian people, hundreds of thousands of
them, received Chairman Arafat in Gaza when he came to
the occupied land in the hope that that day would be the
beginning of the end of the Palestinian diaspora and the
turning point for the Palestinian people’s return to its
usurped homeland. Months passed in which we saw stalling
and procrastination on many occasions, and efforts to back
out of the implementation of obligations under the
agreements reached. But the souls of the Palestinian people
held the fervent hope that change would come in the near
future.
Alas, today we see all doors closed in the path of
peace, and the proof of that is the intransigent stance and
the provocative acts of the Israeli Government. We have
come here to put the whole case before this Council, which
is the supreme organ responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security. We reiterate our hope
and desire for the establishment of a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace that would ensure legitimate
Palestinian rights, including the right to self-
determination, the establishment of its independent state
and the return of the Palestinian refugees to the homeland
from which they were evicted.
We also wish to reiterate and emphasize our
commitment to the underpinnings of the peace process,
which calls for Israel’s withdrawal from all occupied
Arab territories and Palestinian territories, including
Jerusalem under the resolutions adopted by this Council
and in keeping with the principle that rejects the
acquisition by force of the territories of others.
The final stage on the Palestinian track was a litmus
test of the intentions and credibility of both parties to
implement the agreements concluded. Next, we should
start negotiations on the final status, including the central
issues in the question of Palestine. These central points
include the question of Jerusalem, of the dismantling of
settlements, of the return of refugees and of voters. All
these issues are governed by international treaties, as well
as by resolutions adopted by this august Council.
Allow me to say that the painful events that have
taken place in the occupied Palestinian territories are very
disturbing. They sprang from the accumulation of
simmering tensions, and Israel alone bears the full
responsibility for these events. The Council should
condemn these events and demand that Israel put an end
to its provocative acts and close the tunnel in order to
defuse the escalating tensions. We recommend that the
Council dispatch a fact-finding mission to call for peace
in the occupied territories and to examine in full detail the
situation there. Following that fact-finding mission, the
Council should take measures to ensure peace and
security there.
In closing, the resolutions to be adopted by the
Council must emphasize the principles and tenets
underpinning the peace process and on the basis of which
the Madrid Peace Conference was convened.
The President (interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel,
His Excellency Mr. David Levy, on whom I now call.
Mr. Levy (spoke in Hebrew; interpretation provided
by the delegation): Today, the day when the Jewish
people in Israel and around the world sit in the
5
Security Council 3698th meeting
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
Tabernacle and offer the prayer to the Almighty that he
“place the tabernacle of peace over us”, is also a day when
bereaved families are mourning their loved ones, cut down
in their twenties in the recent events, and offering prayers
in their memory. Many others stand concerned and pained
at the hospital bedsides of the many injured, with a silent
prayer for the recovery of their loved ones in their hearts.
On this day I stand here in the face of the orchestrated
attempt to place blame on Israel and to portray it as the
sole responsible party for the bitter harvest of blood in
which so many have lost their lives, Palestinians and
Israelis alike. I come to refute in their entirety the
distortions of fact which are being spread here regarding
the dramatic events of the last days, which have cast such
a dark cloud over the entire peace process
No matter what claims may be held against Israel,
they in no way justify the incitement to violence and the
use of live weapons, especially by those who have been
empowered by the agreements to ensure law and order and
to prevent incitement. The essence of the peace to which
we all aspire is the transformation of patterns of behaviour,
replacing threats with dialogue, and violence with
conciliation and direct talks between the sides. The
atmosphere of escalation, threats and calls for armed
struggle will not move us from the fundamental principles
which guide our policy: the pursuit of peace while ensuring
national and personal security for our citizens.
Israel’s desire for peace is enshrined in the declared
policy guidelines of the Government. The commitment of
the present Government to the agreements signed by its
predecessor gives expression to the supreme democratic
values which light our path, and is deserving of due
recognition from all interested parties.
From the inception of this new Government, Israel has
been subjected to calls for the normalization process to be
halted and threats of a return to the intifada if Israel does
not commit itself in advance to the outcome of the
negotiations between us and the Palestinians. Israel has
been threatened that if the demands of the other side are
not met in their entirety, then it will face an armed struggle
against it.
On other fronts, steps have been taken and troops
redeployed as a means of sending a message warning Israel
that if it does not adopt one specific path and commit itself
in advance to the one single outcome demanded by the
other side, then the situation in the region will deteriorate
and the blame will be placed squarely at Israel’s feet. A
constant propaganda war is being waged against Israel
and its Government, filled with hatred and venom, and
carried out without interference and often even with the
encouragement of statesmen. Shocking and unprecedented
personal insults against Israeli leaders are voiced daily.
There is not one country in the world that can accept this,
even in the name of peace itself.
Let us remove all doubt. While the official reason
for convening this meeting of the Security Council is the
opening of the Western Wall tunnel, this is merely a
pretence. What we have before us is yet another attempt
to dictate to and pressurize Israel as a means of achieving
political goals, and to predetermine the outcome of the
negotiations. Given, however, the declared purpose of this
meeting, it is important, in the light of the distorted
perspectives that are being heard from all directions, that
we set the record straight regarding the Western Wall
tunnel.
This is a 2,500-year-old tunnel which, in ancient
times, was used as a water system providing life itself to
Jerusalem and its inhabitants. Today, water is of course
supplied differently, yet the tunnel remains a symbol of
the unique and eternal character of Jerusalem. Today the
tunnel forms part of the larger tourist fabric of the city.
The tunnel holds no political or religious significance
whatsoever. The attribution of a religious nature to this
issue is manipulative and baseless, and designed purely to
arouse emotions. Our sole intention in opening the exit of
the tunnel was to provide greater comfort and safety to
the many local visitors — Jews, Christians and
Muslims — and the many tourists and pilgrims who come
to the Holy City to marvel at its wonders.
The supreme Muslim religious authority in
Jerusalem, the Waqf, was informed in advance of our
intention to open the tunnel to tourists and visitors. I wish
to remind the Council that all measures taken by the
Israeli authorities in Jerusalem take into account the needs
of the entire population, including the Muslim population,
in order to preserve the principle of freedom of worship
and free access to the holy sites for all religions.
At no time in Jerusalem’s long history has freedom
of worship and free access to the holy sites been so
painstakingly safeguarded as it has under Israel’s
authority, to the benefit of all religions. Great pains have
been taken to ensure that the opening of the tunnel neither
damaged any archaeological or religious sites nor
endangered the security or the integrity of any structures
in the Old City, be they Islamic or otherwise.
6
Security Council 3698th meeting
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
I wish to emphasize that the Western Wall tunnel does
not run beneath the Temple Mount, nor does it in any way
affect the Al-Aqsa Mosque, as has been claimed, or its
foundations. What we are facing here is an attempt to
exploit an isolated event for the purpose of conducting a
general and orchestrated offensive against Israel.
At this juncture, as we debate the current sensitive and
dangerous situation, I strongly urge the participants here to
call upon the various regional actors to display caution,
reserve and responsibility in both their words and their
deeds.
Israel will not allow itself to be placed on trial. Over
the last months we have cautioned more than once that
words of violence can turn into actions, and that threats of
violence are carried out in the end. To our great regret, our
fears have now been realized
The President of the Palestinian Authority must exert
the authority vested in him to exercise his restraining
influence and issue clear and unequivocal instructions to his
forces, which are subject to his authority, and to the
residents of the autonomous areas to refrain from violence
lest there be any further deterioration. This is his
responsibility. At this difficult time, I must make it as
completely clear as possible that Israel has always been and
remains committed to pursuing peace through honouring
agreements.
Peace is meant to prevent the spilling of blood, that of
our sons and our neighbours alike. Violence and the
terrorist actions to which we were subjected only a few
short months ago endanger the peace process and threaten
all possibilities of bringing about a new reality.
We believe that honouring agreements is an integral
element of peace and of the efforts required to achieve it.
In the few weeks since assuming the heavy burden of
responsibility of government and the mission of running the
weighty matters of State, we have had ongoing contacts
with the President of the Palestinian Authority, Mr. Yasser
Arafat, and his colleagues. The Prime Minister, the Defence
Minister and myself have held talks with him, and we have
agreed together with the Palestinian side upon a clear
structure for resuming the negotiations for discussing and
resolving the issues in dispute. We have taken steps to ease
the closure, while taking upon ourselves security risks, in
the light of the horrendous terrorist attacks in Tel Aviv,
Jerusalem and elsewhere, which remain fresh in our minds.
We have taken decisions also to assist and ease the
economic hardship in the autonomous areas.
The place for resolving differences is the negotiating
table, and for this, order, stability and security must be
restored.
The recent events are serious and grave.
Nevertheless, we must not lose hope. Now we must make
every effort to prevent further deterioration, to restore
quiet and to renew negotiations and dialogue. We must
remember that continued escalation, violence and
expressions of hatred may prevent any possibility of
advancing towards peace.
Once more, I call upon the President of the
Palestinian Authority, Yasser Arafat, to act in accordance
with the responsibilities vested in him.
I hope that this Security Council debate will not be
allowed to become yet one more phase in the attempt to
isolate and impose unacceptable positions on the
Government of Israel. The Council must not lend its hand
to the atmosphere of escalation. This will serve no
purpose.
I come from Jerusalem and I shall return there.
Jerusalem is a mosaic of many colours towards which
countless eyes and prayers are turned from all corners of
the earth. Jerusalem has always been and remains the
heart and soul of the Jewish people, the eternal and
historic capital of Israel. The annals of the Jewish people
are embedded in her very essence, her stones, her
pathways and hilltops. Jerusalem, as its Hebrew name
testifies, is the city of peace. Let us all, Jew and Arab
alike, raise a prayer and heed the lessons of recent days,
and embark on a new path of dialogue.
We are pained by the bloodshed. The years of
struggle, violence, bloodshed and pain have led us
nowhere. We must build a new future. Let us not miss the
opportunity.
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of September and on the very able manner
in which you are conducting the affairs of the Council.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel for his kind
words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Egypt, His Excellency Mr. Amr Moussa.
7
Security Council 3698th meeting
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
Mr. Moussa (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): At
the outset, I would especially like to congratulate you
personally, Mr. President, as you assume the presidency of
the Security Council at this very delicate stage.
The Council is meeting today to look into the situation
in the Middle East in the wake of the bloody developments
in Jerusalem and the other occupied Palestinian areas. This
sends a very important message. The Arab-Israeli
negotiations, which started in Madrid five years ago, are
facing problems, and the march towards peace is stalling.
The Security Council, which is responsible for maintaining
international peace and security, must therefore intervene.
The events in East Jerusalem and other Palestinian
areas came as no surprise for those who have been
monitoring the evolution of the peace process. Nor is the
direction taken by Israeli policy surprising. It is like a dark
tunnel into which it is trying to drag the rest of the Middle
East. It is trying to circumvent the pillars of the peace
process and its basic points as had been agreed, and to
relinquish the commitments made in that framework.
Yes, Mr. President, what happened was no surprise for
us in Egypt. Nor was it a surprise for you. We had issued
warnings at the highest levels in Egypt; we had warned the
Israelis about the outcome of this policy. President Hosni
Mubarak more than once said that only evil and harm
would come of this policy — and this is exactly what has
happened. The policy of pressure, blockade, closing of the
territories, demolition, imprisonment and the lack of respect
for commitments can yield only frustration and outbursts,
blood and victims. No one can be blamed except the Israeli
policy — its shameful stalling and the relinquishment of its
commitment to the peace process.
We strongly condemn the changes made by Israel in
Jerusalem, as well as its incitation to action and the
challenges it has issued. We also condemn the settler
policy, which will never be recognized by the international
community because it is illegal. In spite of all of this, the
matter goes beyond what happened yesterday. It takes on a
totally different dimension that is really very dangerous,
namely the Israeli position vis-à-vis the peace process —
not only on the Palestinian track, but also on other Madrid
tracks: the Palestinian track, the Syrian track and the
international Arab tracks. What we see is Israel moving
away from the basic points that have been agreed.
Thus, first, the Israeli policy avoids any mention of
the principle of land for peace or its implementation; and
this destroys the basis for that process.
Second, the Israeli Government went back to the
settlement policy in spite of a direct reference in the Oslo
agreement to avoid any measures that might affect
negatively the outcome of the negotiations and the final
status of the territories.
Third, the Israeli Government once again has sought
to change the demographic and geographical composition
of Jerusalem, which is subject to negotiations under the
documents annexed to the Oslo agreement. The final
status of Jerusalem has yet to be defined or determined.
It has to be determined through negotiations and not
unilaterally, either by Israel or by Palestine.
Fourth, the Israeli Government refused to implement
the redeployment agreement in Hebron despite the official
provision to that effect in the agreement and its own
commitment to that implementation.
Fifth, Israel would not redeploy its forces in other
areas agreed to — the B and C areas — in accordance
with the transitional agreement on redeployment in these
areas as of 7 September 1996.
Sixth, the Israeli Government would not resume
negotiations on the final status, in accordance with the
provisions of the agreement.
Seventh, the Israeli Government has gone back to
the policy of committing acts of aggression against
civilians, as happened in the past two days when the
Israeli Army fired on civilians, killing more than 60
Palestinians and injuring hundreds.
Eighth, Israeli forces have entered Palestinian towns
and cities. This destroys the idea of autonomy. We are
talking about two distinct and separate societies — two
neighbouring entities. We are not working to establish one
entity that would dominate another. That is not an Arab-
Israeli peace. That is an Israeli peace. And it will never
be achieved under any circumstances.
Ninth, this all comes in addition to the Israeli
economic blockade. This Israeli policy has been carried
out against the Palestinian entity and the Palestinian
Authority, not only through closing the territories and
imposing the blockade, but also by eliminating any
opportunities for economic advancement or economic
independence for the Palestinians.
Tenth, add to this the policies of imprisonment, and
what one gets is a dark picture of the Israeli-Palestinian
8
Security Council 3698th meeting
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
track — the result of the very unwise and aggressive
policy, that has been adopted by the Israeli Government.
Not only does this eliminate the prospects for the
Palestinian-Israeli track — but it also affects the other
tracks. We will hear the Foreign Ministers of Lebanon and
Syria speak of the stalling developments on both tracks.
In view of this, perhaps the Council will recall what
the Cairo summit decided last June — that the peace option
is a strategic Arab option that would require a serious
commitment by the other side, namely Israel. Perhaps
members would also recall the message sent by that summit
that the lack of commitment by Israel or any reversal of its
position vis-à-vis the commitments to the peace process
would lead to a setback for the whole process, with all the
implications and the dangers inherent in plunging the region
back into the cycle of violence, thus forcing all Arab
countries to reconsider their positions in the peace process
with Israel. The Israeli Government bears full responsibility
for this.
This is the framework to which we, as Arab countries,
all have committed ourselves. The peace option is a
strategic option, but we cannot accept a reversal of position
by Israel. We cannot accept a threat to peace or a threat to
the legitimate national rights of the Palestinians or to the
return of land — Syrian or Lebanese.
We have invested so much time and have made so
many efforts to create a framework for peace, in Egypt in
particular. We have aimed, since the very beginning of the
peace process to close the file on the Israeli-Arab conflict
and to open a new chapter of cooperation, understanding
and coexistence. We still believe in this, and we still have
this goal. But it cannot be implemented by one side alone.
Therefore, I call upon the Israeli Government to
review and reconsider its policy because its outcome is very
dangerous. The alternative to peace is something that the
international community cannot bear because it will
jeopardize stability and peace in the whole region. No one
can accept this. We want an Arab-Israeli peace that is
balanced: right for right, security for security, and
commitment for commitment. Peace will be established
only on this basis. Mr. Netanyahu spoke about reciprocity.
This is reciprocity — security for security, commitment for
commitment,and right for right. We all share in this
responsibility — all the parties, the two sponsors, the
permanent members, the Security Council and the
international community at large.
We must be serious in what we do. Egypt is ready,
as it has always been, to assist in putting the peace
process back on track. But we do not want the
exploitation of photo opportunities to deceive public
opinion. Israel must relinquish the negative policy it has
pursued and must implement its commitments, foremost
among which are to withdraw from Hebron, to end its
interference in the Palestinians’ internal affairs, and to
stop blockading and killing them.
The Security Council must assume its obligations
and responsibilities in maintaining peace and security. It
must send the strong, clear and unequivocal message to
the Israeli Government that policies of violence against
civilians, of provoking religious sentiment, of
relinquishing contractual obligations and of political
prevarication will not lead to a positive outcome. The new
Middle East must be based on mutual respect without
violence and on making sacrifices to attain peace.
We extend our hand for peace, for a just peace that
will lead to a balanced, just coexistence between the
Arabs and Israelis.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt for his kind
words addressed to me.
(spoke in English)
I now call on the Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom, His
Excellency The Right Honourable Malcolm Rifkind.
Mr. Rifkind (United Kingdom): Mr. President,
thank you for your welcome. It is a great honour to be
present at this important debate. The fighting over the last
two days between Palestinians and Israelis has shocked us
all. The casualties suffered by both sides are very high.
We have not seen violence on this scale since the Oslo
agreements were reached and brought such hopes of
peace.
Sadly, violence was predictable. Despite progress in
some important areas, fires of frustration have been
smouldering because of the lack of progress on Hebron,
the continuation of the closures, which Palestinians see as
collective punishment and which carries a heavy
economic penalty, and the moves to develop settlements.
And the decision to open a tunnel in the Old City of
Jerusalem, following on the earlier demolition of a
9
Security Council 3698th meeting
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
Palestinian community centre, added the fuel that produced
conflagration.
But the incidents of the last few days are only
symptoms of the wider deterioration of the peace process,
which has now reached grave and serious proportions. Our
priority must be to put out the blaze. Only then can we
work to help the parties to engage seriously in real peace
negotiations, which are the only way to avoid such
outbursts in future.
Urgent action is needed to deal both with the
immediate problem and with the underlying deterioration in
the peace process. And what is required is first of all, I
would suggest, a moratorium on the opening up of the
tunnel to tourism; secondly, a meeting between the two
leaders, Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Arafat, at
which agreement can be reached on immediate steps to
cease the fighting; thirdly, the earliest possible engagement
to bring about the implementation of outstanding issues
under the Interim Agreement, starting with Hebron — this
would demonstrate by deeds and not just by words an
unequivocal commitment to the peace process; and fourthly,
as King Hussein has proposed, agreement to an
international commission to work out ways of dealing with
the sensitive questions that arise in Jerusalem on
archaeological matters. The United Kingdom would be
happy to participate.
No one can pretend these steps are easy. The fighting
has made negotiating much more difficult, but it has also
made it more necessary. The United Kingdom urges the
leaders most closely concerned to make the leap of faith
that is needed to snatch progress back from the jaws of
such a setback. And this calls for statesmanship of a high
order. It is a great challenge, but it is not an impossible
one. Who can forget that in even more difficult
circumstances in South Africa, Nelson Mandela and F. W.
de Klerk were able to rise to an even greater challenge?
And so Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Arafat can,
and ought to be able to, count on the support of the
Security Council and the international community if they
bring the violence of the last days and hours to an end and
then engage with renewed determination and urgency in the
work for lasting peace, to which both have committed
themselves. The way forward is clear. It needs courage to
take it. But the alternative is not one to contemplate.
The President (interpretation from French): I now
call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of France, His
Excellency Hervé de Charette.
Mr. De Charette (France) (interpretation from
French): I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency and on your very skilled
leadership.
The tragic events that are occurring in the
Palestinian territories are the most serious we have seen
in many years. This brings us back to a time we thought
had passed. This situation is a challenge to the
international community. It poses a major risk for the
peace process. This process, which has been at a standstill
for several months now, is in danger of dying if the
international community does not react quickly and with
resolve.
In fact, these events are not surprising. France, for
its part, for some time now has been warning the Israeli
authorities about growing frustrations in the Palestinian
territories, including Jerusalem. I met with Mr. Levy at
the beginning of September, and recently the President of
France met with Prime Minister Netanyahu. In both cases
we insisted on the urgency of concrete measures that
would allow for an improvement in the daily lives of the
Palestinians.
The incident that touched off the crisis might appear
to be of secondary importance. Mr. Netanyahu insisted
heavily on this point. Actually, that argument is probably
accurate. The opening of a tunnel is less serious than
many of the measures taken, which have directly affected
the lives of Palestinians: the closure of territories, the
travel ban on non-resident Palestinians to Jerusalem, the
destruction of homes, the expansion of settlements, and so
on. But this latest step, taken in a highly symbolic place,
shows, if not deliberate provocation, then at least a
serious psychological error. It is obvious that the Israeli
authorities miscalculated the emotional reaction of
Palestinian public opinion, which is very sensitive to
anything that occurs within the perimeter of the mosques.
France is deeply troubled by the surge in violence
and by the growing number of victims. Last night, I was
in contact with President Arafat, who reported 69 deaths
and more than 1,100 injured. These confrontations
resulted in casualties primarily among the civilian
population. We also, of course, deplore the injuries and
deaths among the Israeli army as well as those among the
Palestinian police, which confronted each other for the
first time.
France is concerned that an important provision of
the agreements concluded between the Palestinian
10
Security Council 3698th meeting
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
Authority and the Israeli Government has been deliberately
violated. The fact that the Israeli Army has entered parts of
Zone A, which is under Palestinian control, is, in fact,
contrary to the letter and spirit of the Taba Agreement.
We should shed as full a light as possible, as Mr.
Netanyahu himself has said he wishes to do, on these tragic
events — on how they unfolded, their causes and those
responsible. There can be no doubt that, primarily, they
reflect the exasperation of the Palestinian population.
According to the Israeli authorities, the current legislation
is the result of a deliberate campaign against Israel which
has the assent of President Arafat. It is difficult for us to
subscribe to that analysis, even though it may be possible
that certain dubious elements have tried to take advantage
of a difficult situation.
France hopes that everything possible will be done to
restore calm, bring the situation under control and avoid
circumstances in which the most extremist factions can
exploit the situation. In this respect, we feel that there is as
much composure and desire for calm on the side of the
Israeli authorities as on that of President Arafat. For its
part, France has endeavoured, through many contacts that
the President of the Republic and I have had with Mr.
Netanyahu and President Arafat, to help to calm a situation
which, if nothing is done soon, is in danger of moving
beyond the control of the local authorities.
France is giving and will continue to give its tireless
and determined help to the search for peace. It supports
efforts from any quarter aimed at resolving this crisis.
For several months now, some have seemed to believe
that another peace would be possible, based on other
principles, that would conform more closely to their own
interests. I say, solemnly, that only the complete
implementation of the Madrid, Oslo and Taba Agreements
is capable of restoring peace. Only the fundamental
principles established by those Agreements — that is, land
for peace and the right of the Palestinians to self-
determination — can provide an acceptable basis and
favourable prospects for negotiations.
It is either that or violence; respect for principles or
confrontation; agreements or war. France believes that the
Egyptian initiative, which led to this meeting, has come at
an opportune time and can help contribute to a return to
calm thinking. The deliberations of the Security Council
will help to restore peace once the Council confirms the
need to return to the peace process on the bases that I have
laid out.
We believe that two measures are imperative. The
Israeli authorities must return the tunnel under the Holy
City to its original state. According to certain information,
the city of Jerusalem may have decided to close the
tunnel on a provisional basis. Such a positive decision
should be confirmed and made permanent. Furthermore,
the Israeli troops that have entered zone A must withdraw
as soon as possible.
We should also clearly call upon the parties to
resume negotiations on the peace process on the basis of
established principles and implement without delay the
agreements already concluded. In this respect, the
evacuation of Hebron and the relaxation of security
measures in the territories would constitute necessary and
urgent measures.
We must not so much condemn as avoid similar
events in the future. In this respect, we approve the idea
of an immediate meeting between Mr. Netanyahu and
President Arafat in order to resume negotiations at the
highest level to allow the complete implementation of
agreements that have been signed and the achievement of
an agreement on the final status of the Palestinian
territories in order to build a just and lasting peace.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of France for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Russian Federation, Mr. Yevgeniy Primakov.
Mr. Primakov (Russian Federation) (interpretation
from Russian): Russia reacted with great concern to the
bloodshed in Jerusalem, Ramallah, Nablus and Gaza. We
have not seen such a dangerous situation since 1982. We
must understand something: It would appear that this
situation is a direct result not only of reckless activity in
respect of the delicate issue of religious sentiment, but
also of the fact that over the past four months the peace
process in the Middle East has come to a virtual standstill
and that Israel has even begun to draw back from
agreements that it entered into. This took place after a
new leader came to power in that country.
The past four months were effectively a prelude to
the opening by the Israeli authorities of a tunnel directly
adjacent to one of the holiest places of the Islamic world,
the Al-Aqsa Mosque. Given the seriousness of the
situation, Russia supported the request of the Arab Group
for an urgent discussion of this issue at a formal meeting
11
Security Council 3698th meeting
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
of the Security Council. We believe that this meeting will
be an important step in the search for a way out of the
current impasse.
Russia strongly urges all the interested parties to show
maximum restraint and to avoid action that may lead to a
further deterioration of the situation. We are convinced that
breaking the vicious circle of confrontation can be achieved
only through political means. We are also convinced that
the situation now requires not just close contact between the
parties if the vicious spiral of violence is to be broken
quickly, but also an urgent resumption of talks on an
overall Middle East settlement. Russia is one of the
sponsors of the peace process and cannot acquiesce to a
situation in which the first hard-won fruits of the peace
negotiations are sacrificed to tactical considerations and
internal political manoeuvring. There must be a resumption
of the peace process, not with a tabula rasa, but on the
basis of compliance with agreements already entered
into. Only those agreements — not just the written
agreements; I must emphasize, but also those reached in the
framework of the Madrid process — can, we are deeply
convinced, put an end to the dangerous escalation of
violence. Immediate progress in all negotiations on the
basis of the principle of “land for peace” and Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978)
on Lebanon, is the way forward.
Russia has cautioned that the longer instability persists
in the peace process, the greater becomes the risk of being
hurled back to confrontation. In the tragic events of recent
days, we can clearly see what that would lead to. Russia
has already taken steps and made contacts aimed at
normalizing the situation and encouraging dialogue and
cooperation between the Government of Israel and the
Palestinian national Authority. The most important thing
now is not to allow a further escalation of the dispute on
both sides. This applies to the interests of Palestinians and
Israelis alike and to the aspirations of the international
community as a whole.
It is no coincidence that, in the Security Council
today, many countries are represented by their Ministers for
Foreign Affairs. This not only reflects our concern about
events in the Middle East, but will make it possible for us
to take more effective action to normalize the situation.
However, to achieve this we need to adopt a resolution
today that is acceptable to all members of the Security
Council. It must be done today. Otherwise, we are very
much afraid that those who are guilty of the bloodshed will
receive the wrong signal.
The President (interpretation from French): Before
I call on the next speaker, I wish, on behalf of the
Council, to welcome to the Council table the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Honduras, Mr. Delmer Urbizo Panting.
(spoke in English)
The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Indonesia, Mr. Ali Alatas.
Mr. Alatas (Indonesia): Let me begin, Sir, by
extending to you my warm congratulations and those of
my delegation on your assumption of the presidency at a
time when the Council is considering an issue of critical
importance to all of us. Your proven diplomatic skills
assure us that our deliberations will be brought to a
successful conclusion.
I should also like to extend to your predecessor,
Ambassador Tono Eitel of Germany, our deep
appreciation for the exemplary manner in which he
guided the work of the Council last month.
This meeting has been called to address a highly
volatile — indeed, explosive — situation in the occupied
territories, which threatens to engulf the Middle East in
the all too familiar violence and bloodshed that we had
hoped had become part of the past. For quite some time
now, Indonesia has observed with deepening concern the
progressive deterioration of the situation in the occupied
territories. The ominous manifestations of this
deterioration — Israel’s confiscation of Arab land and
establishment of new settlements; its failure to lift the
closure of Palestinian territories; its refusal to withdraw
its forces from Hebron; its attempts to change the
geographic and demographic conditions; and its failure to
implement the provisions of the 1993 Declaration of
Principles and subsequent agreements — have again
turned the region into a flash point of crisis fraught with
far-reaching consequences. We are clearly confronted by
a case of bad faith on the part of Israel and by Israel’s
manifest lack of commitment to the peace process. Israel
is gravely endangering the peace process by taking
measures contrary to it both in letter and in spirit.
Moreover, it has spurned the resumption of negotiations
based on the interim accords and the principle of land for
peace.
It cannot be denied that the most dangerous
development that precipitated the current cycle of
violence was Israel’s provocative action of opening a new
entrance to the tunnel which runs along the western wall
12
Security Council 3698th meeting
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, triggering an open confrontation
resulting in death and injuries to scores of civilians. This
flare-up of violence is reminiscent of the era of the intifada
and reflects the deep frustration and anger of the
Palestinians at obstructions to the peace process by the
Government of Israel. My delegation strongly condemns the
indiscriminate use of force in Jerusalem, Ramallah, Nablus
and Gaza against the Palestinian population. Further
aggravating the situation is the unprecedented and direct
confrontation between the Israeli army and the Palestinian
police force.
The unilateral action of the Israeli Government to
change the facts on the ground regarding the status of
Jerusalem is in utter disregard of the timetable set by the
1993 Declaration of Principles scheduling this critical issue
for the final phase of negotiations, in May 1997. It is
therefore imperative that the Security Council, in
unambiguous terms, call upon Israel to close the tunnel and
return it to its initial state before the crisis. We further call
for the cessation of all acts detrimental to the safety and
well-being of the Palestinian people.
The traumatic events that are currently unfolding need
to be urgently addressed by both parties. We urge the
Government of Israel to resume negotiations with the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to resolve this
crisis in accordance with the provisions of the Declaration
of Principles and subsequent agreements. Negotiations in
good faith must be relaunched in order to arrive at a just
and comprehensive settlement. Reneging on earlier
commitments and ignoring the issues at stake, and
especially the inalienable rights of the Palestinians, will not
resolve the core issue of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The peace process must move forward and become
irreversible. For this to materialize, the Government of
Israel must honour its obligations under the relevant
agreements. Peace is a challenging task, but it must be
pursued relentlessly lest more blood be spilled.
The President: I thank the Foreign Minister of
Indonesia for the kind words he addressed to me and to my
predecessor.
(spoke in French)
The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Chile, His Excellency Mr. José Miguel Insulza.
Mr. Insulza (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish): I
wish to begin by reiterating what I said yesterday in the
General Assembly. We state our deep concern at the
serious crisis in the Middle East peace process, a process
we have supported since its beginnings in Madrid and
Oslo.
Few international agreements have aroused so much
hope and relief in the international community. From the
beginning, this peace process was viewed as going
beyond the parties to the conflict, and proved that even
the most complex and difficult problems on the
international agenda could be resolved with political
courage, enabling age-old enemies gradually to become
partners in a new Middle East reality of security and
respect for all. We must not give up hope that this
remains possible. Unfortunately, the peace process has
recently faced many obstacles, and frustration was
building up until the recent eruption in Jerusalem, which
is the reason for today’s meeting.
Jerusalem is a holy city for a number of cultures and
religions, and we all understand that a delicate balance
must be maintained. It is a highly sensitive place, where
history has shown us that there for every action there is
a reaction, and where subjective factors largely prevail
over objective analysis. The level of accumulated tension
was so high that a single spark sufficed to ignite the
flames we are regrettably witnessing. In the course of but
a few days, many have lost their lives, both Palestinians
and Israelis, and hundreds have been wounded.
It is essential for the Government of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority to reduce the tension that this new
tragedy has caused. We therefore call upon both parties
to do everything possible to calm the situation and resume
dialogue in the framework of respect for existing
agreements and for the beliefs of the populations
concerned.
A situation that a few months ago was ripe with
opportunity must not be allowed to become a mere
parenthetical interval. There have been men and women
of determination; statesmen who were able to see beyond
the limitations of the present and to break down the walls
that prevented Palestinians and Israelis from beginning a
peace process. In the light of this success, we cannot
permit the triumph of certain minority groups which are
against peace and which speak with the voice of
extremism and espouse a culture of death: a step
backwards in the peace process would only benefit them.
We in the international community must cooperate so that
the language of violence and intolerance does not
13
Security Council 3698th meeting
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
supplant that of dialogue and understanding in the long-
suffering region of the Middle East.
Chile is located far from that region, but the many
Chileans of Palestinian and Jewish origin live together in
peace and harmony. We have the largest population of
Palestinian origin in Latin America, and it pains us to see
it affected by the grave situation its people are facing.
Chile maintains good relations with Israel and with the
Arab countries and has a great wish to see the peace
process in the Middle East continue to move forward. To
this end we are willing to help in any way we can.
Chile shares some of the proposals that have been
formulated within the framework of this crisis and at this
meeting of the Security Council. It is necessary, of course,
to suspend use of the tunnel which gave rise to the
controversy, but above all it is necessary to renew the
process of implementing the peace agreements and the
resolutions of this Council on the Middle East.
The President (interpretation from French): The next
speaker is the Vice Chancellor and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Germany, His Excellency Mr. Klaus Kinkel.
Mr. Kinkel (Germany) (spoke in German;
interpretation provided by the delegation): Allow me first
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the way in which
you have steered the Security Council through a very
difficult month.
The recent dramatic developments in the Palestinian
territories and in Jerusalem fill us with grave concern. I
would like, on behalf of my Government, to express our
sympathy for the victims and relatives of the victims on
both sides. The Federal Government will immediately make
available financial assistance for the medical treatment and
medical care of the victims.
The recent incidents have shocked the region and
endangered the process of peace and autonomy, which is so
vital to the region. This is a process without alternative, a
process that must continue. Those on both sides who are in
a position of political responsibility must remain level-
headed at this time. We must do everything in our power
to put an immediate end to the violence and bloodshed;
there must be no further casualties, no more people killed
and wounded.
Following other encouraging developments of the last
few years, and now that the cessation of the East-West
conflict has put an end to so many awful situations, the
developments in the Palestinian territories and in the
Middle East have become very promising. There must be
no return to violence and terror. I believe that on such a
day, on such an occasion, it should also be said quite
clearly that what has already been achieved in the Middle
East peace process has created a situation in which both
sides were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. I think this
must be said.
A return to the negotiating table is indispensable
now. I believe we should appeal to both sides to try to
negotiate in a constructive manner, oriented towards
achieving the objectives they are working for. What must
now take place is a meeting between Prime Minister
Netanyahu and President Arafat. This is of course of
central importance. Yesterday I tried to make a
contribution towards this end in numerous telephone
conversations, as did Federal Chancellor Helmut Kohl,
and I warmly welcome the initiative taken by the
Egyptian President, who invited the parties to Cairo.
Of course, the weapons must remain silent, but what
we need above all is a general de-escalation of the
situation. Another factor I deem to be very important is
that the confidence that has been lost should be restored,
and this applies to both sides. I therefore believe that the
meeting not only has to take place, but that it ought to
lead to concrete results.
My third point is that I should like to appeal to the
parties to implement the agreements already entered into,
to stick to their spirit and their letter of them, because I
believe that only in this way can we bring about a
calming of the situation.
The issue of Hebron will have to be solved, and of
course — and here I refer back to the speech I made
earlier this week to the General Assembly — a solution
has to be found to the situation of the people sealed off
in the Palestinian territories, because the people have to
get the feeling that the peace agreement is paying off, that
it is something from which they too benefit. Both sides
must contribute to avoiding an escalation of the situation.
And of course each side must respect the religious
feelings of the other, and must respect the holy sites. Here
I warmly welcome the announcement that the tunnel is to
be closed.
We Europeans feels a special responsibility, and
therefore Prime Minister Major, President Chirac, and
Federal Chancellor Kohl urgently appealed to Prime
14
Security Council 3698th meeting
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
Minister Netanyahu and President Arafat today. They said,
“You have to sit down at one table, you have to regain
confidence in each other. The peace process has to
continue.”
I would like to appeal to all parties involved: please
let reason return. The whole world is looking to this region,
filled with a great feeling of hope, and at the same time
scared that the peace process might have come to an end,
might be in danger. We have the feeling that a renewed
effort is called for now. We must not allow the peace
process to die together with the victims. That would be
terrible, but there is still time.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the Vice Chancellor and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Germany for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Poland, His Excellency Mr. Dariusz Rosati.
Mr. Rosati (Poland): Let me congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of September. As this turbulent month is
coming to an end, I wish to thank you for the efforts you
have made to ensure the efficient work of the Council.
The Polish delegation is gravely concerned about the
escalation of tensions in Palestine. The outbreak of violence
and continuing open confrontation may jeopardize the
results of the peace efforts already achieved, destabilize the
situation in the whole region and endanger the continuation
of the Middle East peace process.
Our concern has been aroused even more by a visible
gradual aggravation of the crisis, which appears to be
steadily growing worse and more dangerous.
We deeply regret the loss of lives and suffering
resulting from the recent tragic developments in Jerusalem,
Ramallah, Bethlehem and other places.
The incidents that took place in Palestine have
particularly grave significance since they involved an open
exchange of fire between the Israeli security forces and the
police of the new Palestinian Authority — the first incident
of this kind since the beginning of the peace process.
It is therefore important that the parties to the conflict
take decisive and immediate steps to defuse the current
situation. One important step in that direction could be the
restoration of the status quo in Jerusalem’s Old City. It is
equally important that the parties refrain from actions that
might lead to a further escalation of tensions.
We call upon the Israeli Government and the
Palestinian authorities to respect and implement the
agreements achieved, as well as to avoid creating
problems that are bound to impede the continuation of
constructive dialogue between them. This, in our view, is
the only way to lead to lasting peace in the Middle East.
We commend diplomatic efforts made by other
States, including the members of the Security Council, to
encourage both parties involved to desist from
perpetrating further acts of violence and to meet at the
negotiating table to seek a peaceful settlement of their
differences. We express our earnest hope that the parties
to the conflict will respond to those efforts in a positive
way.
Being among the countries that have been
consistently supporting the Middle East peace process
initiated in Oslo and Madrid, the Polish delegation is of
the view that this process constitutes an important factor
related to global international security and stability.
We deeply believe that the question of Palestine can
be resolved by peaceful means and confidence-building,
through the cooperation of both parties concerned.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland for his kind
words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Honduras, His Excellency Mr. Delmer Urbizo Panting,
on whom I now call.
Mr. Urbizo Panting (Honduras) (interpretation from
Spanish): I wish first to congratulate you warmly, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and for the manner in which you are guiding the debate
of this very important meeting.
Honduras has always favoured the attainment of a
just and lasting peace that would guarantee security and
stability in the Middle East region. We have always
maintained that full respect for the agreements concluded
between the Palestinian people and the Government of
Israel is an essential element in the peace process.
For this reason, we view with just concern the
serious situation brought about by Israeli actions in the
15
Security Council 3698th meeting
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
Al-Aqsa Mosque in the occupied Palestinian territory of
East Jerusalem, and the attacks against Palestinian civilians
who protested against such actions which, unfortunately,
resulted in dozens of dead and wounded. The confrontations
this week in Jerusalem, Bethlehem, Al Birah, Hebron and
Nablus are acts which my delegation regrets because they
jeopardize the peace process in the Middle East.
While deploring the attacks against Palestinian
civilians, Honduras believes that the Israeli measures to
alter the legal status and demographic composition of
Jerusalem are null and void, and contrary to the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 1949, to the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and to the agreements
concluded by the Palestine Liberation Organization and
the Israeli Government.
The negative impact of the continuation of this
dangerous situation for the Palestinian people and for the
prospects of peace cannot be ignored. That is why we
believe that the measures taken by Israel that affect the
rights of the Palestinian people in the occupied territory
of East Jerusalem must cease immediately. The special
character that the city of Jerusalem has for the Palestinian
people must be respected.
My delegation therefore appeals to both parties —
for the sake of the peace process and out of respect for
the agreements — put an end to this dangerous situation,
so as to be able to restore peace to the region. It is
essential that this Council contribute to the early
settlement of this conflict by prescribing measures to
prevent its escalation.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Honduras for his kind
words addressed to me.
There are many speakers still remaining. However,
in view of the lateness of the hour, I intend, with the
concurrence of the Council, to suspend the meeting now.
16


United Nations S/PV.3698 (Resumption 1)
96-86309 (E) This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fifty-first Year
3698th Meeting
Friday, 27 September 1996, 4 p.m.
New York
President: Mr. Cabral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Guinea-Bissau)
Members: Botswana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Legwaila
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Osomavía
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Qin Huasun
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Elaraby
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dejammet
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Eitel
Honduras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Martínez Blanco
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wisnumurti
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fulci
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Rosati
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Park
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fedotov
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Sir John Weston
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Albright
Agenda
The situation in the occupied Arab Territories
Letter dated 26 September 1996 from the Permanent Representative of Saudi Arabia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/1996/790)
Letter dated 26 September 1996 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/1996/792)
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m. and resumed
at 5 p.m.
The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Australia, Bahrain, Cuba, India, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Oman, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Sudan and Yemen in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite these
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Downer
(Australia), Mr. Al-Khalifa (Bahrain), Mr. Rodriguez
Parrilla (Cuba), Mr. Shah (India), Mr. Velayati
(Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Madadha (Jordan),
Mr. Muntasser (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Abdulla
(Oman), Mr. Allagany (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Taha
(Sudan), Mr. Al-Shara (Syrian Arab Republic) and
Mr. Al-Eryany (Yemen) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Members of the Council that I have
received a letter dated 27 September 1996 from the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:
“In my capacity as Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, I have the
honour to request to be invited to participate in
the debate on the situation in the occupied Arab
territories, under rule 39 of the provisional rules
of procedure of the Security Council.”
On previous occasions the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In accordance with past practice in
this matter, I propose that the Council extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Ibra Deguène Ka.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The President (interpretation from French): I
should like to inform the Council that I have received a
letter dated 27 September 1996 from the Permanent
Representative of Guinea to the United Nations, which
reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that the
Security Council extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
His Excellency Mr. Engin A. Ansay,
Permanent Observer of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference to the United Nations,
during the Council’s discussion of the item
entitled The situation in the occupied Arab
territories'.”
This letter has been issued as a document of the
Security Council under symbol S/1996/799. If I hear no
objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees to extend
an invitation under rule 39 to Mr. Engin A. Ansay.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
Mr. Fulci (Italy): Allow me first of all to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your presidency of the
Security Council for the month of September. Your
wisdom, impartiality and high degree of professionalism
have been an art and a constant guarantee of our
effectiveness. At the same time, I wish to thank your
predecessor, Ambassador Tono Eitel, Permanent
Representative of Germany, for his exemplary leadership
of our proceedings for the month of August.
Let me also say at the outset that Italy fully
associates itself with and subscribes to the statement that
will be made later on by Ireland on behalf of the
European Union.
Almost exactly three years ago, on 13 September
1993, we witnessed a great moment in contemporary
history: the Prime Minister of Israel, Yitzhak Rabin, and
the Palestinian leader, Yasser Arafat, shook hands on the
White House lawn, marking the start of a peace process
that until then had seemed absolutely impossible.
This happened because of the dedication, tenacity
and hard work of men and women of good will from
several countries who never lost faith. They overcame
difficulties that had been considered insurmountable for
many years. The Nobel Peace Prize awarded to the two
2
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
main architects of this watershed sanctioned the transition
to a new era in relations between the Israelis and
Palestinians.
Since then, amid enormous and ongoing difficulties,
and at times misunderstandings, the peace process has
continued. Not even the tragic assassination of Prime
Minister Rabin could stop it.
When the new Israeli Government was installed, its
commitment to continue to implement the peace agreements
was greeted with profound satisfaction by the entire
international community.
Unfortunately, in the past three days, a spiral of events
has taken place that is threatening the very foundation of
this peace process. One of the deepest values of mankind,
religious sentiment, has entered the fray. Feelings like this
obviously risk igniting powerful emotional reactions, as was
unfortunately confirmed by the grave events that followed.
Something unprecedented has now occurred. For the
very first time, the Palestinian police and the Israeli
soldiers, who are supposed to be together leading the way
to peace, exchanged gunfire instead. It seems that the
ensuing clashes were the heaviest in many years. And,
according to reports, this morning — this morning alone —
in a third day of violence, 10 more people lost their lives.
Needless to say, such an event is a setback for the
peace process; worse than that, it could turn back the clock
that until now had been marking the hours of hope. In fact,
the concrete risk is that the situation may spin out of
control — that violence will beget more violence.
I would like to recall at this point that the Irish
Presidency of the European Union had appealed to all the
parties concerned to immediately stop the violent
confrontation and resume negotiation. The European Union
troika — that is to say, Ireland, Italy and the
Netherlands — met with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Israel here in New York on Wednesday, 25 September, to
express grave concern over a possible escalation of the
conflict and disquiet over the current fragility of the peace
process. The European Union troika also reiterated the
Florence Declaration of 19 June 1996, according to which
the Oslo agreements are the only way to achieve a lasting
peace in the Middle East.
In line with these European steps, the Prime Minister
of Italy, the Honourable Romano Prodi, personally
contacted President Arafat by phone. As the Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Italy, Lamberto Dini said yesterday:
“Now Israel needs to send a signal. It needs to
take action that will demonstrate that it really
remains committed to peace.”
In fact, there are concrete measures that the Israeli
Government can take unilaterally to implement its
commitments in a concrete way and to dispel the
misgivings and deeply felt concerns, not only of the
Palestinians and of the Arabs, but of many other countries
whose voices we have heard this morning. Such measures
were also discussed at the meeting some weeks ago
between President Arafat and Prime Minister Netanyahu.
Like the great majority of nations, Italy hopes that
all the frantic efforts being made in these very hours to
save the peace process may be truly successful. But they
must be successful quickly because there is not one
minute to lose. Meanwhile, we join the appeal of other
members of the Security Council to the Israelis and the
Palestinians to stop fighting.
Action must be taken rapidly to appease restless
consciences. We believe that, in the current phase, this is
the primary, though not exclusive responsibility of the
Israeli Government. The good will, commitment and
courage that have been invested in the peace process must
not be squandered. This is the sincere hope, this is the
expectation of the Italian Government, of our Parliament
and of our entire people.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Italy for the kind words addressed to
me and my predecessor.
Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): In recent days, Israeli forces have clashed with
Palestinian demonstrators in the areas of Palestinian self-
administration, resulting in bloodshed and the wounding
and killing of several hundred Palestinians. The
international community has expressed its grave concern
over these occurrences. The Chinese Government and
people deeply deplore these unfortunate events and offer
their profound sympathy and condolences to the innocent
victims and their families. We believe that these acts of
the Israeli forces are clearly not conducive to peace and
stability in the region. We urge the parties concerned to
take immediate measures to halt the conflict and prevent
further bloodshed.
3
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
The Palestinian-Israeli peace talks are now at a critical
juncture. We urge the parties concerned to exercise restraint
and to keep calm, to cherish the hard-won peace and to
comply strictly with the agreements concluded between
them, including the agreement on the resolution of the final
status of Jerusalem. They should refrain from any action
that would further aggravate the situation and impair the
peace process in the Middle East, thus establishing a
favourable atmosphere for the prompt resumption of
Palestinian-Israeli peace negotiations.
The international community is disturbed at the
difficulties facing the Palestinian-Israeli peace talks. We are
of the view that, in order to break the current impasse and
prevent a set-back of the whole peace process in the Middle
East, the parties concerned must make greater efforts to
overcome interference and obstacles with a view to
implementing the concluded agreements as soon as
possible. Only in this way will it be possible to consolidate
the progress that has been achieved in the peace talks and
push forward the peace process in the Middle East.
The question of Palestine is at the core of the Middle
East question. The early settlement of the Palestinian
question in a just and reasonable manner, as well as the
restoration of the legitimate national rights of the
Palestinian people, are the keys to the achievement of
peace, stability and development in the Middle East region.
China has consistently supported the Middle East
process. We have maintained that a political settlement to
the Middle East question should be sought on the basis of
the relevant United Nations resolutions and in accordance
with the principle of “land for peace”. We believe that the
achievement of peace in the Middle East is the common
aspiration of the peoples of the region. It is in keeping with
the fundamental interests of the peoples of all countries in
the region, as well as with peace and stability in the world
at large.
Mrs. Albright (United States of America): The United
States Government joins other members of this Council in
expressing deep sorrow and regret at the loss of life during
these past few days in the West Bank, Gaza and Jerusalem.
We offer our condolences to the families of the victims. We
extend our sympathies to the injured.
Our focus today should be on how to stop the
violence. That violence is an unfolding tragedy not only for
the victims, but also for the hopes invested in the peace
process. We want to restore that process, as it is the best
way to end the continuing sorrows, not only now, but for
the future as well.
Our first objective is to restore calm. Our second
objective is to accelerate the negotiating process. That
process is the way to resolve key outstanding issues for
implementation of the Interim Agreement. Implementation
must go forward. Tangible results must be seen.
To be effective, both sides must reach out to each
other as real partners. Partners take into account the needs
of others. Both sides must feel a heightened sense of
mutuality which underscores partnership and enables it to
work. Both sides should keep that reality in mind as they
consider their actions.
We are working intensively with both sides to
achieve a restoration of calm and forward movement to
produce tangible, positive events on the ground. The
members of this Council should focus on how to help,
how to restore calm, how to encourage the peace process,
and how to make and consolidate real gains.
Words here are no substitute for action in the region.
Only through such action can we restore that essential
component to the peace process: a sense of hope. Hope is
what sustains progress and the process in the Middle East
is such that it cannot stand still.
During the past few years, we have seen the dawn
of high hope and promise in the Middle East. It is a cause
of great sadness that this era is mixed with moments of
deep sorrow. Innocent victims, Palestinians and Israelis
alike, have suffered senseless violence. Rhetoric offers
them no comfort. It does not advance the cause of peace.
It does not bring closer the day when the people of the
Middle East can live in safety and lead normal lives.
Instead, such rhetoric encourages extremism and
diverts attention from the task at hand: restoring a
situation in which we can return to progress towards a
comprehensive and lasting peace. Let us turn our attention
not towards condemnation, but towards encouraging the
parties to restore the peace process and return to efforts
to achieve concrete progress.
Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): Traditionally, the
month of September at the United Nations has been one
which, with the commencement of a new session of the
General Assembly, rings with renewed hopes for peace.
With the recent developments in the Israeli-Palestinian
4
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
relationship, however, a sombre shadow has been cast over
this Chamber today.
My delegation, fully recognizing the far-reaching
implications which the Middle East carries for international
peace and security, has consistently supported the peace
process in that region and has closely followed the progress
of its implementation. We consider the latest clashes in the
West Bank, which have been deemed the worst since the
1993 Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government
Arrangements, to be detrimental not only in terms of the
heavy casualties, but also because of the nature of the
fighting between the Israeli military and the Palestinian
police force.
If steps are not taken to curb the fighting, then the
current situation in the West Bank, which has turned into
a grim confrontation between organized forces, may do
immeasurable damage to the already shaky efforts for a
just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the region.
As we are well aware, the catalyst for this explosive
and tragic turn of events was the Israeli decision to open a
new entrance to a tunnel that runs under a major religious
site in Jerusalem. Although this decision may have been
based upon practical considerations, the highly sensitive
political factors should have been taken into consideration.
Indeed, given the extremely fragile and sensitive state of
affairs in Jerusalem, opening the entrance was perceived by
Palestinians as a deliberate challenge to the status quo in
that city. In this regard, my delegation believes that the
violence that has ensued from this action could have easily
been anticipated and thus avoided.
As I mentioned at the Council meeting convened on
15 April to discuss Israel’s measures to close its borders
with the West Bank and Gaza, it is the wisdom, courage
and patience of both Israelis and Palestinians that will
enable them to overcome the crisis before them. I reiterate
my view that as the problems facing the two peoples are
man-made, so too can a workable solution be forged among
them.
In the face of such crises, one of the highest priorities
for the international community has always been to prevent
the situation from degenerating into further violence. With
that said, perhaps one of the best ways to contain the
situation in the West Bank is to restore the status quo. All
the delicate issues related to the status of Jerusalem could
then be discussed in a reasoned and more dispassionate
manner through the negotiations on final status.
The Republic of Korea, along with the rest of the
international community, still believes that Israel and
Palestine both realize the crucial stake they have in
continuing the peace process, and thus hopes that the
spirit of compromise and cooperation can be revived in
their relations. More specifically, we hope that the current
tensions can be defused in a prompt manner through a
summit meeting between the two parties, and therefore
appreciate the diplomatic efforts currently under way to
facilitate such a dialogue.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to appeal once
again to both parties to implement faithfully the
agreements they freely entered into on the basis of
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) so that,
through the exercise of restraint, the current crisis can be
overcome, and the march towards reconciliation can
resume at a full pace.
Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): Botswana is alarmed by
developments in the occupied Arab territories. We are
dismayed by the soaring number of the casualties of the
wanton violence that is being wreaked mainly on the
innocent. These developments are the culmination of a
series of events whose common genesis is the nearly
comatose state in which the peace process has been
languishing in the past few months. The difficult
economic conditions under which the Palestinians live as
a result of the border closures have exacted a heavy toll
on their everyday lives. Work and travel restrictions, and
the slowdown in the Israeli-Palestinian peace process have
exacerbated the growing frustration among the Palestinian
people. The agreements signed between the Government
of Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization had
given the people of Palestine a profound hope that at long
last they could look forward to a peaceful future. The
policies of the Government of Israel which have had the
effect of reversing some important aspects of the peace
agreements have dashed their hopes. The Palestinians
were bound to lose their sense of purpose in the
circumstances. And, as we all know, and as history has
taught us, people in such situations resort to all manner of
desperate acts.
Israel and the Palestinian Authority have accepted
that they cannot build peace on one another’s graves.
They have committed themselves to agreements aimed at
establishing a just, comprehensive and lasting peace. The
international community has warmly and wholeheartedly
welcomed the emergence of such common ground
between the two peoples. The Government of Israel and
the Palestinian Authority should focus attention on the
5
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
arduous task of building the foundations of durable peace
and not on the digging of graves to bury their dead. The
present situation should not be allowed to derail the peace
process and return the Middle East to the dark ages of
endless bloodletting. The agreements between the parties
provide a framework for mutual accommodation and
cooperation. The parties should not lose this window of
opportunity. This calls for mutual respect and for
understanding of the interests and concerns of both parties.
In this regard, the highly controversial decision by the
Government of Israel to open a tunnel under the third-
holiest Muslim site was an act of insensitivity to the
religious concerns of the Palestinians. It is not in the
interests of Israel to ignore these concerns.
The armed confrontation between the Israeli Defence
Force and the Palestinian Authority police is an unfortunate
and ominous development which can seriously poison the
atmosphere of cooperation between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority on important security matters. Israel
and the Palestinian Authority need each other to manage
these delicate issues. The atmosphere of trust and mutual
confidence engendered by the joint patrols of the security
forces was an important element in the implementation of
the peace process. The security forces of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority have a crucial role to play in the
peace process, and conflict between them should be avoided
as much as possible.
The Security Council has a responsibility to ensure the
reduction of tension in the area. It should help the parties
to give the necessary momentum to the peace process. In
this context, we appeal to the Government of Israel to
honour its obligations under the agreements signed with the
Palestinian Authority. The resumption of the
implementation of the Interim Agreement, in particular the
Israeli withdrawal from Hebron, is crucial to rebuilding
confidence and energizing the peace process.
Botswana acknowledges the diplomatic efforts
undertaken by a number of countries to de-escalate the
volatile situation in the area. It is our hope that the efforts
undertaken by these countries will complement those of the
Security Council. The international community is
unanimous on the need for an urgent and permanent
solution to the problems of the Middle East. It is crucial
that the parties receive the same message from today’s
debate. It must be made abundantly clear that the backward
policies of war are not acceptable. Common sense and
civilized conduct must prevail.
The Israelis and the Palestinians need to be
constantly reminded that their destinies are permanently
and inextricably interlinked by reason of geography and
history. They cannot wish one another away. They have
battled and killed each other’s children generation after
generation, but this has not resolved their differences.
They must try another route — jointly and not
separately — to reach the lofty goals of their national
dreams. Peace is their imperative. The one cannot have
peace without the peace of the other. Equally, the sense
of safety and security for the self-preservation of one side
would be meaningless if it were not anchored on similar
conditions for the safety and security of the other side for
its own self-preservation.
The President (interpretation from French): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Guinea-Bissau.
The confrontations over the last two days in
Jerusalem and Ramallah, but also in Nablus, Bethlehem
and Gaza, have prompted members of this Council to
hold a formal meeting of the Security Council today, as
demanded by the situation.
Peace and security in this region of the world are
indeed gravely threatened. The peace process in the
Middle East risks being hampered and even cast into
doubt. Direct confrontations between the security forces
of the two camps, which until now have been contained
or averted, have broken out and shown the extent to
which the climate of trust so necessary to the
establishment of peace has been affected. Confidence
must be restored, rancour dispelled. It is indispensable,
even urgent, to return to the negotiating table, for
violence has burst onto the scene with swift and deadly
intensity. Human lives are being destroyed. The wounds
of yesterday, already hard enough to heal, are now
reopened and the chances of seeing them close for good
are diminishing. Peace, the peace of the brave we thought
to be at hand, seems to be fading into the distance. And
yet each one of us still remembers the powerful, indelible
images and the historic handshake between Chairman
Yasser Arafat and the late Prime Minister Rabin. So
many hopes were inspired then, and feelings revived.
Rather than exacerbating tensions and deepening
differences by digging this tunnel under the Al Aqsa
Mosque, a mosque whose symbolism escapes no one, it
is important to promote and respect direct dialogue
between Palestinian and Israeli leaders, to appeal for
6
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
restraint and calm and to take every measure required to
restore peace.
We believe that it is important to acknowledge very
clearly and loudly the validity of the agreements that have
been signed and to respect them scrupulously. We cannot
stop halfway because there is no such thing as half a peace.
The peace process cannot hinge on electoral issues and
must be free from the political considerations of the
moment.
We believe it is necessary for dialogue to continue and
for the obstacles to be overcome. An end must be put to the
actions of all extremists, which only exacerbate tensions
and provoke further violence and useless killing.
In short, we consider it necessary to take hold of the
situation by eliminating all factors of confrontation. It is
indispensable to respect the agreements that have been
signed. One must act, and act quickly, in a sincere and
constructive direction, calling for the removal of taboos, the
elimination of unrealistic conditions and the good will and
flexibility without which past, present and future difficulties
cannot be overcome.
My country believes that an urgent meeting between
President Arafat and Prime Minister Netanyahu is required,
but it would best be preceded by specific actions. The
closure of the tunnel is one such action, and we believe that
other gestures of reassurance must follow immediately.
It is in this direction, and on the basis of the concerns
we have just expressed on behalf of our delegation, that we
would like the see the Security Council deliberate and
decide.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Algeria, His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Attaf, who will make
a statement in his capacity as Chairman of the Council of
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the League of Arab States.
I welcome him, and invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Attaf (Algeria) (interpretation from Arabic): The
Security Council is meeting today at a time when the
Palestinian territories are enduring an extremely dangerous
situation that can be described as a new downturn in the
peace process in the Middle East.
The international community has been keenly
involved in this process. Because of the obstacles
experienced and the serious hindrances caused by the
Israeli leadership’s failure to respect its commitments, our
Council must today face the logical results of such a
situation and of the Israeli attitude, which differs greatly
from what the international community has set down as
the fundamental principles for a peaceful, comprehensive
and lasting settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The Israeli design still fails to respect the rights of
others and is aimed at imposing a peace that benefits only
one party, posing the possibility of the security of that
party to the detriment of legitimate Arab security. The
horrendous Israeli provocations, that violate the
fundamental duty of respect for holy sites, recognized by
the entire world, are represented by the opening of a
tunnel under the Al Aqsa Mosque. This is part of Israel’s
intransigent flouting of everything the international
community has decided about commitments and
conditions for the settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
This policy has an end and a means. It recently took
concrete form, as everyone knows, through the freezing
of the Israeli withdrawal from Hebron, the refusal to
resume negotiations on the final situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, the return to the policy of
settlements, the blocking off of the Palestinian territories,
the confiscation of Arab lands and the collective
economic sanctions and daily acts of violence against the
unarmed civilian population.
My country condemns this policy, which runs
counter to peace as a whole and peace in all its
particulars.
How can the Security Council meet the challenges
it faces today in fully shouldering its responsibilities in a
conflict wherein the conditions for a settlement are set
down in its own resolutions, which today have been
flagrantly and arrogantly flouted by Israel?
Secondly, the present policy of the Israeli leadership
runs counter to the very logic and meaning of the peace
process. It no longer considers itself bound by the
agreements of the Madrid Conference or the resolutions
of the Council. It no longer respects the Washington and
Oslo agreements. The resumption of negotiations with
Syria and Lebanon at the point at which they were
interrupted are no longer acceptable to the Israeli
administration.
7
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
Thirdly, based on the above, it is clear that, while
claiming to desire the unconditional relaunching of the
peace process, Israel is exploiting the delay in order to
redefine and threaten it as a whole. What kind of peace can
be established and maintained without the total recovery by
the Palestinian people of its rights, including its right to the
creation of its own State with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital? What peace can be established and maintained
without the complete withdrawal of Israel from the Syrian
Golan Heights? What kind of peace can be established and
maintained without a full and unconditional Israeli
withdrawal from southern Lebanon?
Fourthly, given Israel’s scornful flouting of its
commitments, we can only assume that it entertains the
unrealistic notion that peace can be based on the rejection
of Arab rights and Israeli security on Arab insecurity.
Fifthly, no one can today deny that the Israeli position
is a defiance of the international community, and in
particular of the Security Council in its function as the
organ responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security. The failure to resolve the Arab-Israeli conflict
is, in fact, a violation of the Council’s resolutions.
Finally, the events at the Al-Aqsa Mosque fall within
the framework of a well-known and carefully thought-out
plan for total judaization of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, in
contravention of international legitimacy, including the
position of the Security Council.
At a time when the Palestinian territories are going
through a tragic period, which follows upon a period of
hope, and when the peace process as a whole is at a total
standstill, the Security Council must fully shoulder its
responsibilities by issuing a just opinion sustaining a just
cause, rejecting the policy of fait accompli and condemning
Israel’s refusal to respect the commitments it has
undertaken.
This means, first, that the tunnel must be closed, since
its use is a violation of the sanctity of the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
In addition, the deteriorating situation in the occupied
territories requires that Israel fully respect its commitments
under the Oslo and Washington agreements and that it lift
all its repressive measures, which run counter to a policy of
peace and are causing the sufferings of the Palestinian
people today.
Secondly, given the obstacles currently hindering the
peace process in the Middle East, the Security Council has
the responsibility once again to emphasize the Madrid
agreements as a general framework for the peace process
in the Middle East. The Council must also enshrine the
principle of “land for peace” as a basic condition for this
process and reaffirm that its resolutions form the basis for
this process.
At the most recent Cairo summit, the Arab leaders
reaffirmed their commitment to the peace process as a
strategic choice. However, this process must not be a one-
way street. That is why the international community —
primarily represented by the Council, the sponsor of the
peace process — and all parties involved must today,
more than ever before, make serious efforts to reactivate
the peace process in the Middle East by requiring Israel
to renounce its intransigent policy of rejection. This
policy has led to the tragic situation we are considering
today and will doubtless lead to others if we do not find
a definitive solution to the situation.
Finally, I turn to you, Sir, in expressing my warm
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council and my wishes for your success.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the Foreign Minister of Algeria for his kind words
addressed to me.
The next speaker is the First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the State of Kuwait,
His Excellency Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-
Sabah. I welcome him and invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Al-Sabah (Kuwait) (interpretation from
Arabic): It gives me pleasure to convey to you, Sir, our
sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I wish
also to pay tribute to your predecessor for his stewardship
of the Council last month.
The Security Council is meeting today at the request
of the Arab Group at the United Nations, which cannot
remain silent about the ongoing events in the occupied
West Bank, the Gaza Strip and the Holy City of
Jerusalem, the first Kiblah and the site of the third Grand
Mosque, in the wake of the opening by Israel of the
tunnel constructed under the western wall of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque.
The Council’s accession to that request shows its
appreciation of the threat of the tunnel project to the
physical safety of the Al-Aqsa Mosque. It also shows the
8
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
Council’s sensitivity to the current critical phase of the
peace process in the region. Furthermore, it reflects the
Council’s perception of the gravity of the situation in the
wake of the conflagration sparked by Israeli measures that
constitute a stark challenge to and a repugnant provocation
of the sentiments of the Palestinian people — indeed, a
provocation to all Arabs and Muslims throughout the world.
These measures are taken within an overall plan of
action by Israel to judaize Jerusalem, change its Arab
character, alter its legal status and suppress its Islamic
physical features and cultural heritage. Indeed, they are part
of a series of steps intended to impose new facts on the
ground in a bid to depopulate Jerusalem of its Arab
citizens, build new settlements and expand the existing ones
inside the city and in its surrounding areas.
All of these Israeli measures are not the outcome of a
policy that came into being overnight. They are, rather, the
direct result of a long-term and focused plan of action that
took concrete and unmistakable shape following the
assumption of power by the new Israeli Government, which
is pursuing an aggressive expansionist policy in violation of
the agreements concluded by the former Government of
Israel. Those agreements provide for negotiations on the
determination of the status of the City of Jerusalem in the
course of the final stage of talks. Thus, Israel has reneged
on its legally binding obligations under the Oslo agreement
as well as disregarded the Security Council resolutions
regarding the City of Jerusalem.
These Israeli actions are the culmination of the new
strategy and plan of action being pursued by the
Government of Israel to pre-empt the provisions of the
accords reached, to back away from obligations, to expedite
settlement activities, to seize and annex more Palestinian
land and displace more Palestinians, to disassociate itself
from the land-for-peace principle and to shift towards
inadmissible notions that seek security for Israel through
territorial expansion, irrespective of the cost or the
consequences.
The final communiqué adopted by the Arab summit
meeting held at Cairo last June endorsed the peace process
as a strategic choice anchored in international treaties,
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid formula and the
principle of land for peace. Therefore, no one should be
surprised at the angry reaction now unfolding following the
discovery by the Arab and the Muslim nations, as well as
the international community, that the policies of extremism
are supplanting reason and vision and that oppression and
aggression are replacing legally binding obligations and
signed agreements.
Therefore, while Kuwait condemns these grave
Israeli measures that may well destroy the peace process,
it calls upon the Security Council to adopt without delay
a draft resolution to force Israel to close the tunnel and to
reverse all actions and practices that have led to these
highly volatile situations. We also call upon the Council
to fulfil its responsibility regarding the restoration of the
peace process and to put it back on track by a reversal of
the Israeli designs so as to avoid a return to the cycle of
tensions and fighting. The Council should also reaffirm its
previous relevant resolutions and its backing of the
accords reached in order to safeguard the peace process
and to halt its drift towards collapse.
It is our fervent hope that reason and wisdom will
prevail with the unanimous adoption of a draft resolution
that reflects the sensitivity and significance of the current
situation and displays the Council’s sense of
determination to fulfil its obligations in regard to the
maintenance of international peace and security. Such a
draft resolution would demonstrate the response of the
Council vis-à-vis actions that undermine peace. A
collective and unanimous position on the part of the
Council would demonstrate in no uncertain terms its
resolve and will. The Council should not allow the
aspirations of peoples for just and comprehensive peace
to evaporate as a result of an aggressive drive by Israel
which, if left unchecked, would bring about wide-scale
destruction and despair.
To be attained and maintained, viable peace requires
justice and equity based on the rule of international law
as embodied by the Council. Equally, it requires courage
and bold initiative. The Council is undoubtedly duty-
bound to fulfil its role towards that end.
The President (interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Malaysia, His Excellency Mr. Datuk Abdullah bin Haji
Ahmad Badawi. I welcome him, and I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Abdullah (Malaysia): Malaysia is deeply
disturbed by the new eruptions of violence in the
occupied Arab territory of Jerusalem, the West Bank and
Gaza. This dangerous situation has been brought about by
the irresponsible and blatant act of provocation by the
Israeli authorities in opening a tunnel in the immediate
vicinity of the Al-Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem and in
9
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
permitting the observance of Jewish religious rites in the
Holy Sanctuary of Al-Haram Al-Sharif. Their act of
violating the sanctity of the Al-Aqsa Mosque and Al-Haram
Al-Sharif has not only undermined the peace process and
led to loss of life, it has inflamed anger and outraged
Muslims throughout the world.
We condemn this blatant act of provocation by Israel.
We call upon Israel to respect the sanctity of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque and Al- Haram Al-Sharif and to rescind its
decision and close the tunnel. We also deplore the closure
of Jerusalem to the Palestinians imposed by Israeli
authorities, which would exacerbate the hardship of the
population living in those areas.
Malaysia considers that the measures taken by Israel
to create new demographic facts and to change the status of
Jerusalem are illegal, invalid and in contravention of
relevant Security Council resolutions on the position of the
international community and on the status of Jerusalem.
Malaysia reaffirms its total commitment to and
unwavering support for the Palestinian people and its
leadership in the attainment of all their inalienable rights to
exercise self-determination and to establish an independent
State.
Regrettably, since the election of the new Israeli
Government under Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu the
peace process has taken a new turn. Announcements made
by the Likud Government that it is not to be bound by the
peace agreements signed by the former Israeli Labour
Government and the Palestinian Authority, Mr. Netanyahu’s
decision to rule out any compromise on Jerusalem or a
Palestinian State, the long-delayed redeployment of Israeli
soldiers from Hebron and the departure from the land-for-
peace principle have threatened the Middle East peace
process. In our view, the decision of the Israeli Government
to approve the expansion of Jewish settlements and the
seizure of Palestinian land will only complicate the peace
process.
The present Israeli Government must honour all peace
agreements into which Israel has entered with the
Palestinian Authority. Any departure from those agreements
by the Israeli Government would destroy all hopes of
achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace between
Palestine and Israel. The Israeli Government should not
attempt to create new realities on the ground and impose
new conditions before resuming negotiations. It should also
refrain from placing new obstacles to the peace process.
Malaysia would like to urge the United States, which has
invested so much effort in the latest peace process,
earnestly to encourage Israel to honour its commitments
to the peace agreements.
Malaysia strongly believes that the momentum
towards a successful peace process in the Middle East
must be maintained. The climate of suspicion must be
immediately replaced with new faith in peace. Any
attempts to shatter the peace process would only
aggravate instability and bring about renewed violence
and destruction, which must be avoided at all costs.
The President (interpretation from French): Before
calling on the next speaker, I should like to inform the
Council that I have just received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Costa Rica, the United Arab
Emirates and Mauritania, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Di Tella
(Argentina), Mr. Berrocal Soto (Costa Rica), Mr.
Ould Cheikh Ahmed (Mauritania) and Mr. Al-
Noaimi (United Arab Emirates) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President (interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Senegal, His Excellency Mr. Moustapha Niasse. I
welcome him, and I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Niasse (Senegal) (interpretation from French):
First, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of September. We consider it a tribute to the
entire continent of Africa and to your country, Guinea-
Bissau, which is close to Senegal. I should also like to
congratulate you on the outstanding way in which you
have been discharging your task — a sensitive one,
especially in the present circumstances that are the reason
for our meeting. I take great pleasure in expressing these
sentiments, as you are the son of a brotherly and friendly
country, an immediate neighbour of Senegal with whom
10
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
our Government and people have always enjoyed privileged
and multifaceted relations.
The prevailing situation in Jerusalem is more than
alarming. The numerous casualties that have occurred in
that city every day during the deplorable confrontations
between Israelis and Palestinians have plunged the Middle
East into tensions that the peace process launched at the
Madrid Conference seemed to have removed from this
region forever.
These confrontations, which are the concern of the
entire world, are all the more grievous in that they are
taking place in a city that was the birthplace of sublime
messages, proclaiming love for one’s neighbour, that have
been transmitted through the centuries by the three revealed
religions that share the same cradle — Judaism, Christianity
and Islam.
Jerusalem, which, etymologically, means “city of
peace” should, be the focus, today more than ever, of all
the efforts made by the Palestinian and Israeli leaders, as
well as by the international community over the past few
years, to create, maintain, consolidate and expand a
dynamic of lasting peace in the Middle East.
It is therefore regrettable that Jerusalem’s original
mission continues to be betrayed almost every day. In
particular, the events taking place there today are the result
of practices that the United Nations, in several relevant
resolutions, has condemned in an attempt to end, especially
those aimed at changing the demographic, historical and
cultural status of that Holy City, which is an international
city.
The decision leading to the opening by the Israeli
occupier of a tunnel in the area of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, the
third holy site of Islam, was far from wise if we measure
its impact by the amount of blood that has been shed over
three days in Jerusalem and by the many additional
obstacles to the Israeli-Arab peace process that it has
caused.
My country, Senegal, following the example of the
international community, condemns that action and
solemnly appeals to the Israeli Government to modify its
position on the peace process and to take unequivocally into
account the hopes that the entire world had placed on the
establishment of dialogue between Israel and the Arabs —
a dialogue that we have hailed and supported. This is an
appeal designed to be constructive, made by a country that
everyone knows has relations with both parties: Israel and
the Palestinian State.
This is an opportunity for my country to reaffirm its
support for all United Nations resolutions on the problem
of the Middle East and the question of Palestine in
particular. This question is at the heart of this critical
issue, whose resolution hinges on the establishment of an
independent State for the Palestinian people. This
reaffirmation is perfectly understandable for Senegal,
which has presided over the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People since
the creation of that body.
Senegal’s Head of State, President Abdou Diouf, has
always devoted particular attention to the problem of the
Middle East in all its aspects and dimension. Senegal
believes that, despite the difficulties inherent in any
attempt to build peace on a foundation of long-standing
passions, we should not throw up our hands in the face of
the uncertainty which, for some time, has been part of the
search for a peaceful and lasting solution to this issue.
We base this conviction, which we are honoured to
express here, not only on the determination of the
international community, under United Nations auspices,
not to let slip all the hopes born of the agreements
concluded since 1993 between Israel and the Palestinians
and certain other Arab countries. But we base it above all
on the existence, in Israel as in the Arab world, of a
majority opinion in favour of peace. We know that to be
true. That is a major advantage and takes us farther from
the long-standing passions of the past to a new situation
that falls within the framework of changes experienced by
the world in the past few years.
Let all peace-loving countries and nations ensure that
this reality is strengthened, instead of allowing it to
dissolve in the continuation of practices inspired by
extremism, whatever its origin.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Senegal for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Tunisia, Mr. Habib Ben Yahia. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Ben Yahia (Tunisia) (interpretation from
Arabic): At the outset, I am pleased to extend to you, Sir,
our sincerest congratulations on your assumption of the
11
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
presidency of the Council for this month. I am certain that,
with your diplomatic skill and wide experience, you will
guide our deliberations with success.
The Council is meeting today in an emergency
situation to consider the volatile situation in the occupied
Arab territories in Jerusalem and a number of Palestinian
cities, where bloody events have erupted, killing and
wounding a large number of civilians. The situation is still
escalating and widening and, ominously, may lead to the
worst possible circumstances.
The Israeli authorities opened a tunnel under the
western wall of the Al-Aqsa Mosque in East Jerusalem.
That action provoked the feelings of the Palestinian people
as well as the Arab and Islamic worlds. This represents a
menace, as the Mosque is the first of the two kiblahs and
the third holy shrine, and it is a step in the direction of
undermining all the Islamic sites and represents the
judaization of the Holy City.
This measure attempts to change the legal status of
Jerusalem, in violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention,
flouts the resolutions of the Security Council and ignores
the agreements concluded between Israel and the Palestinian
authority, agreements that stipulated that the status of
Jerusalem would be the subject of final-status negotiations.
If Israel were to persist in changing the demographic
composition of the city and in demolishing Palestinian
houses under flimsy pretexts — it even went so far as to
discourage visitors from seeing Orient House — this would
be another attempt to impose a fait accompli, which would
render any negotiation meaningless. Opening the tunnel is,
as a matter of fact, a link in a series of decisions whose
objectives are well known. It is a part of a comprehensive
policy that has become very clear in the few months since
the new Israeli Government took office. In this very short
time, the Israeli authorities have embarked on the expansion
of settlements and made arrangements to build a number of
housing compounds in the western Strip. They have also
persisted in the siege of Palestinian cities and the starvation
of the Palestinian people, as well as in cutting off their
livelihoods.
Can these practices be considered reflections of a
genuine desire to turn over a new leaf and start a new
relationship between the Palestinian and the Israeli peoples
that is based on a mutual recognition of the right of each to
independence, dignity and security? What we have
witnessed today is a return to the logic of brute force and
a retreat from the spirit of peace. It is a return to
intransigence in imposing a fait accompli without any
regard for the resolutions of this body or for public
opinion. All our expectations are being fulfilled now. The
Israelis are reneging on all their security commitments.
In the absence of security, there can be no justice.
Security without peace is false and impossible. Security
is the result of justice and equity, not of tyranny and the
usurping of the rights of people. The world was heartened
by the launching of the peace process and applauded the
agreements of Oslo, Washington and Cairo as steps on
the right path to restore the legitimate national rights of
the Palestinians, to recognize their right to self-
determination, and to permit the establishment of an
independent Palestinian state in accordance with the
resolutions of international law.
Tunisia is a peace-loving country. It supported the
peace process, which was based on land for peace. We
are expressing today our full solidarity with the brotherly
Palestinian people. We would draw attention to the danger
of the current developments, as they will jeopardize the
peace process. We call upon the Council — in particular
the sponsors of the peace process — swiftly to move to
put an end to any Israeli practices that run counter to the
spirit and the letter of all the agreements that have been
reached within the framework of this process in order to
avert any escalation of this crisis, which might have a
negative impact on all the countries and peoples of the
region, as well as on the peace and security of the entire
world.
We call upon Israel today to reconsider its practices
and its arbitrary policies, and to renounce any actions that
could impede efforts towards peace. Israel must cease all
interference with the holy sites and put an end to the
establishment of settlements and the siege of Palestinian
towns. We also call upon Israel to honour its
commitments within the framework of the agreements, to
return to the negotiating table with the serious political
will to implement a settlement that accords with the
principles of international law, and to completely
withdraw from the occupied Palestinian territories, the
Syrian Golan and southern Lebanon as part of
establishing a just, lasting and comprehensive peace.
The gravity of the situation in the Palestinian
territories requires rapid and decisive intervention by the
Council in order to force Israel to take immediate
measures to rectify the situation before it is too late. This
means Israel must close the tunnel forever, immediately
halt all aggression against civilians, and respect its
12
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
commitments in a way that guarantees progress towards the
peace to which we all aspire.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Tunisia for his kind
words addressed to me. The next speaker is the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Canada, His Excellency the Honourable
Lloyd Axworthy. I welcome him, and I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Axworthy (Canada) (interpretation from French):
The escalation of violence this week in Jerusalem, the West
Bank and Gaza has deeply shaken Canadians. We are very
much alarmed by the number of Palestinians and Israelis
who have lost their lives in recent days, and we would like
to extend our condolences to the families of those who have
been killed or wounded.
We are extremely concerned also about the future of
the peace process in the Middle East. A lasting peace can
be based only on confidence.
(spoke in English)
The tragic events of this week and the tensions of the
past months have served to shatter the trust that has been so
painstakingly built up over many years, a trust vital to the
success of the peace process. Restoring that trust must be
the very first priority. In the meantime, a terrible price has
been paid in human suffering, and we must all acknowledge
that.
We know that nothing is to be gained from
apportioning blame. We hope that out of the present
suffering, Israelis and Palestinians alike will agree that
violence is not the answer. We issue an urgent appeal for
leaders throughout the region to do all in their power to
restore calm and bring the violence to an immediate end.
We all need to support these leaders, and accept that there
is only one road, and that is the road of peace. We call on
Israeli and Palestinian leaders to return to the negotiating
table in the coming days and we very much hope that
Prime Minister Netanyahu and Chairman Arafat will soon
meet.
Both parties can demonstrate their commitment to
peace by honouring and fully implementing the existing
agreements on Palestinian autonomy. We would like to see
the start of serious negotiations between the Syrian and
Lebanese Governments, and the Israeli Government.
What is critical now is avoiding any further
measures that will provoke further violence and suffering.
We urge the Government of Israel to reverse its decision
to open a new entrance to the Hasmonean tunnel, and we,
too, deeply regret the recent demolition of the Palestinian
community centre. The Israeli Government must move
forward with speedy and substantive steps to implement
the Oslo agreements, as it has said it intends to do. We
urge the Israeli Government to demonstrate that
commitment by avoiding any further initiatives to change
the status quo on matters subject to permanent-status
negotiations. Expanding existing Israeli settlements, or ill-
considered actions in Jerusalem or elsewhere, are not
appropriate steps in this climate. We urge the Palestinian
Authority and the Government of Israel to exercise
maximum calm and restraint in the prevention of
violence.
It is vital that confidence be restored and that Israelis
and Palestinians alike see that there is a real commitment
to the serious and early implementation of those
agreements. Unilateral actions cannot resolve these very
sensitive questions; only negotiations can. Our goal is a
just, comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East,
based on the principles laid out in United Nations
Security Council resolutions over a generation — notably
242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
It is also true that the international community has
a responsibility to the peace process in the Middle East.
We must ask ourselves today if we are prepared to
continue the struggle for peace and if we are doing all
that every member here can possibly do. It is our duty to
speak out in the cause of peace and to consider, as
members of the international community, any initiatives
that would aid the parties to build confidence, such as a
renewal of the Madrid process.
Canada’s involvement in the efforts to secure peace
in the Middle East dates back almost 50 years. My
predecessor, the late Lester B. Pearson, received a Nobel
Peace Prize for his efforts during the Suez crisis in 1956.
Since that time, Canada has contributed to every United
Nations peace-keeping operation in the Middle East.
Canadians do not want to see the accomplishments
of the last several years destroyed. Our active
involvement in the peace process has helped, along with
that of many others, to build peace. We have accepted the
challenge of chairing the refugee Working Group. We
have and will continue to support the economic
development of the region, including direct aid to the
13
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
Palestinians. We urge all parties to continue preparations
for the third North Africa and Middle East economic
summit in Cairo in November, building on the successes of
those held in Casablanca and Amman.
The Madrid Conference in 1991 heralded a new era in
the Middle East. Since then, we have seen leaders of
exceptional courage step forward and accept the challenge
of building peace in the Middle East. Those foundations of
peace have been painstakingly built, often with great
sacrifice. Let us ensure they are preserved and the
deliberations of this Council today are a very important
start for that rebuilding to take place.
The President: (interpretation from French): The next
speaker is the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Yemen, Mr. Abdulkarim Al-Eryany. I
welcome him and invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Al-Eryany (Yemen) (interpretation from Arabic):
I would like to thank you, Sir, for giving me the
opportunity to address the Security Council on such a very
important question for our region. At the outset, I would
like to offer you my warmest congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. Allow me to express my hope that the work of
the Council will be crowned with success under your wise
leadership. I would also like to pay tribute to your
predecessor for the excellent manner in which he conducted
the work of the Council during the past month.
The Security Council meets today to discuss very
complicated and dangerous developments in the Middle
East. Recent tragic events have led to the explosion of the
situation in Jerusalem and other Palestinian cities and
towns, and the situation continues to evolve as we speak.
All this has come about as the result of the oppressive,
unjust practices of the Israeli authorities against the
Palestinian population and their continued attempts to
change the features of Jerusalem. The latest such attempt
was the opening of an entrance to the tunnel, which
threatens the integrity of the Al-Aqsa Mosque and other
holy sites. In recent days, the Israeli army has used live
ammunition and other weapons against defenceless civilian
Palestinians. These clashes have led to the death and injury
of hundreds of innocent Palestinians. We condemn and
denounce the measures taken by the Israeli authorities and
Israel’s repeated aggression against Palestinians and
Palestinian officials in Arab Jerusalem and other Palestinian
cities and towns.
These oppressive measures represent blatant
violations of human rights and of resolutions of
international legality, as well as the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War. This dangerous situation could aggravate
tensions in the area and return it to a cycle of violence
that might threaten peace and security in the Middle East.
We view the Israeli practices in Jerusalem as a clear
and flagrant violation of the Israeli-Palestinian accords,
which provide for negotiations on these territories to
determine their final status. These violations threaten the
peace process and the Israeli Government bears the
responsibility for these dangerous developments. The
Security Council must adopt all the measures necessary to
stop Israeli practices against the defenceless, innocent
Palestinians. We call upon the international community,
and the permanent members of the Security Council, and
the two sponsors of the peace process in particular, to
intervene promptly and urgently to stop the bloodshed and
the killing of defenceless civilians; all measures and
practices which desecrate holy places; all oppressive
measures adopted by Israel against the Palestinian people;
the confiscation of property and land belonging to the
Islamic and Christian awqaf; and the attempt by Israel to
change the features and demographic composition of
Jerusalem.
Based on the Yemeni Republic’s ongoing
commitment to a comprehensive, lasting and just peace in
the area based on resolutions of international legality and
legitimacy and the principle of “land for peace”, we wish
to reaffirm the importance that we place on the need for
Israel to respect the accords signed and all resolutions of
international legality and legitimacy, particularly Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425
(1978).
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Yemen for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Australia, His Excellency Mr. Alexander Downer. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Downer (Australia): The violent events which
have taken place in Jerusalem, the West Bank and Gaza
during the last three days have deeply shocked the
Australian Government and people. I want immediately to
take the opportunity offered by this open meeting of the
14
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
Council to express Australia’s sympathy to the families of
all those injured and killed. Clearly, there is great
frustration in the areas where this violence has occurred.
The only enduring answer that can be given to that
frustration is peace. Peace must be pursued with vigour and
must be accompanied by serious attempts to eliminate
fundamental sources of injustice and to spread the message
of tolerance.
Australia calls upon the Government of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority to do everything in their power to
stop the violence. They should ensure that no steps are
taken which further provoke violence.
Australia strongly supports the Madrid process because
it offers the best prospects for the achievement of a just and
secure peace in the Middle East. In this context, we also
call on all parties to honour the obligations and
commitments they have made, including by commencing
substantive talks on final status issues and the redeployment
of forces. All parties should recommit themselves to the
search for a peaceful resolution of their differences. They
must resume direct dialogue. The promise to negotiate
solutions was given. Those negotiations must not be stalled
or avoided. It is only through such steps that progress
towards forging a durable peace and securing the future
welfare of both the Israeli and Palestinian people can be
restored.
The President (interpretation from French): The next
speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Jordan,
His Excellency Mr. Khaled Madadha. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Madadha (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic):
I extend to you, Mr. President, our thanks for your rapid
response in convening this emergency meeting, which is
very important for this Council. I also take this opportunity
to extend our congratulations to you on assuming the
presidency of the Council for this month.
The swift, bloody events that have taken place in the
self-rule areas and the occupied territories, which have left
dozens of people dead or wounded, have confirmed that the
peace process has reached a serious and crucial stage. This
Council must take appropriate decisions and steps to deal
with this crucial situation.
Since the outset, the Government of Jordan has
welcomed the resolve shown by the Israeli people in
choosing their newly elected Government. We have opened
channels of communication with them and even called on
them to cooperate with all concerned parties in order to
resume the peace process, in accordance with the Madrid
Conference and the ensuing agreements based on the
land-for-peace formula and Security Council resolutions,
in the hope that a just and lasting peace can be
established and that through dialogue a number of slogans
and negative and unrealistic statements from the election
campaign can be put to rest. We believe that the reality
and responsibility of governance require more positive
and realistic attitudes.
Our position during the Arab Summit in Cairo in
June 1996 was that we should look beyond these slogans
and give the new Israeli Government time to define its
position with regard to the peace process.
In the last three months, His Majesty King Hussein
and the Jordanian Government have made persistent
efforts and continued dialogue to urge the Israeli
President and his Government to return to the framework
of the Madrid Conference and to halt any steps that could
divert us from this framework. We have also warned that
continued settlement activities, the demolition of houses,
confiscation of territories, displacement of the population,
closure of autonomous areas, aggravated problems of
economy and living conditions and the confiscation of
identity cards could not fail to lead to desperation, misery,
violence and tension. We also warned of the gravity of
desecrating holy places and Al-Quds. We agreed to defer
any final-status negotiations related to this.
We have asked our partners in the peace process not
to procrastinate with regard to the implementation of what
we have agreed.
The serious and bloody events that have taken place
recently have confirmed our apprehensions. They came as
no surprise to us. Opening the tunnel was a spark that
ignited these bloody confrontations. We have listened
with great attention to the statements made by the Heads
of delegations before this Council, which contained a
number of positive points that may also be included in a
draft resolution to be adopted by the Council to deal with
this crisis.
The most important provisions of such a draft
resolution are to calm the situation, close the tunnel and
establish an international fact-finding committee, as
proposed by His Majesty the King, to determine how to
deal with the desecration of the archaeological sites in
Jerusalem, particularly since there are international
resolutions clearly stating that the holy shrines are
15
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
inviolable. It is also important for the draft resolution to
call for a clear Israeli commitment to implement
expeditiously all the agreements, particularly on the
withdrawal from Hebron, thus paving the way to
negotiations on the final status.
The same draft resolution must include measures to
rectify the situation so that these dangerous events do not
occur again.
We call upon the Israeli Government to resume peace
negotiations on the Syrian and Lebanese tracks, starting
from the point where they were stalled, and to take rapid
measures to lift the siege of the closed areas so as to
alleviate the economic problems facing the Palestinian
people.
The peoples of our region, who yearn for peace, are
calling on us to make serious efforts to resume the work
that started in Madrid. We Arabs and Israelis must rise to
the expectations of all those peoples in order to achieve a
just and lasting peace based on the principles we agreed on,
so that our children and grandchildren will in future enjoy
their lives in stability.
The President (interpretation from French): The next
speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Syrian
Arab Republic, His Excellency Mr. Farouk Al-Shara. I
welcome him, and I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Al-Shara (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
from Arabic): Allow me at the outset to warmly
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month.
Let me take advantage of my presence in New York
for the fifty-first session of the General Assembly to set out
in detail the position of my country, Syria. The Security
Council is meeting in the wake of the events that took place
in the occupied Palestinian territories.
Syria is a direct party to the peace process. It has
affirmed and reaffirmed that its option for peace is a
strategic one. My country played a major role in the Madrid
Conference and in opening the way for a comprehensive
peace process, for the first time in the history of the Arab-
Israeli conflict.
I could say that the international efforts made to hold
the Madrid Conference, the discussions and deliberations
that preceded the Conference to enable all to reach
agreement on the basis and rules for that Conference, and
the agreement by Syria in particular at that time to take
part, led for the first time to talk of peace in the area after
a decades-long conflict.
The opening of an entrance to the tunnel, which led
to this bloodshed, symbolizes closing the door to peace.
Wrong are those who believe that the issue is the opening
of an entrance to tourists so that they do not have to walk
as far; wrong are those who believe that this was the
reason the tunnel entrance was opened.
As I have said, and as many in our region and in the
world — those who follow the peace process — know,
the new Israeli Government came to power with a
strategy that has absolutely nothing to do with peace. It
is perfectly obvious, from the first day it assumed power
until the day when the entrance to the tunnel was opened,
that the Israeli Government, regrettably, does not have a
strategy for peace. The Israeli policy aims at burying the
peace process by various means.
Those who have followed the statements,
declarations and practices of the Israeli Government since
it took power approximately 100 days ago know that the
Israeli Government does not miss a chance to tell
everyone that it tries to change the rules of the game for
the peace process and that it is committed to intransigent
positions that reject the principle of land for peace. It
declares unequivocally that it will not withdraw from
occupied Arab territories, that it will not withdraw from
the occupied Syrian Golan or from East Jerusalem, and
that it wishes to resume and encourage settlement of the
West Bank, Gaza and the Golan. The Israeli Government
does not care much for the accords, agreements or
commitments reached in earlier negotiations, during the
term of the previous Israeli Cabinet.
The events that have unfolded over the past two
days clearly reflect the tragedy of the Palestinian people.
They reflect the fact that this people will not surrender.
They will not be an easy victim of the occupation and the
settlement policy. No matter how many attempts are made
to derail the peace process or to diminish its role, the
Palestinian people will accept nothing less than their
legitimate right to self-determination and to the restoration
of all their occupied territories to the boundaries of 4 June
1967.
We in Syria will not give up our strategic option for
peace. We will accept nothing less than a full withdrawal
from the Golan to the lines of 4 June 1967. We believe
16
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
that the Israeli Government is trying to renege on
commitments and pledges made by the previous Israeli
Government. In our opinion and in world opinion, these
commitments and pledges represent a fundamental basis for
the resumption of negotiations on all tracks. If the Israeli
Government is not going to commit itself to the
implementation of commitments and pledges made by the
previous Government, it is basically telling us and the
whole world that we should not believe that it will enter
into any new commitment or respect any old one, in
accordance with resolutions of international legality and
legitimacy and the terms of reference of the Madrid
Conference.
How can any Arab party resume peace negotiations
without such commitments and pledges? And in an
atmosphere such as the one in which we live today, fraught
with danger, we cannot help feeling that we are returning
to the law of the jungle, rather than living in a world of
respect for international law, international legitimacy and
the resolutions of the Security Council.
I regret that I have had to go into such detail, but I
must also tell the Council that what is happening now must
be a warning to us all that the peace process faces a real
threat. The peace process is dying. The peace process might
be buried and we might not have another such opportunity
as we have had to implement a comprehensive, just peace
in the Middle East.
Arrogance and intransigence do not make peace. Israel
today is acting with unprecedented intransigence and
arrogance. Israelis believe that the Arabs are helpless and
that, with its old means of force and power, with all its
weapons of mass destruction, foremost among which are
the nuclear option and a huge arsenal of advanced
weaponry, Israel does not have to comply with international
law, Security Council resolutions nor even the principles of
international legality.
The Security Council, which is charged with
maintaining international peace and security, is called upon
today more than ever before to adopt whatever decision it
considers necessary and appropriate to revive the peace
process and put it back on track. It is called upon to
condemn the bloody practices of the Israeli authorities in
the occupied Palestinian territories. It is called upon to put
an end to these events of bloodshed, these painful and
tragic events.
Consequently, regarding the question of the tunnel, the
prelude to evil, we believe that, important as it is, we
should not confine ourselves to discussing that particular
question. Rather, this Council should adopt the
appropriate resolution to rescue the moribund peace
process, the area and the region from more violence and
tension that benefit no one.
In conclusion, I would like to apologize for going
into such detail, but I would like to state that all Arab
countries, in a single voice and at two conferences —
first at the summit conference and then at the Foreign
Ministers’ conference — have all said that peace is a
strategic option for the Arabs, but that it is unacceptable
that it not be a strategic option for Israel. It would be a
real catastrophe and a real tragedy if it were not.
The European summit conference that took place in
Florence and the industrial summit that took place in
Lyons reaffirmed the basis for the peace process and the
principles of that process, which are based on Security
Council resolutions and the principle of “land for peace”.
It is high time that Israel realized that it will not be able
both to achieve peace and keep the occupied territories.
It must choose. And that choice is for Israel to return the
occupied territories taken by force to their rightful owners
and to respect its commitment so that we can re-open the
road of the peace process. That choice is desired not only
by the people of the area, but by the whole world.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Syrian Arab
Republic for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Morocco, His
Excellency Mr. Abdelatif Filali.
His Excellency Mr. Abdelatif Filali, Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Morocco, was
escorted to a seat at the Council table.
The President (interpretation from French): I
welcome the Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Morocco and invite him to make his statement.
Mr. Filali (Morocco) (interpretation from Arabic):
I wish on behalf of the delegation of the Kingdom of
Morocco to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September. We are certain that the work of the Council
will be crowned with success thanks to your diplomatic
skill. I wish also to convey our congratulations to your
17
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Germany, on
his presidency of the Council last month.
The Security Council is meeting as Palestine faces a
grave, explosive situation that jeopardizes everything that
has been achieved since the Madrid Conference. Everyone
expected that the Israeli provocation and aggression over
the past two days would result in bloodshed and innocent
victims. Today’s situation is the consequence of the Israeli
Government’s closure of Gaza and the West Bank, imposed
upon Palestinians living there, its rebuff of the peace
agreements reached with the Palestinian Authority, and its
decision to pursue its policy of expansion into occupied
Palestinian territories, in addition to the continuing
provocations carried out by the Israeli police and army
against the Palestinian people.
Since the 1970s and even before, my country has
always been in the vanguard of States participating in the
peace process. My country has taken innumerable initiatives
to bring about a just, lasting and equitable peace that would
ensure the rights of all and that would be universally
respected. We welcomed the Madrid Conference, which
was based on the same principles and foundations that
underpin our foreign policy with respect to the Israeli-Arab
conflict in general and to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict in
particular. We welcomed the Oslo Agreement and travelled
to Washington, D.C., to participate in the signing ceremony
for the agreement between the Israelis and Palestinians
sponsored by the United States and the Russian Federation.
Like all other States, we were optimistic about the
peace process based on the Oslo Agreement, which laid
down the principles of land for peace and respect for the
rights of all parties to the conflict.
We supported all these initiatives, and have used every
possible diplomatic, political and other means to help
realize them, in the conviction that the dawn of a just and
lasting peace was at hand despite the length of the
negotiations. But then the Government of Benjamin
Netanyahu came to power and all of that came to an end.
There was retreat from all the principles unanimously
approved by the participants in the Madrid Conference,
including Israel itself. Negotiations on all matters hit
obstacles, and the new Israeli Government began to drain
the Oslo agreement of its content and significance. That
was the first time a Government based on principles of
democratic succession had refused to honour international
commitments undertaken by the previous Administration —
which is contrary to the principles of democracy and to
international norms.
We cannot fail to deplore and reject this situation,
and vigorously and urgently to appeal to the Israeli
Government to honour its commitments under
conventions and agreements concluded, to bring about a
just, lasting and equitable peace with the Palestinian
Authority and with its Arab neighbours.
Yesterday His Majesty King Hassan II, as President
of the seventh Islamic Summit Conference and as
Chairman of the Al-Quds Committee of the Organization
of the Islamic Conference, and on behalf of the Islamic
world, addressed a letter to the Secretary-General
deploring the provocations carried out by Israel towards
Arabs and Muslims in flagrant violation of all
international resolutions calling for safeguarding the
character of the Holy City of Jerusalem. Those actions are
aimed at creating a new situation in defiance of
everything that was agreed at the Madrid Conference and
in agreements between the Palestinian Authority and
Israel, in particular with respect to the ultimate status of
the city of Jerusalem. His Majesty the King requested the
Secretary-General to circulate that letter as a document of
the General Assembly at its fifth-first session and of the
Security Council, with a view to urging the international
community to shoulder its responsibility to ensure that the
rule of law prevails, to challenge any action that infringes
upon legitimate Islamic rights and laws, and to respond to
the Israeli policy of imposing a fait accompli by force.
That Israeli policy can only lead to stalemate and return
the region to the old cycle of instability and violence.
It is the responsibility of the Security Council to
demand that Israel respect and honour all agreements into
which, before the recent elections, it entered with the
other parties concerned.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Morocco for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the Secretary-General of the
People’s Committee for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, His
Excellency Mr. Omar Mustafa Muntasser. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Muntasser (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)
(interpretation from Arabic): I wish at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September. I am confident that your personal qualities
and diplomatic skill will enable you to guide the work of
18
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
the Council to success. I wish also to thank your
predecessor, Ambassador Tono Eitel, Permanent
Representative of Germany to the United Nations, for the
successful way in which he conducted the work of the
Security Council last month.
Once again, the world, including the Security Council,
is witnessing the Palestinian people being massacred, as
they have been for the past 50 years, by the terrorist
aggressors, the Israelis, a brutal force confronting a
defenceless people mortally wounded and drained of its
life-blood.
The Zionist usurpers have established their Zionist
entity and pursued a policy of displacement. They have
been supported in this by a number of countries, foremost
among which is the United States of America, which has
supported terrorism and aggression against the Arabs and
Muslims, forgetting its important role as a super-Power and
a permanent member of the Security Council, which is the
depository of the hopes of all peoples for justice and
fairness.
The responsibility for the massacres and genocide
being perpetrated right now against the Palestinian people
should be borne by the United States, which wholeheartedly
supports the Israelis. The Israelis kill the Palestinians as if
they were lambs, displacing them from their homes, their
gardens and their houses. This shameful crime against
humanity does not move the conscience of the largest
country in the world, which ignores it completely and at
best appeals to both parties to exercise restraint.
Do we not have the right to ask the Council exactly
what it means when it appeals to both parties, both the
victim and the aggressor, to exercise self-restraint? All its
members know that this cannot serve the maintenance of
international peace and security. The settler occupation is
expanding day after day, in spite of the resolutions of this
Council. The prisons are filled with Palestinians, houses are
demolished for the flimsiest of reasons and the holiest of
places are being desecrated and trampled upon daily. And
now we see measures aimed at demolishing these holy
places and we hear irresponsible statements every day. The
Palestinians exercise absolutely no right to establish their
independent State and absolutely no thought is given to a
withdrawal from the Golan, except after hundreds of years.
The Palestinians enjoy absolutely no rights in Jerusalem.
Tunnels are opened under the Al-Aqsa Mosque in
preparation for its demolition. The attacks are aimed not
only against occupied territories, but also at the autonomous
areas, including Gaza. Despite all of this, the Council talks
of peace. What peace? The peace of the killer and the
victim, of the lamb and the wolf? The peace of terrorists
equipped with all kinds of weapons — weapons of mass
destruction, bacteriological, chemical and nuclear
weapons? The displacement of a people that has fallen
victim to a conspiracy of the whole world — a portrait of
the tragedy of the twentieth century?
We support peace. The only difference between us
and others is that we are against surrender and a policy of
fait accompli. We are for a peace that is just and
comprehensive. We have no hatred for Jews. While we
are concerned about the interests of the Palestinian
people, we are also concerned about those of the Jewish
people. Therefore, as we said before, the steps outlined
for a so-called peace will not lead to real peace. Real
peace must be comprehensive and just to start with. These
developments prove our insight: a comprehensive and just
peace must include both Palestinians and Jews. This
cannot be achieved without the establishment of a
disarmed, democratic State, free from bacteriological,
nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction, in which
both Palestinians and Jews could live under a democratic
regime supervised by the United Nations, as in South
Africa. We are confident that this solution would further
the interests of all, and that if it is not followed the
tragedy will continue.
The powerful will not remain powerful forever, nor
will the weak remain weak. This fact has been seen in all
times and will never change. This is the word of God and
the word of God cannot be changed.
In conclusion, we would like the Security Council,
in addressing this tragic topic today, to assume its
responsibility to stop the Israeli aggressors from carrying
out their plan to judaize Jerusalem and from committing
aggression against the holiest religious sites of Christians
and Muslims, and to impose upon Israel a commitment to
honour its own pledges and to sit at the negotiating table
without arrogance, intransigence or preconditions. A
deadline for such negotiations must be determined or else
the Council should implement Chapter VII, from which
Israel has been exempt for over half a century. We call
upon the Council today not to reiterate the same old
concern or issue another appeal for restraint. This has
never stopped aggression before and has never saved a
victim. Repeating it would only deepen the feeling on the
part of Arabs and Muslims that the Security Council has
a double standard and is only here to punish Arabs and
Muslims.
19
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
Right will prevail, even if it takes a long time.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the Secretary-General of the People’s Committee for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya for his kind words addressed to me and to
my predecessor.
The next speaker on my list is the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Sudan, His Excellency Mr. Ali
Osman Mohamed Taha. I welcome him and invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Taha (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic): I
would like at the outset to convey through you, Sir, the
deepest feelings of sorrow prevailing in the Sudan as a
result of the lives that have been lost in Al-Quds Al-Sharif.
I take this opportunity, on behalf of the Sudan, to extend
our condolences to the families of the bereaved and to wish
the wounded a speedy recovery.
No doubt, a comprehensive and just peace is an
objective to which the peace-loving nations aspire and
which they endeavour to realize based on the principles of
justice and equity. Reneging on undertakings and
obligations runs counter to the genuine goal of establishing
peace and undermines any movement in its direction. The
squandering of the chance for a just, comprehensive and
permanent peace by the occupation Powers through the
practices being pursued in the Arab territories is ample
evidence of the weighty contradiction between the realities
of occupation and peace.
The measure taken by the Israeli Government in Al-
Quds — the opening of a gate to a tunnel under the
western wall of Al-Aqsa Mosque in the eastern part of this
city and the ensuing violent and bloody suppression of
unarmed civilians expressing their opposition to this
measure — is a violation of the noblest of sentiments. It
also defies all international covenants and civilized human
values and runs explicitly counter to the resolutions of this
Council relating to the status of Al-Quds.
Undoubtedly you know, Sir, that the Al-Aqsa Mosque
enjoys a high status among Muslims all over the world. It
is part of Islamic belief, is regarded with love and respect
and is linked to ancient and modern history. It constitutes
an important part of the heritage and culture of Muslims.
The existence of Jerusalem — Al-Quds — with all its
sites that are holy to the followers of the three religions,
must be insured as a place dear to believers and as a safe
sanctuary where religious tolerance and peace prevail. If
the status of Al-Aqsa Mosque is understood, any attempt
to change that status explains to us the opposition that
was peaceably demonstrated by the Palestinian people in
East Jerusalem. This has truly expressed the feelings of
all Muslims and Arabs throughout the world.
It might be appropriate in this connection to recall
the arson that took place in 1968 at the same Mosque.
That event touched the feelings of Muslims all over the
world, resulting in their leaders’ agreeing to establish a
collective, formal entity to represent them. Thus was born
the Organization of the Islamic Conference.
These practices will eventually lead to disaster and
to catastrophic consequences for the people and countries
of the region. They will also have negative repercussions
for international peace and security.
Therefore, while we vehemently condemn these
Israeli measures and the suppression of unarmed civilians,
Sudan — based on its commitment to international
covenants and to the agreements reached by the parties
concerned — requests the Security Council to discharge
its responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. We ask that it request Israel to put an
immediate stop to these measures, which cause grief to
Muslims all over the world. The Security Council must
also take specific measures to put an end to aggression
against the Palestinian people and to comply fully with
human rights covenants.
Sudan, in solidarity with the Palestinian people and
their legitimate rights, and as part of its commitment to
the resolutions adopted by the Arab summit held last June
in Cairo, calls upon the Council to confirm its credibility
by implementing all the resolutions adopted on the Israeli-
Arab conflict and the decisions of the Madrid Conference,
with a view to achieving a comprehensive and just peace
on all tracks. This is the sole way to stability and security
in the region.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the Minister for Foreign Affairs for his kind words
addressed to me.
The next speaker is the Minister of State for Foreign
Affairs of Oman, His Excellency Mr. Yousef Bin Al-
Alawi Bin Abdulla. I welcome him, and I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
20
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
Mr. Bin Abdulla (Oman) (interpretation from
Arabic): We would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
The Council is meeting at a time when international
peace and security are in jeopardy. Yes, international peace
and security are truly endangered, especially as the Holy
City of Jerusalem — enshrined by Almighty God and
having been visited by the Prophet Mohammed — is
witnessing bloodshed. Blood has been shed at the place
where the prophets gathered behind Prophet Mohammed, in
the presence of Jesus Christ, Moses, Abraham and all the
other prophets. We are truly saddened at the events that are
taking place in that Holy Land.
We ask Almighty God to accept the martyrs of this
Earth, to take them into Heaven and give patience to their
families. At the same time, we would like to extend our
condolences to the families of those Israelis who were
killed. They are also victims of Israel’s misguided policy.
They too are the victims of a useless policy of aggression
and provocation.
You, Sir, are now the highest authority in the
international community, and we are meeting today after
witnessing the fact that more bloodshed, violence and
hatred can be avoided only through a resumption of the
peace process. That path to peace was supported by the
international community at the Madrid Conference, and
great efforts and resources were expended on it, with a
view to reaching agreement between the Palestinian and
Israeli peoples.
This morning I heard the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Israel say that Israel does not agree to any preconditions.
Israel is committed to those preconditions. Those are the
agreements that the State of Israel has committed to
through its previous Government. This morning Mr. Farouk
Kaddumi summarized for the Council how these
agreements have been reneged on. Now, the issue is in the
hands of the Security Council, whose five permanent
members have the authority and the ability to adopt
resolutions.
This morning, the United Kingdom Secretary of State
for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs presented some
ideas and proposals for dealing with the situation. The
Council could adopt those ideas and proposals. It is up to
the Council to ask Israel to reconsider its policy.
This is about a tunnel that has existed for two
thousand years. Generations upon generations have passed
through that Holy Land and the tunnel has never been a
source of hatred or bloodshed. What is its importance
today? Do we need it? Have we come together here to
talk about a tourist attraction? The tunnel leads to the Al-
Aqsa Mosque, one of the holiest Muslim sites. Are
members of the Council aware of the Muslim belief that
those who perish in defending that Holy Land are martyrs
and ascend directly to heaven? We are dealing here with
a serious and delicate issue.
If members of the Council are unable to reach
agreement on a draft resolution urging Israel to reverse its
policy, which is within the power and competence of the
Council to do, they can at the very least give advice.
I do not believe that one can deny the Palestinian
people their legitimate right to self-defence, a right that is
enshrined in the United Nations Charter. When they come
out to demonstrate their rejection of the actions taken by
the Israeli Government — and I say “the Israeli
Government”, not the people of Israel — they are
exercising the legitimate right of self-defence.
In the present instance, where is the democracy
about which we hear so much? Is it in behalf of
democracy that innocent people are killed and tanks sent
into the streets of the Holy City? No, that is not
democracy.
I repeat: the Security Council must issue a warning
to the Israeli Government. I wish it every success in its
task.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Oman for his kinds
words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Bahrain, His Excellency Shaikh Mohammed Bin
Mubarak Al-Khalifa. I welcome him and invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Al-Khalifa (Bahrain)(interpretation from
Arabic): Permit me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir,
on behalf of the delegation of the State of Bahrain, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We hope that your efforts in the
maintenance of international peace and security will be
crowned with success. I should be remiss were I not also
to express my appreciation and thanks to your
predecessor, Ambassador Eitel of Germany, for his efforts
during his presidency of the Council last month.
21
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
The State of Bahrain views with deep concern the
tragic events that have taken place in the Palestinian
territories in recent days. A few days ago, we were
surprised at the opening by the Israeli authorities of the
tunnel under the historic Islamic sites in occupied Jerusalem
in an attempt to judaize the Islamic character of that city.
The Israeli measure gave rise to outrage in the Palestinian
territories in particular, and in the Islamic world in general,
where it was viewed as an act of aggression against the
Islamic holy places and an affront to the feelings of
Muslims and Arabs.
It is regrettable that the Israeli authorities have dealt
with the angry and legitimate reaction in the Palestinian
territories in a manner that runs counter to the search for
peace in the area. Israeli armed forces have opened fire
upon defenceless Palestinians demonstrating against the
Israeli action, claiming the lives of scores and injuring
hundreds more. We condemn the Israeli policy that has led
to the massacre of defenceless Palestinians and we
denounce the Israeli measures designed to alter the Islamic
character of historic sites.
We call upon Israel to close the tunnel from Baruch
Square under the western wall of the Al-Aqsa Mosque
because it jeopardizes the integrity of the Mosque as well
as other Islamic sites in the area. At the same time, we call
upon Israel to comply with relevant Security Council
resolutions with regard to Jerusalem and with the provisions
of the Fourth Geneva Convention concerning occupied
territories.
Bahrain, which is anxious to see the peace process in
the Middle East continue, supports the statement by the
Council of the League of Arab States on 21 September and
appeals to the international community, the members of the
European Union and the sponsors of the peace process to
bring pressure to bear upon Israel to cease its practices
designed to judaize the city of Jerusalem and alter its
demographic and legal character.
We also call upon the international community to
bring pressure to bear upon Israel to change its views on
settlements in the Arab territories and to act in a way
consonant with the peace process in the area. In that
connection, we should like to reaffirm the necessity of
pursuing the peace process in the Middle East, convinced
as we are that that is the strategic option in that region for
the sake of its prosperity, future and peoples. We believe
that peace must be based on justice and equity and on the
restoration of rights that cannot be denied and on
commitments that cannot be withdrawn. Should Israel
continue to flout its commitments, to ignore the bases of
the peace process, to renege on its promises and pledges
entered into within the framework of that process, and to
prevaricate and procrastinate over their implementation,
that can only lead to a set-back in the peace process and
subject the region to a cycle of violence and tension once
again.
We call upon this Council to adopt a resolution that
will prompt the Israeli Government to stop its oppressive
practices against the Palestinian people and to honour the
pledges and agreements it has made in the interests of
maintaining international peace and security.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bahrain for his kind
words addressed to me and my predecessor.
The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Mr. Ali-Akbar Velayati.
I welcome him and invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Velayati (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, let me congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council.
I wish to express my condolences to the Palestinian
people and the bereaved families over the loss of life of
the innocent people who have been killed by the Zionist
army during the past few days.
Today is a day of mourning for the entire world of
Islam and, indeed, for humanity at large. We all
witnessed the desecration of Islamic holy places and the
indiscriminate massacre of those whose only fault was
their religious devotion. Several Muslim worshippers —
elderly people, women and children who had gathered in
one of the most sacred places in the Islamic world —
were murdered just today. Nothing — not even the
distorted logic of Zionists and their supporters — can
justify this inhuman atrocity and assault on the entire
Muslim world. No one can conveniently label peaceful
worshippers as terrorists. No one can question the fact
that it is a crime against humanity to use helicopter
gunships to attack and murder in cold blood those who
had taken refuge in the House of God.
The recent developments in the occupied territories,
particularly in Al-Quds al-Sharif and the Islamic
sanctuaries, represent the most dangerous escalation of
Israel’s inhuman behaviour against the Palestinian people.
22
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
The deliberate attempt of Israel to undermine the
holiest Islamic sites, held in highest reverence by the entire
Muslim world, represents an affront to the people of
Palestine and the Muslim world in general. It shows a
complete disregard by Israel for the basic rules of conduct,
to say nothing of the obligations it has undertaken during
the past few years. The indiscriminate killing of almost 100
Palestinian civilians, who were protesting blatant acts of
aggression against their beliefs and values, constitutes a
further illustration of the real face of the Zionist regime
disguised behind the facade of peace.
These developments represent yet another step in the
long series of intransigent acts on the part of the new
Israeli Government that have undermined the very
foundations of the so-called peace process, while at the
same time exposing the inherent deficiencies of a plan that
did not aim to address the real issue in a realistic manner.
The reneging by Israel on its commitment to land for peace,
the revival of the illegal settlement policy, and now this
blatant attempt to change the character of the Holy City of
Al-Quds al-Sharif cannot be seen independently. They are
elements in the general policy of continued occupation and
expansion and the step-by-step imposition of faits
accomplis.
These policies have met with the indignation of
individual members of the international community.
However, in the face of these consecutive acts of
intransigence, the international community as a whole,
particularly as represented in this Council, has been
prevented from reacting effectively by certain members
motivated by their own domestic agenda.
Such double standards and blind support have given a
sense of impunity to the Israeli regime. The worst it can
expect in the face of its continued illegal behaviour is
simply calls on both sides for restraint. Consequently, the
real outcome of the actions of Israel and the muted
reactions of the international community has been the
consecutive consolidation of the old agenda of further
expansion, further settlement and further de-Islamization
and de-Arabization of Al-Quds al-Sharif.
It is incumbent upon the Security Council to react
resolutely and decisively in the face of crimes being
perpetrated by Israel against innocent Palestinians in the
occupied territories. Anything less will not only be
interpreted by Israel as a green light for more aggression,
but will also further undermine the credibility of the
Security Council. It is high time for the Council to act. The
Islamic world cannot accept further indifference by the
Council to the plight of its brethren in Palestine.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic
of Iran for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign
Relations, International Trade and Worship of Argentina,
Mr. Guido Di Tella. I welcome him and invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Di Tella (Argentina) (interpretation from
Spanish): Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, for having
convened this emergency meeting without delay. Our
participation in this meeting was not expected, but the
significance of the events and the concern they aroused in
Argentina prompted President Carlos Saúl Menem to call
upon me to convey our deep concern.
Nothing that occurs in the Middle East is alien to us
because we are linked to that region by close ethnic,
religious and cultural ties.
Argentina, a land of immigration, has seen its
population nurtured and enriched by citizens of both Arab
and Jewish origin. In our territory, communities from the
Middle East live side by side harmoniously without
distinction of race or creed. Today we wish to join our
voice to those of all the Governments that in this debate
have made a solemn appeal for the preservation of peace
and security on the West Bank, in Gaza and in Jerusalem.
In various forums and on various occasions, my
country has lent its support to the shaping of the peace
programme that emerged from the Madrid and Oslo
agreements and that were widely supported by the
international community. The hopes for a lasting peace
emerging from that process have now been dimmed by
rigid and obstinate attitudes that depart from the letter and
the spirit of those agreements.
I wish to express my Government’s concern about
the extremely serious incidents that have occurred. They
are capable of endangering the advance of this process.
The security of peoples depends on moderate policies,
and certainly not on extreme formulas of any kind. There
can be no doubt that the growing instability is playing
into the hands of extremist groups who do not wish to see
the peace process succeed. Terrorism should never
triumph.
23
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
We call on all the parties to respect scrupulously the
peace agreements that have been signed. It is necessary to
restore the requisite conditions for the dialogue that had
begun to bear fruit and solidify. It is also imperative to
resume the negotiating process. Those who bear the greatest
responsibility for the maintenance of peace and security
should act with the greatest prudence and even-handedness.
We urge this body, which has ceaselessly sought a
peaceful solution in the Middle East, to continue to strive
to put an end to the bloodshed and to recreate the
conditions needed for dialogue and negotiation. On behalf
of the Argentine people and Government, I would also like
to express our condolences to all the victims of these tragic
events and to their families.
May I conclude with an appeal to all parties to deal
with this crisis that has tormented the peoples of the region,
and to do so with prudence, moderation and a spirit of
tolerance, so as to achieve a lasting peace with justice and
security.
The President (interpretation from French): The next
speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the United
Arab Emirate, His Excellency Mr. Al-Noaimi. I invite him
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Al-Noaimi (United Arab Emirates) (interpretation
from Arabic): Allow me to extend the congratulations of the
United Arab Emirates, Sir, on your presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I would like to thank the
member States of the Security Council for holding this
emergency meeting in order to consider the latest grave
developments to take place in Al-Quds as well as in the
other occupied Palestinian territories.
These bloody events have erupted as a result of
Israel’s intransigence in resumption of excavations in Al-
Quds al-Sharif and in opening an entrance to the tunnel
under the Western Wall of Al-Aqsa Mosque and other
Islamic buildings. These are all serious and explicit
indications of the constant Israeli endeavours to judaize Al-
Quds and to distort and destroy its demographic
composition. This is a provocation for the Palestinian
people and for all the Muslims and Arabs in the world. The
serious, regrettable events that took place in recent days
included Israeli army forces firing repeatedly at unarmed
Palestinian civilians who were protesting the Israeli
measures, resulting in scores of dead and wounded. This
came as no surprise. It was part of a premeditated,
irresponsible Israeli plan aimed at continuing its policy of
fait accompli and at consecrating its occupation by force
through resort to the practices of oppression, pressure,
siege, closure, confiscation, demolition and imprisonment
of the Palestinian people, in violation of the Fourth
Geneva Convention, the relevant Security Council
resolutions and the agreements between the Palestine
Liberation Organization and the Israeli Government.
The United Arab Emirates expresses its deepest
concern regarding the developments in the occupied
Palestinian territories and its regret and disappointment
regarding the Israeli Government’s policy of reneging on
its commitments under the peace agreements between
Israel and Palestine — in particular, Israel’s commitment
to put into effect the principle of land for peace, renounce
the policy of settlement, full withdrawal from Hebron and
the release of thousands of Palestinian detainees who are
still in prison.
We call upon the international community,
particularly the sponsors of the peace process, to put
pressure on Israel to renounce its aggressive policy and
comply with all its commitments, as stipulated in the
resolutions of international legality and in conventions.
We call upon the Security Council, which is responsible
for the maintenance of international peace and security, to
take the appropriate measures to contain this crisis by
obliging Israel to permanently — not temporarily — close
the tunnel, to put an end to its excavations in the Islamic
and Arab sanctuaries, and to return in earnest to the
negotiating table with the Palestine Liberation
Organization, which is the one and only option for a just
and peaceful settlement to the question of Palestine and
for the realization of the aspirations of the Palestinian
people to establish an independent State just like any
other country in the world.
The President (interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania,
His Excellency Mr. Lemrabott Sidi Mahmoud Ould
Cheikh Ahmed. I welcome him and invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed (Mauritania)
(interpretation from Arabic): May I first of all
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I should like to
thank you and the other members of the Council for
acceding to the request of the Arab Group and for holding
this meeting. I should like also to pay tribute to the close
ties that bind our two countries. In addition, I should like
24
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
to acknowledge the exceptional role played by your
predecessor, His Excellency the Ambassador of Germany,
during his presidency of the Council last month.
The Security Council is meeting today to consider this
grave situation, which results from the latest measures taken
by the Israeli authorities. These have as their goal, among
other things, opening a tunnel under the Haram Al-Sharif
in the Holy City of Jerusalem. This is but one link in the
chain of provocations and harassment against the
Palestinian people, which runs counter to the spirit and the
letter of the peace accords concluded by the Palestinian
Authority and the Government of Israel. My country, which
condemns these measures, would like to reaffirm here that
it is convinced that peace in the Middle East can be just,
comprehensive and lasting only if Israel withdraws from the
occupied Palestinian territories, including the Arab city of
Jerusalem, and if it guarantees to the Palestinian people the
right of self-determination as well as its right to an
independent State and to exercise it inalienable and
legitimate rights. There can be no true peace until Israel
withdraws from the Golan and Lebanon.
It is important here to recall the unanimous Arab
position, as adopted by the Arab summit in June: that the
peace process is a strategic option that requires the same
commitment from Israel. That is why Israel must comply
with the rules and resolutions underlying the peace process
and honour its commitments. In this regard, and in order to
overcome current obstacles and guarantee the continuation
of the peace process, my country requests the Council to
take the necessary steps in dealing with the consequences
of the latest decisions taken by the Israeli authorities, and
it also asks for a return to the negotiations with regard to
Palestinian-Syrian issues and for respect for the principle of
land for peace and the principles of other Security Council
resolutions.
The Security Council today must discharge its
responsibilities in accordance with the United Nations
Charter and take the necessary steps to restore all rights to
their legitimate holders. Permanent members of the Security
Council should also assume their role in ensuring a lasting,
equitable and just peace, opening up a new era guaranteeing
understanding and cooperation among all the States in the
Middle East.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the
Islamic Republic of Mauritania for the kind words he
addressed to me.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of Brazil in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr.
Amorim (Brazil) took the seat reserved for him at
the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: (interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Turkey. I invite him
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Çelem (Turkey): We are dismayed by the turn
of events in the Middle East and the lack of progress in
the peace process. Turkey has been an ardent supporter of
the Middle East peace process from its very beginning.
We deem it a unique opportunity that can bring about
long-awaited peace and prosperity to the whole region.
Much ground has been covered in this direction. The
announcement by the new Israeli Government that it was
committing itself to the peace process and to continuing
to fulfil its pledges according to the Interim Agreement
was welcomed by the entire international community.
Moreover, the first meeting between Prime Minister
Netanyahu and President Arafat, on 4 September 1996,
was an encouraging sign for the invigorating of the peace
process.
However, the recent impasse in the Middle East
peace process has led to the deep concern that the whole
process may be interrupted. The momentum must not be
lost. Therefore, any action that may hamper or slow down
this process has to be carefully avoided.
In the light of the already charged atmosphere,
decisions regarding holy sites and places of worship are
particularly susceptible to having wide-reaching
implications and creating strong public sensitivities. The
decision to open the tunnel under the Al-Aqsa Mosque, in
our view, is of that nature. It can obviously have
repercussions far beyond the Middle East. Al-Quds Al-
Sharif is an equally sacred city for all three monotheistic
religions. All interested parties should meticulously
25
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
respect the delicate harmony and balance that for centuries
has permitted the peaceful coexistence in this city of the
followers of these three faiths.
It is difficult to understand the reasoning behind the
decision of the Israeli Government to abandon today the
cautious approach it has displayed in this regard since 1988.
We deplore the fact that Israel, instead of adopting a
conciliatory attitude, has opted to use force against the
Palestinian people protesting this decision. It has been
perceived by the Palestinians as a provocation and as a
desecration. We do not see any grounds to suspect the
sincerity of the reaction of the Palestinians to the decision
to open the tunnel at a time when sensitivities were already
heightened because of the stagnation of the peace process.
This spontaneous reaction has to be taken into
consideration. We cannot afford to see the further spread of
demonstrations, further bloodshed and further human
suffering. We cannot afford to see the Middle East peace
process thrown into total disarray.
Information obtained this morning indicates that the
situation is even more tense. We call on both sides to
exercise restraint and to refrain from actions that may be
exploited by parties that are against the peace process. We
think that it is vitally important at this juncture that Prime
Minister Netanyahu and President Arafat meet immediately
to find a way out of this crisis. We call upon the Israeli
Government to review its decision concerning the tunnel
and to refrain from resorting to the use of force or from
any action that can be construed as provocation.
The President (interpretation from French): The next
speaker is the representative of Norway. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Biørn Lian (Norway): The scenes of violence
and bloodshed in the Palestinian areas the last few days
have shocked and terrified us all, and it is clear that the
Middle East peace process is faced with one of its gravest
crises since 1993. The violence which has followed the
Israeli decision to reopen the old tunnel under the Temple
Mount in Jerusalem must also be seen against a background
of deep frustration and impatience among the Palestinians
at the lack of substantial and visible progress in the peace
process in recent months.
The Norwegian Government deeply regrets the tragic
loss of lives in the recent violence. It is now of the utmost
importance that a further escalation of the conflict be
avoided, and that both parties show great restraint and
avoid actions that could create further obstacles for a
continuation of the peace process.
The Norwegian Government urges both parties
immediately to come together at the highest level to
discuss how an escalation of the present crisis can be
avoided and how substantial discussions on the peace
process can be achieved without further delay. We, on our
side, have been in direct contact with the two parties to
convey this message, and we are prepared to assist the
parties in any way they consider appropriate. We are
encouraged by the fact that the two parties are in direct
contact with each other.
It remains of the utmost importance to start
substantial talks on the final-status issues and to reach
agreement on Israeli redeployment from Hebron, as stated
in the Interim Agreement. Norway is already present in
Hebron with close to 40 observers, and we urge the two
parties to take the necessary decisions for Israeli
redeployment to take place, so that other international
observers can be invited by the parties to join the
Norwegian advance party in Hebron.
The Israeli Government now has a special
responsibility to act to redress and reverse the situation
and to ensure that substantial progress can be made in the
implementation of existing agreements. We also urge the
Israeli Government to bring to an end the border closures
which could further aggravate the economic crisis in the
Palestinian areas. In view of the current crisis, the
Norwegian Government has decided to make an
extraordinary contribution of $2 million for budget
support to the Palestinian Ministry of Finance. That
amount is already being transferred, and as Chairman of
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee, Norway is also actively
coordinating fund-raising efforts to improve the
disbursement of development assistance to the Palestinian
Authority.
The President (interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Japan. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Owada (Japan): The clashes in recent days
between Palestinians and Israeli troops in the West Bank
and the Gaza Strip have aroused profound concern
throughout the international community. We in Japan are
truly shocked by the recent violence. We extend our
condolences to the families of those who have lost their
lives and our sympathies to those who have been
wounded.
26
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
Over the course of the past several months, the
international community has been watching the deteriorating
situation in the region with a deepening sense of crisis.
Prospects for a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
region have grown increasingly dim. There is a danger that
the viability of the peace process can be put in jeopardy.
This most recent outbreak of violence is a clear expression
of frustration at the lack of improvement in the situation in
the occupied Arab territories.
In order to salvage the peace process itself, it is
essential that the Government of Israel and the Palestinian
Authority engage without delay in direct talks to bring
about a cessation of hostilities. Improvements to the present
situation should be carried out through a double-track
approach. One task is immediate, and the other a more
fundamental approach to the basic issues at the root of the
problem.
The immediate task on which action is required is for
the parties directly involved to immediately engage in
efforts to bridge the chasm of mistrust that separates them
by refraining from any action which could do harm to the
prospects of the peace process. It is thus essential that they
devote themselves to practical confidence-building
measures. Japan urges all parties, in particular, to refrain
from any action that could provoke further violence. At the
same time, on a more fundamental level, it is imperative
that the parties directly involved intensify their efforts, in
good faith and with steadfast determination, to pursue the
peace process in order to restore peace throughout the
region. Both sides must summon the courage to take steps
to implement, without further delay, the commitments that
they have already made in Madrid, in Oslo and thereafter.
Japan has been participating actively in the multilateral
talks which have proved to be of great value in facilitating
the peace process. We have also been extending assistance
to the parties concerned, including assistance to the
Palestinians. All these efforts on the part of Japan have
been made in the context of our hope that the peace
process will be expedited by our cooperation. It is for this
reason that Japan has been following the situation as it
has evolved in recent months with a growing sense of
concern. In fact, on the occasion of the visit of our
Foreign Minister, Mr. Yukihiko Ikeda, to the Middle East
last August, Japan made an urgent appeal to the parties
concerned to engage in direct and ongoing dialogue
without delay. He conveyed that same urgent message to
Chairman Arafat when he visited Japan in September.
The international community should be seriously
concerned at the ominous trend we are witnessing in the
occupied Arab territories. Japan, for its part, is determined
to contribute in whatever way it can to the creation of an
environment conducive to peace. Indeed, it is incumbent
upon the international community and its member States
to fortify the peace process. Even more critical, however,
is the courage, supported by firm political will, of the
parties directly concerned. The Government of Japan calls
upon them in the strongest possible terms to do
everything in their power to resolve the present crisis and,
in so doing, to offer the people they represent the hope of
a more peaceful and secure future.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Pakistan. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Kamal (Pakistan): Since this is the first time I
am addressing the Security Council under your
presidency, Sir, let me congratulate you on the
assumption of your high office. Under your talented and
able guidance, the Council has been able successfully to
fulfil its responsibilities during the current month.
I would also like to take this opportunity to express
my admiration for your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Germany, for the excellent manner in
which he conducted the affairs of the Council.
It is with a sense of outrage and concern that the
Government of Pakistan views the recent action taken by
the Israeli Government in opening an entrance to the
tunnel extending under the western wall of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque and the provocative attempts to permit the
observance of Jewish religious rites in the holy sanctuary
of Al-Haram al-Sharif. We have been equally shocked to
learn about the indiscriminate shooting by Israeli armed
forces of civilian Palestinian demonstrators, resulting in
27
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
an alarming number of casualties. Pakistan strongly
condemns all these actions.
The special significance of the Holy City of Al-Quds
al-Sharif for the international community in general and the
Islamic Ummah, in particular, requires no further
elaboration. These Israeli measures, which are aimed at
altering the legal status and demographic composition of
Jerusalem, are illegal and invalid.
These provocative Israeli actions have dashed the
hopes that the peace process would lead to the early
exercise by the Palestinian people of its right to self-
determination through the establishment of an independent
homeland. This required the complete withdrawal by the
Israeli authorities from all the occupied Palestinian and
Arab territories, including the Holy City of Al-Quds
al-Sharif.
Pakistan’s support for the just struggle for the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people is well known.
We have consistently stated that Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) continue to provide
a viable and just framework for a durable and
comprehensive settlement of the Palestinian question.
It is imperative that the peace process, arrived at
through bold and courageous initiatives, should not
collapse. We fully share the expectations of the
international community that there should be no attempt to
derail the implementation of the agreements and accords
concluded so far. The provisions of these agreements and
accords must be sincerely complied with, both in letter and
in spirit. We hope that the new Israeli leadership in Israel
will concede to the realities on the ground and resolve all
pending issues with the Palestinian national Authority,
including the reversal of these recent alarming actions. We
strongly urge the demonstration of the requisite flexibility
and accommodation, as well as a sincere commitment to the
achievement of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace that
will ensure security and stability in the Middle East.
The Government and the people of Pakistan are deeply
concerned at these latest actions by the Israeli authorities,
which are seriously undermining the peace process. It urges
the Security Council to uphold the just position taken by
the Palestinians on the issue of Jerusalem, a position which
was based on international law and justice. We also call
upon the Council not only to take urgent measures to
redress the current grave situation, as it imperils the peace
of the holy city of Al-Quds al-Sharif, but also to prevent
the further deterioration of the situation. We firmly believe
that the Council has the duty to call upon the Israeli
authorities immediately to end these unjust actions and to
desist from taking similar measures in future.
We are confident that the Security Council is
conscious of the importance that is attached to Al-Quds
al-Sharif by the entire Muslim world and of the dangers
inherent in allowing the prevailing resentment to fester.
The President: I thank the representative of
Pakistan for his kind words addressed to me and to my
predecessor.
(spoke in French):
The next speaker is the representative of Ireland. I
invite to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Campbell (Ireland): May I offer you, Sir, our
sincere congratulations and good wishes on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The following associated countries —
Bulgaria, Hungary, Lithuania, Malta, Romania, Slovakia
and Slovenia — have aligned themselves with this
statement. Iceland and Liechtenstein also align themselves
with this statement.
It is with the utmost dismay that the member States
of the European Union learned of the latest grievous
outbreaks of violence in Jerusalem and throughout much
of the occupied territories. The catalyst for breaking the
peace on this occasion was the regrettable opening of a
tunnel connecting some of the most sacred and
archaeologically important sites in the Holy City. The
atmosphere among the Palestinian people has become so
charged by the frustration arising from the absence of any
real progress in the peace process over recent months that
a spark such as this was enough to ignite a wave of
violence and destruction.
It is particularly distressing that this violence should
be taking place among people whom we had all hoped
would increasingly have seen themselves by this stage as
active partners in a peace process which has been
welcomed throughout the world. The lack of progress in
the peace process, together with such decisions as the
lifting of the freeze on settlements, the failure to redeploy
Israeli troops from Hebron and the aforementioned
incident, are undermining the developing partnership
28
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
between the Israeli Government and the Palestinian
Authority.
The European Union deplores the killings that have
occurred as a result of this latest violence. We also fear the
deleterious effect that these events — the most serious
since the signing of the Declaration of Principles three
years ago — may have on the peace process in the Middle
East as a whole. There can be no doubt that the current
incidents are a most serious setback to this process, which
we all support.
The European Union is committed to its policy on the
status of Jerusalem. This policy is based on the view that
East Jerusalem is subject to the principles set out in
Security Council resolution 242 (1967), notably the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force, and
other Security Council resolutions pertinent to Jerusalem.
The European Union further asserts the full applicability of
the Fourth Geneva Convention in this regard. In particular,
the European Union opposes measures by any party which
would prejudge the outcome of the permanent status
negotiations.
The European Union recalls its statement of only
yesterday in which it urged all parties to exercise the
utmost restraint and to work to avoid confrontation.
Following the most recent loss of lives, it all the more
urgently calls upon the leaders of the parties jointly to
commit themselves to putting an end to the present
violence. At the same time, they should recognize that the
only solution is to pursue the current peace process with
renewed vigour. It is vital that international confidence be
re-established and commitment to the peace process
demonstrated.
We renew our call upon Israel to give clear practical
demonstration of its confirmed intention to implement fully
the agreements already reached and to carry forward the
peace process. We stress the crucial importance, for the
achievement of a just, comprehensive and lasting peace, of
the respect for the key principles agreed upon by both
parties: self-determination for the Palestinians, with all that
that implies, and land for peace.
The Heads of Government of the European Union, at
their meeting in Florence last June, reaffirmed that peace in
the Middle East is a fundamental interest of the Union. The
peace process alone can lead to security and peace for all
the countries and peoples of the region. We remain
dedicated to our support for this process. We again urge all
parties to resume negotiations on the basis of the principles
already accepted by both parties in the Madrid and Oslo
agreements. We recall, in particular, that it was agreed
between the sides that negotiations should include the
question of Jerusalem, noting its importance for the
parties and the international community, not least the need
to respect the established rights of religious institutions.
We recall also that the essential principles on which the
successful conclusion of negotiations should be based
have been enshrined in Security Council resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978).
Today the European Union exhorts the parties to
refrain from any action which might lead to any further
escalation of the violence in the occupied territories. It
calls upon their leaders, through their actions and their
words, to lead their people back to the path of peace.
Personal contact between President Arafat and Prime
Minister Netanyahu is clearly essential in the present
circumstances. Accordingly, the European Union urges
these two leaders to come together with the least delay to
resume the dialogue which alone can lead to the peace
which their people earnestly seek and deserve.
The President: I thank the representative of Ireland
for his kind words addressed to me.
(spoke in French)
The next speaker is the Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Saudi Arabia, His Excellency Mr. Abdul
Rahman Mansouri. I welcome him and invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Mansouri (Saudi Arabia) (interpretation from
Arabic): I would like to congratulate you at the outset,
Sir, on your presidency of the Council for this month.
You will undoubtedly steer the Council’s deliberations
with skill, prudence and efficiency.
Recently, the Middle East peace process began with
the Madrid Peace Conference with the aim of reaching a
just and comprehensive solution to the Palestine question
and the Arab-Israeli conflict. Difficult negotiations were
held with Israel immediately following the Conference,
the first and foremost of which resulted in the Oslo
agreement of 1993, which was then followed by other
agreements between the Arabs and the Israelis. Some of
these agreements are now under implementation.
However, Israel unfortunately did not commit itself to the
texts of the agreements or to the deadlines. This is the
Palestinian-Israeli trajectory, which is witnessing bloody
events in Al-Quds al-Sharif, as have been witnessed in
29
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
the past in other Palestinian cities. This has undermined the
desired march towards peace.
Israeli leaders have advanced the question of security
as a pretext for prevarication, hesitation and reneging on the
fulfilment of deadlines and stipulations. The Israeli Power
occupying the Palestinian-Arab territories continues its
serious violations of its commitments, one after another,
commitments made in accordance with international law,
international humanitarian law and the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
On the evening of Monday, 23 September 1996, Israeli
authorities, under the protection of army units, opened an
entrance to a tunnel in the vicinity of Al-Haram Al-Sharif
in occupied East Jerusalem. The tunnel extends
approximately 488 metres, parallel to the Western Wall of
Al-Aqsa Mosque. The opening of this entrance and any use
of the tunnel endanger the security and integrity of Al-Aqsa
Mosque and the foundations of the Islamic structures above
the tunnel.
The question of Al-Quds al-Sharif, the first of the two
qiblas and the third holy shrine, is the essence of the Arab-
Israeli conflict and the focus of interest for the Arab and
Islamic worlds. The future of the peace process in its
entirety hinges on how we deal with this problem. It is
obvious that the latest Israeli measures are yet another
manifestation of the intended judaization of Al-Quds al-
Sharif, creating additional factors relating to the legal status
of the Holy City.
Saudi Arabia, which opposes any desecration of the
Islamic shrines in Jerusalem, views these serious measures
as a revelation of Israel’s premeditated intentions to judaize
Al-Quds al-Sharif, wipe out the Arab and Islamic heritage
of Jerusalem and legitimize Israeli schemes. We wish to
warn of the catastrophic consequences of these measures,
which explicitly run counter to all resolutions of
international legality. Our position will always be that any
settlement of the question of Jerusalem will take into
consideration the resolutions of international legality,
particularly Security Council resolution 242 (1967), which
stipulates the withdrawal of Israel from the occupied
territories that have been occupied since 1967, and
resolutions 252 (1968) and 267 (1969), which relate to Al-
Quds al-Sharif.
The Security Council has repeatedly called for the
implementation of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949
and for its application to all the territories occupied by
Israel since 1967, including Al-Quds al-Sharif. It has called
on Israel to abide by the provisions of the agreement. The
Council has declared in many resolutions that all Israeli
measures aimed at altering the demographic and legal
status of the Holy City are null and void. Settlement
activities violate the 1993 Oslo communiqué and the 1995
Interim Agreement between Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization on the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip, particularly, the agreement of both parties to carry
out negotiations on the settlements in the second phase.
This categorically meant that no party would create any
additional facts on the ground that would affect the
outcome of the negotiations or render the agreements
pointless and futile. Israel, however, persists in creating
the so-called Israeli security zones and continues its
economic siege of Palestinian cities to oppress the
Palestinian people.
Israel’s arrogance blinds it to the present and future
international implications of its actions. It implants in the
Israeli psyche concepts incompatible with peace and
security for all. The international media are now reporting
confrontations and massacres resulting from the opening
of the tunnel, rather than new progress in the peace
process.
The Arab countries would welcome a just and
lasting peace. The Palestinians have made concessions in
the hope that the Israeli party would respond with a
genuine desire for equal coexistence, would abandon
policies of containment and expansionist greed, and would
put an end to measures leading to the judaization of
Palestine.
It is the responsibility of the international community
to support the peace process until it has been completed.
The Security Council must therefore bring about the
closing of the Israeli tunnel extending under the
foundations of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, and must put an end
to illegal Israeli measures with respect to Al-Quds Al-
Sharif. We call upon the sponsors of the Madrid peace
process, the United States of America and the Russian
Federation, and upon the European Union and all peace-
loving countries to shoulder their responsibility: to put
pressure upon Israel to effect no changes in the
Palestinian territories, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif, the
first kiblah and the third holiest shrine, and to save the
Middle East peace process.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Saudi Arabia
for the kind words he addressed to me.
30
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
The next speaker is the representative of Djibouti. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): At the outset, Sir, I wish to
congratulate you most warmly on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. We are confident
of your skills and experience; there is no doubt that the
Council is in good hands. We also wish to express our deep
gratitude to Ambassador Tono Eitel of Germany for having
successfully and capably guided the work of the Council
last month.
We are witnessing the calculated implementation of a
deliberately provocative policy by the new Israeli
Government, a policy designed to reverse the fruits of years
of hard work, sacrifice and good faith on the part of the
previous Government, the Palestinians, the Arabs and the
international community. The obvious and precipitous
decline in trust and in mood throughout the region has been
recognized by all, to the extent that it was no surprise that
the act by the Israeli authorities of opening a tunnel under
one of Islam’s holiest shrines, the Al-Aqsa Mosque in East
Jerusalem, provoked a fierce and justified reaction by the
people of Palestine. The resulting shooting of civilian
demonstrators, which has left hundreds dead and wounded,
justly deserves a unanimous universal outcry of
condemnation. One is hard put to argue with those who say
the Israeli rule is that “Arabs only know the language of
force”.
So Likud’s first 100 days have seen a litany of
dithering, vagueness and ambiguity regarding agreements
already reached and signed, and a reneging on the final
status negotiations embracing critical issues such as
Jerusalem, an independent Palestinian State, borders, and
full and total Israeli withdrawal from the occupied Arab
lands. Further, confusion and distress have been sown by
the decision of the Likud Government to approve the
construction of new settlements and highways on
confiscated Arab land, all in total defiance of commitments
and agreements made, and in contravention of resolutions
and conventions. Without question, these moves violate the
spirit that prevailed only recently.
We are all aware of the hardships inflicted upon the
Palestinian people by the border closures, which have led
to deteriorating living conditions, unprecedented levels of
unemployment and an economy which may technically, if
not in fact, be in bankruptcy. It is against this overall
tapestry, woven to create a reversal of commitments already
undertaken and leading to a state of hopelessness and
despair, that the opening of the tunnel provided the straw
that broke the camel’s back. The reaction by the
Palestinian people appears to have been one that crossed
all lines of class, age and gender: to confront an army
with a bold disregard of loss and sacrifice.
What can be done to bring calm and a return to the
peace process? We believe that construction work in old
Jerusalem must cease forthwith, that Israeli troops must
withdraw from Hebron as stipulated in the peace accords,
and that plans to expand Jewish settlements in the West
Bank must be terminated. Border closures must be
reversed as well, and there must be an unambiguous
reaffirmation of the principle of land for peace as
envisioned in resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
It may be well to recall that the issue of Palestine
has been before the Council virtually since the inception
of the United Nations, and that of the occupied territories
for nearly 30 years. While in that time other seemingly
intractable issues around the world have received full
consideration and achieved finality, the Palestinian issues
continue to languish in the archives of the Council. This
unprecedented indecisiveness on the part of the
international community has been an embarrassment to
the Council, creating a situation of unrelieved tribulation
and humiliation. Yet outside the Council, the combined
efforts of many appeared to have finally broken the
chains of futility. With the negotiations in Oslo and in
Madrid, and with the momentous signing in Washington
in 1993, a framework for resolution, peace and progress
was developed. Unfortunately, the promise and hope
raised by those valiant efforts seem to be slowly receding
from our grasp, and the questions now validly posed by
all are, “What peace? What process?”.
We are witnessing a dangerous fall into past patterns
of confrontation and hopelessness, of old attitudes. But as
long as there are many who tenaciously believe that peace
is possible in the Middle East if we only give it a chance,
there is hope. Let us give peace a chance.
The President: I thank the representative of Djibouti
for the kind words he addressed to me and to my
predecessor.
(spoke in French)
The next speaker is the representative of Lebanon.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
31
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
Mr. Moubarak (Lebanon) (interpretation from
Arabic): I wish on behalf of my delegation to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of September. I wish also
to pay tribute to the efforts of your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Germany, as President of the
Council last month.
We wish to express our appreciation of the fact that
members of the Security Council promptly consented to
hold this meeting to consider the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories. The events of recent days, which
have left scores of dead and wounded, undoubtedly
constitute a grave turning point in the situation in the
region. We were not surprised by this Israeli escalation: on
several occasions we have warned that the leaders of Israel
are not interested in peace, that their expansionist aims in
various guises — such as security — stand above all other
Israeli interests. They wish to impose new principles
incompatible with the peace process that began in Madrid.
We had hoped, during the holding of the Madrid
Conference in 1991 and the development of the principles
and foundations of the peace process, to see a new era in
our region in which a just, lasting and comprehensive peace
would prevail. The Arab parties took part in this process in
good faith, but Israel’s relentless colonialist aims and its
policy of expansion and seizure of territories have dashed
these hopes. Indeed, the new Israeli Government dealt a
nearly fatal blow to these hopes when it expressly declared
that it was reneging on the commitments underlying the
peace process, resumed the settlement process, refused to
resume peaceful negotiations that had continued despite all
obstacles, and took measures to annex East Jerusalem. The
opening of the tunnel under the Al-Aqsa Mosque threatens
not only the security of the Mosque itself, but also
international peace and security in the region and in the
world.
We have repeated on several occasions that the Holy
City of Jerusalem is crucial to the peace and security of the
region because of its religious, emotional and historical
significance and its importance to Palestinians, Arabs,
Muslims and Christians of all ages throughout the world.
Strengthened by this conviction, we would like to state the
following.
First, we are in full solidarity with the Palestinian
people. What is happening today confirms once again that
this people rejects occupation, no matter the occupation
force.
Secondly, the current problem is not a chance
development; it is the result of Israeli policies and the
Israeli mentality. Consequently, in order to face these
problems, we must adopt a position in the international
community, as represented by this Council, clearly
reaffirming to Israeli leaders that we reject attempts to
annex East Jerusalem as well as colonization or settlement
activities in other occupied Arab territories. In asking for
this, we are in fact serving future peace in the region:
Showing indulgence to the Israel leaders could result in
violence against Israelis and Arabs alike. Our position is
in accordance with Security Council and all international
resolutions, as well as with the principles of international
law, which remains the very basis of the civilized world
today.
We believe that the Council is duty-bound to act to
ensure the implementation of the provisions of the Charter
and resolutions it has adopted in the past, in accordance
with one standard and as it has done in other areas of the
world. Resolutions 242 (1967), 267 (1969), 271 (1969),
298 (1971) and 476 (1980) have all declared null and
void Israel’s administrative and legislative measures and
its attempts to annex Jerusalem.
Thirdly, the pretext of security put forward by
Israelis to justify their settlement and expansionist
measures, which underlay the events that just took place,
has proven misguided, since those steps have led to an
escalation of violence and a worsening of tensions. What
peace can exist under continued occupation? Faits
accomplis imposed by force are not viable and are
doomed to failure. True peace is at hand if we act on the
bases we all agreed upon. These bases, set out together in
Madrid — first and foremost the exchange of “land for
peace” and the implementation of international
legitimacy — reaffirm the need for Israel to return Arab
occupied territories, including Jerusalem and the Golan up
to the line of June 1967, pursuant to resolution 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), and for it to withdraw beyond
Lebanon’s internationally recognized borders, pursuant to
resolution 425 (1978).
We in Lebanon reaffirm that we shall never agree to
any proposal, new or old, that threatens our national
policy. Lebanon will continue to reject any attempts to
exclude other Arabs, especially Syria. Meaningless
slogans calling for peace and meetings should not allow
Israel to continue its settlement policies without the
criticism of international public opinion.
32
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
Fourthly, we call on both States that sponsored the
Middle East peace process to play their roles, not only in
calming things down in the occupied Palestinian territories
and convincing Israel to close the tunnel, but also in
revitalizing the peace process and resuming it at the point
at which it stopped and in accordance with the Madrid
principles and the principle of ”land for peace“, pursuant to
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and
425 (1978).
What is happening in the Palestinian occupied
territories is only one link in a large chain of continued
violence in our region. It is not enough to calm spirits.
Dozens of civilians were killed in southern Lebanon during
Israeli bombings aimed against one of the United Nations
posts and which caused the death of hundreds of people.
Violence is continuing every day in southern Lebanon
because of Israeli occupation and dozens of people are
being killed in Palestine today. We urge the sponsors of the
peace process to pursue it in accordance with the principles
approved in Madrid with a view to achieving a just, global
and lasting peace in the region.
Fifthly, the Security Council must shoulder its
responsibility to preserve peace in the region. We are
asking for the Council to adopt a resolution and to follow
up on its implementation. If this Council does not adopt
such a resolution, it will be forced to meet again very soon
because the violence will continue.
We are asking for a resolution that clearly expresses
the international community’s condemnation and opposition
to Israeli policy, to the annexation of Al-Quds and to the
expansion of settlements. This resolution should require
Israel to comply with the international rule of law.
We should also adopt a clear-cut position that reflects
the determination of the international community to
continue with the peace process on the basis of the Madrid
principles, especially the principle of land for peace.
The Security Council is called upon to shoulder its
historic responsibilities because time is short and is not
working in favour of peace. What is happening in the
region does not threaten only the people of the region. We
would also like to urge through the Council, all the parties
involved to act in a serious-minded manner and to take
steps to convince Israel to return to the Madrid principles.
The President (interpretation from French): The next
speaker is the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian people, Mr. Ka
to whom the Council has extended an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure. I invite him
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Ka, Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People:
(interpretation from French): Allow me at the outset to
convey to you, Sir, in my capacity as the Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, my warm congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of September. I should also like to express my
gratitude to the members of the Security Council for
having been kind enough to authorize me to speak at this
meeting, and to share with them the Committee’s
appreciation for the speed with which they acceded to the
request of the Arab Group to hold an emergency meeting
devoted essentially to the flare-up of tensions in the land
of Palestine.
Between 1993 and September 1995, the international
community welcomed with joy and relief the signing of
several historic agreements between President Arafat and
the late Prime Minister of Israel, Yitzak Rabin. Those
agreements crowned years of negotiations that were
intended to reach a just and lasting solution to the
question of Palestine and — over and above the question
of Palestine — to end the painful conflict that has raged
in the Middle East for several decades.
This same international community had hailed with
optimism the effective implementation in the field of the
practical arrangements of the different accords and
agreements calling for the withdrawal of Israel from Gaza
and Jericho, the redeployment of Israeli forces and the
establishment of the Palestinian national authority.
Dreams began to become reality with the first free
and democratic elections held on Palestinian land. This
hope for peace finally regained between Israel and its
Arab neighbours, was further nourished by the process of
dialogue that had also begun between Israel and Syria and
which left us hope for a peaceful political settlement to
the question of the occupied Arab Golan.
All of us had hoped that this much-desired peace
process was finally established, and that the return to the
logic of war, hatred and frustration of all kinds had been
banished forever. The tragic events taking place before
our eyes today in the occupied Arab territories once again
highlight the precariousness of the situation in the Middle
33
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
East and just how dangerous Israeli practices are for the
present peace process.
The decision recently taken by the Israeli Government
to open a tunnel in the Old City of Jerusalem — the holiest
of sites — following the sealing of Palestinian territory,
both within Palestine and in its relations with the exterior,
for several months; the confiscation of Arab lands to build
settlements or roads around areas inhabited by Palestinians;
and the measures of intimidation taken against the Arab
civilian population show that Israel wishes to stifle the
occupied territories economically and to deny the
Palestinian people their right to exercise their legitimate
rights to self-determination and to establish an independent
state, in keeping with international legality and the relevant
resolutions adopted by the United Nations Security Council.
It is therefore important for the international
community to exert pressure and take the measures
necessary so that the inhumane sealing off of the territories
and the restrictions on the movements of Palestinians
imposed by the occupying authorities are lifted; that the
redeployment of Israeli troops from the city of Hebron on
the West Bank should take place as called for in the interim
peace accords signed by the former Israeli Government;
that construction and expansion of settlements should cease;
that the tunnel be closed once and for all; and that, finally,
the protagonists — in order not to prove right the enemies
of peace — resume the peace process that has been under
way since 1993.
Given the Israeli attitude since June 1996, the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People continues to be very much concerned, by
the situation created by Israel, on behalf of its own security
and to the detriment of an entire people whose legitimate
aspiration is to live in peace on the soil of its homeland.
The Palestinian national authorities have clearly shown
their aspirations to live in peace, in dignity and justice with
their neighbours by courageously embarking upon peace
negotiations with the Israeli party since 1991, and by
taking since then widely-known political measures. It is
through this inevitable coexistence that, in the final
analysis, the Middle East — a crossroads of history and of
the world — will become a region of opportunities, an area
of economic growth and political stability.
The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People remains convinced that
many Israelis are still firmly committed to the peace
process and condemn the delaying measures of their
Government, which would hold back the march of
history.
Strengthened by this conviction and in my capacity
as the Chairman of the Committee on Palestine, I would
like to take the opportunity of this meeting to make an
urgent appeal to the Israeli authorities to ask them to
reconsider their present policy of scorn and confrontation,
and to commit themselves resolutely, as the international
community has constantly called for, to recreate the
conditions for a climate of confidence and hope by
putting the peace process back on the right track — that
of a peace that is profitable to both the Palestinian and
Israeli peoples.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People for the very
kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is His Excellency Mr. Engin
Ansay, Permanent Observer of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, to whom the Council has extended an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure. I now invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Ansay (Organization of the Islamic
Conference): I should like to extend to you, Sir, my
warmest congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
I should also like to take this opportunity to thank
your predecessor, Ambassador Eitel, the Permanent
Representative of Germany, for his able performance in
steering the work of the Council during the month of
August.
On behalf of the Secretary-General of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), I thank
you for calling upon me to address the Council on the
situation in the occupied Arab territories.
At the outset, let me say that I wish I were speaking
under better — instead of what have become bitter —
circumstances. For we in the OIC had joined forces with
the international community in supporting the peace
process in the Middle East in full measure, despite some
of the disadvantageous elements that the relevant
agreements carried affecting Palestinian interests. We
were even beginning to feel hopeful about the future of
peace in the area because of the few achievements that
34
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
had already emerged from the early stages of the
implementation of the Oslo accords, and we were prepared
to continue to lend our full support towards the attainment
of the agreed goals and objectives of the peace agreements.
Regrettably, our hopes, together with those of the
well-wishers in the international community, are shattered
by the unfortunate turn of events in Palestine, the
responsibility for which must lie with Israel and Israel
alone. For what has brought about the turmoil is the sum of
a series of violations of various elements of the peace
agreements by Israel and blatant acts of aggression by the
Israeli authorities against the Palestinian people, the results
of which we are witnessing today: hundreds of dead and
seriously wounded Palestinians and Israelis. Unless the
Israeli violations are checked immediately, the situation
threatens to get out of control and to assume a much
greater dimension than we have witnessed so far, thereby
rendering irreparable damage to the peace process.
The unfortunate state of affairs emerges from the
hesitation that the new Israeli Government is openly
showing about the principles and foundations of the peace
process, about the principle of “land for peace” and about
honouring the commitments that the country and its people
have made solemnly, in black and white, under the peace
agreements. Thus, instead of ushering in an era of peace,
tranquillity and economic and social development, what the
new Government of Israel is bringing in, with impunity, is
an era of insecurity and restlessness coupled with economic
and social chaos.
If not this, then what else can be expected from such
troublesome activities as the inexplicable delay of as long
as six months in the redeployment of the Israeli army in
Hebron; the unilateral suspension of negotiations; the
demolition of Palestinian homes; the continuing blockade
imposed upon the City of Al-Quds al-Sharif and other
Palestinian territories; the attempts to alter the demographic
set-up of Jerusalem, thereby replacing the Arab-Islamic
identity of the Holy City with the artificial judaization of
the place; the authorization to Jews to invade the Islamic
precincts of the Holy Al-Aqsa Mosque, which is the third
holiest site for Muslims after Mecca and Medina; the
restrictions placed on the functioning of the Palestinian
institutions; and now the latest: the opening of an entrance
to the tunnel extending under the western wall of the Al-
Aqsa Mosque in occupied East Jerusalem, thereby
constituting a serious threat to the security of this important
shrine.
In order for the peace process to be allowed to work,
it is imperative for all sides to create a climate of
confidence and to show, by their actions, their resolve to
pursue the implementation of the accords as a whole,
without being selective. The Palestinians, despite the
obstacles being placed in their way, are doing all they can
to abide by the provisions of the peace agreements. It is
now up to Israel to do likewise if it genuinely seeks and
deserves peace.
Here, a well-known saying comes to mind: “If a
nation wants to keep another nation in the ditch, it can
only do so by staying in the ditch with it.” Today, nobody
needs to be reminded of this more than the present
Government of Israel, and our sincere message to them is
the following: If you want to breathe the air of peace,
tranquillity and a secure environment, then change your
attitude and ways towards the peace process and the
Palestinian people, and you too will very soon be out of
the ditch.
In the spirit of our solidarity with the peace process
in the Middle East, we condemn the continuing atrocities
that are being inflicted by the Israeli authorities on the
Palestinian institutions and people in flagrant disregard of
the peace agreements and human rights. In particular, we
condemn the latest act of the opening of an entrance to
the tunnel under the esplanade of the Holy Al-Aqsa
Mosque and demand its immediate closure by the
Government of Israel.
We also strongly urge that, while encouraging
bilateral discussions between the Palestinian authorities
and the Government of Israel aimed at defusing the
present explosive situation brought about by Israel in
Palestine, the Security Council resume its responsibilities
for the maintenance of peace and security in Palestine,
including in the first instance measures to close the tunnel
extending under the western wall of the Holy Al-Aqsa
Mosque.
The Palestinian people, at this crucial period in their
history, expect and deserve more support from the
international community. We therefore appeal to all
Member States actively to pursue their support for that
people and their national authority so as to give them the
means to overcome the ordeal through which they are
going, to establish firmly their national institutions and to
continue to take an active part in the peace process, to
which they remain deeply committed.
35
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
We in the OIC believe in speeding up the peace
process and aim at putting it back on track with a view to
establishing a just and comprehensive peace in the region
and restoring the inalienable national rights of the
Palestinian people, including their right to return, their right
to self-determination and their right to build their own
independent State on their national soil with Al-Quds al-
Sharif as its capital, as well as a complete and speedy
Israeli withdrawal from the occupied Syrian Golan and
occupied Lebanese territories.
In conclusion, I should like to assure the Council that
as soon as the necessary measures to restore peace and
security in the area have been undertaken, improving the
environment for the resumption of the peace process, the
OIC and its 53 member States, representing the very serious
concerns of more than one billion Muslims all over the
world, will also reinforce their wholehearted support of the
peace process in fulfilment of their collective desire to see
peace and tranquillity return to the area.
The President: I thank Mr. Ansay for his kind words
addressed to me.
(spoke in French)
The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Cuba. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Rodriguez Parilla (Cuba) (interpretation from
Spanish): My delegation would like to extend to you, Sir,
its warmest congratulations and to wish you every success
in your term as President of the Security Council. We
should also like to express our gratitude to Ambassador
Tono Eitel on his brilliant performance.
Barely 100 days after the elections in Israel, that
country has committed another flagrant violation of its
obligations under international law, international
humanitarian law and the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council. The climate of
aggression and hostility against the Arab peoples and the
Palestinian people that has marked the last few months has
led to that Government’s recent grave actions: opening the
entrance to a tunnel located in the Western Wall of the Al-
Aqsa Mosque in occupied East Jerusalem and then
launching an Israeli army attack against Palestinian civilians
who were peacefully demonstrating against that act. This
resulted in hundreds of dead and wounded.
Once again the facts have made it clear that Israel is
continuing to follow an aggressive and dangerous policy
against the people of Palestine and the Arab people. This
represents a constant and unacceptable threat to the entire
Middle East peace process and constitutes gross non-
compliance with the agreements concluded between the
Palestine Liberation Organization and the Government of
Israel.
The international community has followed these
events with deep concern, and it is regrettable that the
many appeals for the continuation and development of the
peace process continue to be ignored.
The Security Council has repeatedly affirmed the
applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 to
all the territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including
Jerusalem. It has also repeatedly called upon the
occupying Power to abide by its provisions.
On numerous occasions the Security Council has
also asked Israel to reverse or halt any action aimed at
changing the status of Jerusalem. Once again the Security
Council’s decisions have been ignored, and the destiny of
the Palestinian people and of the whole peace process in
the Middle East, including all its consequences for the
Arab peoples, are at stake.
How can this happen? Are the Security Council’s
respectability, legal weight and capacity for action not
enough? Is it that its broad competences, including those
that it sometimes assumes excessively, do not apply when
the human rights, well-being and future of the Palestinian
people and the Arab peoples are at stake? Is it that
resolutions on Palestine do not have the same validity or
standing as others adopted by the Council? In the Middle
East we see most clearly the stark contrast between, on
the one hand, the unforgivable omissions, silences and
inexplicable failure to act and, on the other, the arbitrary
excesses of the Security Council.
Today the Security Council is again face to face
with reality because of the inconsistency of its earlier
actions and its wrong messages, the consequences of
which we warned against when dealing with other issues,
including the confiscation of Palestinian lands, aggression
against Lebanon and, more recently, Iraq.
Impunity is the root cause of the current events, and
those that have taken place in the past in that region. The
history of conflicts in the Middle East is the history of
impunity. Let us hope that the Security Council will find
36
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
a way to shed its impotence and reaffirm some of the
indications of some weeks ago that it can act independently.
Is there any need to state that it is the double standard
of United States policy that protects such acts and prevents
the solution of the problem as a whole? Is it necessary to
show that the veto, or even the threat of a veto, is at the
heart of the Council’s impotence? What has become of the
fiery rhetoric against terrorism?
Once more, it is clear that a profound and democratic
reform of the Security Council is necessary. Once again,
the General Assembly must, without delay, use its full
weight as the universal, pre-eminent and sovereign organ of
the United Nations.
Cuba adds its voice to the international community’s
denunciation of this new Israeli aggression against the
Palestinian people and occupied Jerusalem. Cuba joins in
the vigorous condemnation of the Group of Arab States
against the actions of the Israeli occupation forces. Cuba
rejects the opening of the tunnel entrance in occupied East
Jerusalem, or any use of the tunnel that would jeopardize
any sacred temples or archaeological sites that are the
heritage of all mankind.
Cuba reaffirms the right of the Palestinian people to
have an independent State with Jerusalem as its capital and
rejects the measures designed to change the legal status and
demographic composition of the Holy City.
Cuba demands the return of all Arab territories
occupied by Israel, including the West Bank, the Gaza
Strip, the Golan Heights and occupied southern Lebanon.
Cuba demands respect for the territorial integrity,
sovereignty and the internationally recognized frontiers of
the States of the region.
Cuba hopes that there will be no delay, that we will
not hide the need for action behind long debates, and that
the Security Council will express itself with the necessary
severity by condemning the Israeli actions and will assume
its responsibilities for maintaining international peace and
security.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Cuba for the kind words he addressed
to me.
(spoke in English)
The next speaker is the representative of India. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Shah (India): Allow me first of all, Sir, to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month.
The television screen has once again brought into
our homes heart-rending scenes of death and destruction.
We thought that such scenes from the West Bank, Gaza
and Jerusalem had been firmly put behind us. We grieve
for those who have been killed and pray for the recovery
of those who have been injured. This loss of life, which
should never have occurred, has been caused by the
actions of the Israeli authorities in opening a tunnel
beneath the Temple Mount in East Jerusalem.
The avoidable loss of innocent lives and the large-
scale injuries following the violent clashes have horrified
us. The current situation underlines the need for
immediate and effective measures to end the violence and
create a climate which will allow for purposeful
negotiations based on recognition of the underlying causes
of the clashes.
The tragic developments in the West Bank and Gaza
serve to emphasize the moral, legal and humanitarian
imperatives of the Middle East peace process and the
necessity of building further on the agreements and
understandings, on the basis of the principles and time
schedules already agreed upon. At the same time, no
unilateral steps should be taken that are not in conformity
with the interim agreements and understandings.
India’s bond of friendship with the Palestinian
people is firm and abiding. Our historic contacts cover
almost every aspect of human life and endeavour. This
tradition has been renewed and strengthened in modern
times. India continues to believe that the question of
Palestine remains at the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
In this context, India has extended unqualified support to
the Middle East peace process on the basis of Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425
(1978)
Following the recent political changes in the Middle
East, India had been encouraged by the reiteration by all
parties of their continued commitment to the Middle East
peace process based on the framework established by the
Madrid Peace Conference. At the same time, we are
concerned that these reaffirmations do not appear to have
37
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
manifested themselves in commensurate progress in the
peace process.
Less than 48 hours ago, the Non-Aligned Foreign
Ministers expressed their concern at the recent Israeli action
of opening the tunnel beneath the Temple Mount and called
for its immediate reversal. I would like to underline the
urgent need for this step to be undertaken, even now, to
ensure that a process of reconciliation can be initiated
without any delay.
The international community has wholeheartedly
supported the peace process in the Middle East. Successes
that have been achieved so far have not been easy in
coming and it would be tragic if these successes were
allowed to be whittled away. The international community
can provide the necessary support, but it is for the parties
to ensure that the impetus that was generated during the
recent past is sustained. India would urge all parties to
intensify their efforts towards realizing the mutually agreed
objectives of the Middle East peace process, keeping in
view that lasting peace and stability in the Middle East
require the complete solution of the Palestinian question.
The President: I thank the representative of India for
the kind words he addressed to me.
(spoke in French)
The next speaker is the representative of Costa Rica.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Berrocal Soto (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Spanish): I congratulate you, Mr. President, most
particularly on your proper and skilful leadership of this
debate and on your immediate convening of this meeting of
the Security Council to consider the delicate situation in the
Middle East.
For several years now, Costa Rica has provided its full
support to the peace process in the Middle East, and we
welcomed with particular pleasure the peace agreements
signed in Oslo by Israel and the Palestinian Authority,
which demonstrated the important regional and international
consensus in favour of the pacification of this very troubled
part of the world. The path marked out in Oslo is the path
of peace. This is why Costa Rica was deeply disturbed to
learn of the regrettable and reprehensible events in the city
of Jerusalem and in Ramallah, Nablus, Bethlehem and
Gaza. In this context, Costa Rica feels great sorrow over
the violent events that have taken place and expresses its
profound concern over these events, which most assuredly
do not contribute to the appropriate climate of confidence
for full implementation of the important commitments
taken on in Oslo.
Costa Rica urges and encourages all the parties
concerned — particularly the Government of Israel and
the Palestinian national authority — to make every effort,
as soon as possible, to return to the negotiating process
on the implementation of the peace agreements. This
should include the resumption of talks between the two
parties. We also ask them to take every possible measure
to protect and ensure the safety and security of the
inhabitants of the affected areas.
In conclusion, Costa Rica expresses its condolences
for the victims of these events and its full solidarity with
their families. We also wish to reiterate the fundamental
principle that holy places must be respected.
The President (interpretation from French): I
thank the representative of Costa Rica for the kind words
he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Brazil. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Amorim (Brazil): I want to extend my warmest
congratulations, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council. I also wish to pay tribute to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Germany.
It is with great concern and apprehension that we
witness the latest crisis which threatens the peace process
in the Middle East. A high number of casualties once
again envelops the region in tragedy and mourning.
Regrettably, the gradual erosion of a carefully and
laboriously designed peace process jeopardizes efforts
which have taken years to materialize.
On several occasions, the Brazilian Government has
expressed support of this process, which was being
rightfully regarded as a symbol of a new era of
understanding with far-reaching implications for the future
of the region and an example for the world. It is most
unfortunate that the loss of momentum in the peace
process in the Middle East during the past few months
has inexorably reignited hostility and resentment, leading
to the extremely serious events that are now taking place.
Only through the renewal of mutual trust among the
parties, on the basis of strict compliance with agreements
38
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-first year 27 September 1996
already reached, will it be possible to avoid the spreading
of further violence throughout the bereaved region.
As a country where representatives of the most varied
ethnic and religious backgrounds coexist in harmony,
Brazil extends its solidarity to the families of the victims
and reiterates its call for a prompt resumption of sustained
dialogue in observance of existing commitments, so as to
promote confidence among the parties and secure a
peaceful environment for all in the region.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Brazil for the kind words he
addressed to me.
There are no further speakers. I intend to suspend
the meeting now.
39

United Nations S/PV.3698 (Resumption 2)
96-86321 (E) This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fifty-first Year
3698th Meeting
Saturday, 28 September 1996, 9.35 p.m.
New York
President: Mr. Cabral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Guinea-Bissau)
Members: Botswana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Legwaila
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Somavía
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Qin Huasun
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Elaraby
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dejammet
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Eitel
Honduras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Martínez Blanco
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wisnumurti
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fulci
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Matuszewski
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Park
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fedotov
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Sir John Weston
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Albright
Agenda
The situation in the occupied Arab territories
Letter dated 26 September 1996 from the Permanent Representative of Saudi Arabia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/1996/790)
Letter dated 26 September 1996 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/1996/792)
Security Council 3698th meeting (Resumption 2)
Fifty-first year 28 September 1996
The meeting was suspended at 9.40 p.m., 27
September 1996, and resumed at 9.35 p.m., 28
September 1996.
The President (interpretation from French): Members
of the Council have before them document S/1996/803,
which contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the
course of the Security Council’s prior consultations.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless
I hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution
contained in document S/1996/803 to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Botswana, Chile, China, Egypt, France, Germany,
Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy, Poland,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Against:
None
Abstaining:
United States of America
The President (interpretation from French): The
result of the voting is as follows: 14 in favour, none
against and one abstention. The draft resolution has been
adopted as resolution 1073 (1996).
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 9:40 p.m.
2
