United Nations S/PV.3842
97-86788 (E) This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fifty-second Year
3842nd Meeting
Thursday, 18 December 1997, 3 p.m.
New York
President: Mr. Naranjo Villalobos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Costa Rica)
Members: Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Somavía
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Qin Huasun
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Elaraby
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dejammet
Guinea-Bissau . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Cabral
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Owada
Kenya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mahugu
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Matuszewski
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Monteiro
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Park
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dahlgren
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Sir John Weston
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Rosenstock
Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/1997/966)
Security Council 3842nd meeting
Fifty-second year 18 December 1997
The meeting was called to order at 3.25 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(S/1997/966)
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canada,
Croatia, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Norway, Pakistan, Slovenia, Turkey and Ukraine, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sacirbey
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the Council
table; Mr. Fowler (Canada), Mr. Šimonovic´ (Croatia),
Mr. Eitel (Germany), Mr. Erdös (Hungary), Mr. Fulci
(Italy), Mr. Wolzfeld (Luxembourg), Mr. Hasmy
(Malaysia), Mr. Biørn Lian (Norway), Mr. Kamal
(Pakistan), Mr. Türk (Slovenia), Mr. Çelem (Turkey)
and Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine) took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH), document S/1997/966.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1997/989, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by France, Germany, Italy, Japan,
Portugal, the Russian Federation, Sweden, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/1997/975, which contains the
text of a letter dated 12 December 1997 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council, transmitting a letter dated 10 December
1997 from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization addressed to the Secretary-General,
enclosing the eleventh monthly report on Stabilization
Force operations.
Members of the Council have received photocopies
of a letter dated 16 December 1997 from the Permanent
Representative of Germany to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting the
Conclusion of the Peace Implementation Conference on
Bosnia and Herzegovina, held in Bonn on 9 and 10
December 1997, which will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/1997/979.
Mr. Somavía (Chile)(interpretation from Spanish):
Mr. President, allow me to express the great satisfaction
I feel at seeing you, Mr. Fernando Naranjo Villalobos,
presiding over the Security Council on behalf of your
country, Costa Rica. Chile being a friend of Costa Rica,
it is a great pleasure for me to sit with you at this table.
As we begin the third year of the implementation of
the Dayton Peace Agreement, we can see that significant
progress has been made. The latest reports of the High
Representative, like those of the Secretary-General,
provide information about the advances achieved without
overlooking the numerous and pressing challenges we still
face, primarily in the sphere of the civilian aspects of the
Agreement.
Chile is completing a two-year period as an elected
member of the Security Council. During this time, we
have emphasized the Council's humanitarian
responsibilities. We have emphasized the necessity of
directing sanctions against political and military leaders,
not against innocent people, and of ensuring respect for
humanitarian organizations and workers and facilitating
their access to this body. We have also stressed the need
to respect international humanitarian law and to seek truth
and justice when they are violated.
Since the Dayton Peace Agreement, the analysis of
the issue in the Council has focused primarily on the
normative plane, as concerns the implementation of the
2
Security Council 3842nd meeting
Fifty-second year 18 December 1997
Peace Agreement and its annexes. We have evaluated the
application of rules. From that perspective, the focus has
been the unity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, with its two
Entities and its three peoples.
On this occasion, I should like once again to bring to
this table a human perspective, a sensitivity to what is
happening to people. We would like to focus on another
plane: the perspective of the men and women who live
behind that collection of rules that we refer to as
international agreements — those who are in the end the
objects of rules that sometimes seem to them abstract and
impersonal.
I should like to focus my statement on the question
that is in the minds of many people: what is going to
happen in Bosnia and Herzegovina on the day when the
troops of North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
withdraw? Today there are more than 35,000 such troops.
To what extent is the peace process self-sustaining?
How deeply has the Peace Agreement penetrated into
the hearts of the men and women of Bosnia and
Herzegovina? How deeply rooted is the ideal of
reconciliation, which is mentioned in the preamble of the
Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina itself? In short, can
there truly be reconciliation if peace depends on an
international military presence?
I raise these questions because in the Security Council
we are not accustomed to concerning ourselves greatly with
the personal dimensions of the reconciliation process. We
all know that the peace declared in the documents is not the
same thing as peace in people's hearts. We are know that
even the most successful implementation of political
understandings that bring an end to a conflict does not erase
the mistrust, doubts and resentment over atrocities
committed during the fighting.
In our judgment, a true peace cannot be based only on
a military presence and the mere implementation of
political and legal instruments. The emphasis must be on
achieving reconciliation, which is a process and the result
of an internal transformation. Only the moral force of
reconciliation will bring peace to the hearts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Unfortunately, the traditional instruments of diplomacy
are inadequate to the task of tackling this problem. That is
perhaps why we do not speak very much about this subject
in the Security Council. However, I believe that the United
Nations as a whole — not just the Security Council —
must be capable of helping with specific programmes and
projects to stimulate and promote national reconciliation
in this type of conflict.
In this regard, civil society and the local authorities
may have some lessons to teach national Governments.
There have been many experiences in many countries of
conflict resolution at the local level between people on a
given street, in a given community, in a given workplace,
to overcome racial, religious, gender or other kinds of
tensions. These experiences are far from the diplomatic
sphere, but they may be closer to the real life of the
people, in this case of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I should like to take this opportunity to officially
request the Secretary-General to place the subject of
reconciliation in conflict situations on the agenda of the
forthcoming meeting of the Administrative Committee on
Coordination of the United Nations organs, over which he
presides. The idea would be to advance an integrated
treatment of this subject system-wide and to bring about
proposals for actions by the corresponding
intergovernmental organs.
In speaking of national reconciliation, we are obliged
to call for a significant degree of responsibility on the
part of political and military leaders.
When Serbians, Bosnians and Croatians lived
peacefully on the same streets, in the same
neighbourhoods, in the same cities, what need was there
to poison their lives with messages of hatred and
confrontation as was done? Naturally there were historical
problems, memories of past conflicts, and certainly
discrimination in the here and now. No one denies the
problems that existed.
But what leader in his right mind can believe that
future peace and stability can be based on killing innocent
civilians, the use of rape as a tool of war, massive
expulsions of people and total disregard for human rights?
We must recognize that it is the leaders who have,
to a great extent, brought the peoples of these three
countries of the former Yugoslavia into conflict, and these
leaders constitute — not always, but very often — an
obstacle to reconciliation. One aspect of this, of course,
is that we cannot forget those leaders who are responsible
for war crimes and whose individual responsibility cannot
be confused with that of the people to which they belong.
3
Security Council 3842nd meeting
Fifty-second year 18 December 1997
It is extremely difficult to hope to see love and mutual
understanding in a society that has gone through the
fratricidal struggle that Bosnia and Herzegovina has
experienced. But such change can happen, and it must
come from the power of the heart, from men and women
who see the fulfilment of the peace process as a search for
a higher goal for them as human beings.
Throughout our time in the Security Council, Chile
has sought to untangle the ethical dimension present in each
conflict as a way of contributing to the conflict's solution.
Despite the obstacles, and we realize how great they are,
we must have faith that ethical values can bring about
important changes. Individuals have the capacity to raise
themselves above their society's conditioning factors and to
transform the lives of their communities. In individual
change and personal action lies the origin of the true
transformation of a society.
However, just as genuine forgiveness is necessary to
reconciliation, the latter cannot be achieved in a society
where justice is not practised. Reconciliation is not and
cannot be a synonym for forgetting. I come from a country
which, in other circumstances, had to meet the difficult
challenge of reconciliation. Today we are beginning in my
society to enjoy the fruits of that effort, having travelled a
road fraught with difficulties and many tragedies.
The United Nations and the Security Council can do
more to encourage those people in Bosnian civil society, in
community affairs, in the schools and in the workplaces
who have the inner strength to break the bonds of the
present and are prepared to assume the costs involved in
the search for reconciliation.
We all know that those who dare to forsake the
“official culture” always run risks in any society. That is
even more difficult, however, in a society in conflict, like
that of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Intimidating demagogy is
unleashed against them, because those who believe in
violence as a source of power deeply fear those who dare
to act as sane and sensible human beings, rejecting violence
and hatred in their own lives. An example of this are the
media — radio, television and newspapers — in which we
still see the desire to shape public opinion by discounting
one's opponents and perpetuating the spirit of conflict.
I have focused on only one aspect of the conflict in
Bosnia and Herzegovina because many of us are convinced
that that region is symbolic in the context of this issue and
that, if the challenge of national reconciliation is met with
success, it will impart very important lessons to other
peoples in other situations brought to this Council's
attention. We trust that this will prove possible.
I wish to conclude my statement by referring to the
ideal of change embodied by one of the greatest figures
ever produced by the United Nations: Dag Hammarskjöld,
who gave his life for the sake of an ideal of change. It is
incumbent on us today to follow his legacy: his faith in
political, economic and social change through conviction
and the transforming power of the spirit, and not only as
an ethical dimension of the way he lived life. As he told
us in his extraordinary book Markings, in our times the
road to sainthood necessarily leads through the world of
action.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of Chile for his kind words addressed
to me.
Mr. Owada (Japan): Before I address the item
before the Security Council this afternoon, permit me to
offer my heartfelt welcome and deep respect to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Costa Rica, Mr. Fernando
Naranjo Villalobos. In the name of the delegation of
Japan, and also as a personal friend of yours, Sir, I wish
to say how happy I am to see you preside over us in the
chair of the presidency of this Council today.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is about to enter the third
year of the implementation of the Dayton/Paris Peace
Agreement and the last phase of the consolidation period.
During the past two years, the United Nations presence in
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been doing an excellent job
in promoting the peace process. I would like especially to
stress the significant role played by the International
Police Task Force (IPTF). The basic tasks of the IPTF,
such as monitoring the activities of the local police
forces, restructuring and training them, promoting
freedom of movement and investigating human rights
abuse cases, are essential to the building of a multiethnic,
multicultural and democratic society in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. My delegation heartily applauds the efforts
and dedication of all the unarmed men and women who
are serving with the IPTF under very difficult, and quite
frequently dangerous, circumstances in post-war Bosnia.
Indeed, the role of the IPTF is a key factor in the
implementation of the civilian aspects of the Peace
Agreement. My delegation therefore fully supports the
draft resolution which is currently under consideration by
the Security Council and which purports to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
4
Security Council 3842nd meeting
Fifty-second year 18 December 1997
Herzegovina, including the IPTF. In this conjunction, my
delegation would like to stress the continued importance of
the security arrangements currently provided by the
multinational Stabilization Force for the activities of the
IPTF.
Taking this opportunity, I should like to mention that
the Government of Japan welcomes the announcement
made today by President Clinton of the United States that
the United States will in principle take part in an
international military presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina
beyond June 1998.
I must emphasize that the United Nations presence is
making important contributions in other areas as well, such
as human rights monitoring, demining and assisting the
smooth conduct of elections. And it is difficult to find
words that can adequately express the appreciation we have
for the valuable work of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in promoting the
return of refugees and displaced persons. The Government
of Japan fully supports the Open City initiative set out by
the UNHCR.
Japan has made significant contributions to the peace
process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Within this year alone,
Japan has pledged over $190 million in the fields of
economic reconstruction, humanitarian and refugee
assistance, elections and other peace implementation
activities. It also dispatched a substantial number of
supervisors and monitors to the municipal elections held
under the supervision of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe in September this year and has also
provided long-term advisers to the High Representative.
Japan is doing so in the conviction that genuine peace and
reconciliation in Bosnia should certainly be achievable and
that the Peace Agreement should provide the only path
towards that end.
Regrettably, however, we cannot but recognize that
progress in the implementation of the Peace Agreement,
especially in its civilian aspects, has not kept pace with the
expectations of the international community. Bosnia and
Herzegovina is still without even a common flag, a
common symbol, a common currency and a common
passport. In this regard, the international community should
not tolerate an attempt by any of the parties to dominate the
central authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina or to
undermine the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
country. Japan urges all the parties of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to make maximum efforts to fulfil the
obligations set out in the conclusions of the Peace
Implementation Conference held in Bonn on 9 and 10 of
this month so that the peace process may be substantially
expedited.
Japan is the host country of the Winter Olympic
Games in February next year. The Government and
people of Japan sincerely hope that a unified Bosnian
team, comprising athletes from both entities and
representing all the ethnic groups, will come to Nagano
under a common flag and a common anthem to receive
the wholehearted welcome of the international
community. We call upon the parties to make every effort
to achieve this goal and to revive the spirit of harmony
that prevailed at the Winter Olympic Games in Sarajevo
in 1984.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of Japan for his kind words addressed
to me.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Costa Rica.
Allow me to express my country's satisfaction upon
exercising the presidency of this principal organ of the
United Nations. This constitutes and honour and a great
responsibility for Costa Rica.
Last 14 December marked the second anniversary of
the signing of the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Strict compliance with
that Agreement has been the essential basis for the
reconstruction and pacification of Bosnia. That Agreement
is the only possible way to bring about true and just
peace for all the inhabitants. The fratricidal war and
indiscriminate genocide that afflicted that nation have
been overcome thanks to cooperation and the
implementation of the Agreement, making it possible to
restore peace, separate the combatants and protect
innocent civilians from criminal attacks motivated by
fanatical nationalism. For this reason, the commemoration
of this second anniversary is a propitious time for the
Security Council to take stock of the present situation in
the light of the implementation process of the peace
agreements and to identify those priority areas of the
implementation on which the national parties and the
international community should focus their attention.
My delegation is pleased to recognize the progress
achieved on the road to peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We are pleased to see the growing climate of safety,
which constitutes an indispensable prerequisite for
5
Security Council 3842nd meeting
Fifty-second year 18 December 1997
reconciliation. Likewise, we are gratified at the growing
climate of tolerance, democracy, freedom and economic
progress, which are indispensable for the country's
reconstruction. We would especially like to emphasize the
advances made in recent months with regard to national
public instruments in connection with currency, travel
documents and diplomatic representation, in which the High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ambassador Carlos
Westendorp, has played a decisive role.
Despite these achievements, the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina still presents serious problems that must
be overcome. The various authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina should show a firm and clear commitment to
build up the governmental and administrative structures that
are necessary and indispensable to guarantee democracy,
respect for human rights, reform of the police force and the
return of refugees and displaced persons. In this regard,
those authorities should fulfil to the letter the commitments
they entered into two years ago.
My delegation attaches the greatest importance to the
question of respect for human rights. Mechanisms should be
created and implemented to ensure that all persons living in
the country enjoy fundamental rights. We are similarly
concerned about the tragic situation of refugees and persons
displaced by the conflict who are prevented from returning
to their homes because neither the authorities of the
Federation nor those of the Republika Srpska have taken
the necessary legal measures to allow their return.
Likewise, Costa Rica considers that the authorities of
the various entities, and in particular those of the Republika
Srpska, should make every possible effort to promote
tolerance, understanding and reconciliation among the
various ethnic, religious and cultural groups living in their
territories. In this regard, it is essential that they redouble
their efforts to educate the population about the basic
principles of tolerance and national reconciliation. My
delegation cannot fail to mention the importance of
international cooperation aimed at creating an educational
programme that will inculcate those principles in the
people.
A fundamental aspect of the whole process of
pacification and national reconciliation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is the question of combating impunity. The
situation of missing persons and the carrying out of
exhumations is a source of concern. The suffering of the
relatives of victims because of uncertainty and because of
the impunity of criminals should be the subject of the
greatest attention. My delegation acknowledges the efforts
made in this regard by the Office of the High
Representative and the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991.
Nevertheless, it is a source of deep concern that the
parties to the General Framework Agreement and some
States are not fulfilling their international obligations to
cooperate unconditionally with those bodies. My country
believes that they should all cooperate with those
international bodies without any restrictions, provide them
with complete and immediate information and allow them
unrestricted access to those places where there are mass
graves in order to conduct the necessary exhumations.
My country also considers that the normalization and
reconciliation of the population of Bosnia and
Herzegovina will be extremely limited until all war
criminals are brought to justice. The authorities of the
various entities of Bosnia and Herzegovina should bring
suspected criminals on their territories to justice. In
particular, they should cooperate with the International
Tribunal by arresting indictees, facilitating the compiling
of evidence and fully obeying the orders of the Tribunal.
Impunity must disappear from Bosnia and Herzegovina.
My delegation is pleased about the increase in the
number of refugees and displaced persons who have
returned to their places of origin; but we are concerned
that their general situation has not improved significantly.
We call particular attention to the fact that some persons
have been relocated against their will to places other than
their original homes. In addition, we believe that
shortcomings in safety, access to personal documents and
guarantees for the return of property are obstacles to the
return of those refugees and displaced persons. It is
essential that the authorities of the various entities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina remove those obstacles.
In this context, and particularly with regard to
impunity and the need to deepen the process of judicial
and political reform, Costa Rica expresses its agreement
with the extension of the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. This is an essential step towards
full reconciliation, and my delegation will vote in favour
of the draft resolution before us.
All this leads us to the question that, in our
judgement, should be the focus of this debate. We have
taken stock of the situation prevailing in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and we can underline significant and
6
Security Council 3842nd meeting
Fifty-second year 18 December 1997
undeniable advances in the difficult task of consolidating
pacification and promoting national reconciliation. At the
same time, it is clear to us that there continue to be serious
and difficult obstacles. This is naturally the responsibility
of the national parties, but it also falls to the international
community to continue to play an active and leading role in
the task of implementing what has been agreed.
We are satisfied at the recent statements of those
countries with links to and interests in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Political commitment is essential, as is
maintaining the levels of participation and international
assistance in the difficult task of physical and institutional
reconstruction. Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot be
abandoned to the incarnations of the new international
economic reality at this crucial stage. The country must
ensure its reconstruction with international support after the
end of the conflict. Only in that way will we be able to
ensure the true sustainability of the peace agreements and
guarantee through them the irreversibility of what has been
achieved and the country's successful integration into
today's world.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): My delegation welcomes you,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Costa Rica, to our
deliberations and is delighted to see you presiding over our
meeting today. Kenya and Costa Rica have enjoyed warm
and friendly relations over the years, and I am sure that
those ties will continue to grow.
My delegation is encouraged by the progress made so
far in the implementation of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Lack of
commitment and political will had initially been a major
obstacle to moving the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina forward. Recently, however, we have
witnessed more cooperation from the authorities in the
region. This has brought about positive developments in
various aspects of the peace process.
The United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) has played a crucial role in
assisting with the municipal elections held on 13 and 14
September 1997 and with the elections for the Republika
Srpska Assembly held on 22 and 23 November 1997. The
improved cooperation between the United Nations
International Police Task Force and the local police has
facilitated the implementation of the checkpoint policy since
May 1997. Significant progress has been made in the police
restructuring programme. The report of the Secretary-
General indicates that by August the number of
checkpoints approved had dropped from over 300 per day
to 15. While welcoming this very positive development,
we agree with the Secretary-General that the reduction
can only be one element of a broader strategy to promote
freedom of movement.
It is estimated that some 609,000 refugees from
Bosnia and Herzegovina are still in asylum countries,
which are seeking a durable solution. There is need to
continue focusing on efforts to facilitate the return of all
refugees and displaced persons to their places of origin in
safety and dignity. The harassment of returning refugees
and displaced persons is therefore unacceptable. It is even
worse when it is done by police officers who should be
protecting the returnees. In this regard, my delegation
commends the action taken against the Chief and Deputy
Chief of Police of Jajce as reported in paragraph 17 of the
Secretary-General's report.
The presence of mines is still a serious problem. As
pointed out in the United Nations Consolidated Inter-
Agency Appeal for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
reconstruction projects have been delayed, refugees have
been unable to return to their homes, and an average of
50 men, women and children have been injured or killed
by these indestructible, hidden weapons monthly. In this
regard, my delegation supports the efforts of the Mine
Action Centre, the European Commission, Norwegian
People's Aid, the United Nations Development
Programme and other groups in this very critical area.
More often than not, economic reconstruction forms
an integral part of the long-term settlement of disputes.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is no exception. Economic
development is an integral part of any peace process. In
this regard, we commend the efforts of the United
Nations system and the World Bank in trying to bring
about progress in the major sectors of the economy. As
the Secretary-General notes in his report, a lot has been
achieved, but much also remains to be done. The support
of the international community is therefore necessary for
Bosnia and Herzegovina to consolidate the progress made
so far.
My delegation welcomes the conclusions of the
ministerial meeting of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council, held at Sintra, Portugal, on 30
May 1997, and of the Peace Implementation Conference
held at Bonn on 9 and 10 December 1997. It is our hope
that their recommendations will be taken seriously by the
7
Security Council 3842nd meeting
Fifty-second year 18 December 1997
parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina, so as to expedite a
political settlement of the crisis.
The presence of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina has been instrumental in achieving the
progress we are witnessing today. As pointed out by the
Secretary-General in his report, this progress is in its early
stages and is still fragile. In this regard, my delegation
supports the extension of the mandate of the UNMIBH for
a further six months.
My delegation would like to pay tribute to Mr. Kai
Eide for his effective leadership during his tenure as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Coordinator of United Nations Operations in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We welcome the appointment of Elizabeth
Rehn as his successor. We assure her of Kenya’s support as
she continues with this important task. We also affirm our
full support for the High Representative and his staff as he
facilitates the implementation of the civilian aspects of the
Peace Agreement.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of Kenya for the kind words he addressed
to me.
Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): The Chinese delegation welcomes you, Sir, as
you preside over today’s meeting of the Security Council to
conduct an open debate on the question of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Over the past year the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has, on the whole, been stable, and the peace
process has been proceeding smoothly. That is a concrete
manifestation of the political will and cooperative attitude
of the parties concerned in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we
welcome it. Because peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina has
been hard-won, it should be doubly cherished and nurtured.
We believe that national reconciliation is the key to a
genuine, lasting settlement of the problem in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The General Framework Agreement for Peace
in Bosnia and Herzegovina has laid down a basic
framework of that purpose, and the parties concerned
should implement the Peace Agreement in earnest.
Maintaining stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina is in
the fundamental interest of the ethnic communities of that
country, and is conducive to peace and stability in the
region. We hope that the parties concerned will take
account of the fundamental interests of the people, and that
they will set aside their grudges, restore mutual trust,
achieve national reconciliation and join in working to
achieve development. In that connection, the parties
concerned should continue their efforts to resolve
outstanding issues to bring about the full functioning of
common institutions.
There can be no talk of development without peace
and stability, and peace and stability can be better
maintained when there is development. At present, Bosnia
and Herzegovina is in the phase of consolidating peace.
Post-conflict economic reconstruction is a formidable
task, and we appeal to the generosity of the international
community to assist the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to heal their war wounds and to rebuild their
homes.
We support the diplomatic and political efforts of the
international community in behalf of the peace process for
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also support the work of the
United Nations carried out, in its civilian aspects, in
accordance with the provisions of the Peace Agreement.
We believe that the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) should principally carry out
tasks mandated by the Peace Agreement.
Issues relating to judicial reform and economic
matters involve sensitive and complex questions, and
involve high stakes. The United Nations should therefore
proceed with caution in this respect.
We note that the countries contributing troops to the
Stabilization Force are reviewing its future mandate. On
the basis of past experience, operations authorized or
approved by the Security Council have always been
adjusted in response to changes in circumstances. In view
of the fact that the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
continues to be stable, we hope that the countries
contributing troops to the Stabilization Force will report
to the Security Council in timely fashion on their thoughts
about the future. We would also like to point out that the
task of the Stabilization Force, as its name implies, is to
maintain stability. We hope that any action taken by the
Stabilization Force will be conducive to continued
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
China has always supported the peace process in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we have no self-serving
designs in that country. We sincerely hope that countries
in the former Yugoslavia, including Bosnia and
Herzegovina, can live in harmony. We also hope fervently
that, with the common efforts of the parties concerned,
8
Security Council 3842nd meeting
Fifty-second year 18 December 1997
Bosnia and Herzegovina can enjoy lasting peace and
prosperity.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of China for his kind words addressed to
me.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian): I take sincere pleasure in taking part in this
meeting of the Security Council under the presidency of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Costa Rica, with which
Russia has long had friendly relations that were further
developed during a recent visit of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Russian Federation to your wonderful
country, Mr. President.
A few days ago, it was the second anniversary of the
Security Council's decision to lay the foundation for the
implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Looking back and evaluating how far we have
come, we note with satisfaction that although there have
been some difficulties, the peace process is being
implemented.
On the whole, the way the implementation of the
Dayton/Paris Agreement has gone can be regarded as
positive. Undoubtedly, the continued peace and the
establishment of the basis for a unified State are major
achievements. We have been able to move ahead in the
process of forming pan-Bosnian institutions, and refugees
continue to return gradually. Thanks to international
assistance, some progress has been made in the economic
sphere.
The Bosnian sides, as a whole, are abiding by the
commitments they made in the military sphere, have carried
out plans for arms reduction and are implementing
confidence-building measures. In a word, as was again
acknowledged at the recent Bonn Conference of the Peace
Implementation Council, there is now no alternative to
Dayton.
At the same time, it should be recognized that the
pace of implementation of the Peace Agreement does not
correspond to the level of international support given. The
peace process is not yet irreversible. We see a lack of
political will to ensure reconciliation and we have not
overcome stereotypical thinking based on confrontation and
attempts to secure advantages for one side.
To a great extent, negative trends have been kept in
check by the presence of multinational forces that make it
possible to stabilize the situation and intensify efforts in
civilian areas of implementation.
In this connection, we once again reaffirm our
resolute rejection of attempts at an arbitrary, unilateral
interpretation of the mandate of existing international
structures, which is leading to a build-up of elements of
military force in the arsenal of peacekeeping efforts in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Russia is seriously concerned at
the fact that such recidivism is continuing.
Yesterday, near the town of Vitez, sub-units of the
Stabilization Force carried out a pre-planned operation to
forcibly detain individuals indicted by the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. They
thereby went beyond the mandate of the Stabilization
Force approved by the Security Council, which ruled out
such acts of force targeted at individuals.
Russia is surprised and concerned that the High
Representative, Ambassador Westendorp, who is
ultimately responsible for respect for the civilian aspects
of the Agreement, was informed of this arrest only after
the fact.
Russia frowns on any unilateral actions that might
threaten the lives of the peacekeepers or jeopardize the
entire process of a Bosnian settlement, and we do not
intend to take responsibility for this. Justice must triumph,
but only by legitimate means.
Russia is taking an active part in international efforts
to stabilize the situation and in the activities of other
international structures in Bosnia, in strict compliance
with the provisions of the Peace Agreement and Security
Council decisions. We believe that the bulk of the
responsibility for the success of the peace process lies
with the Bosnians themselves and the authorities they
have elected.
At the same time, the situation as it stands requires
the continued cooperation of the international community
with the Bosnian parties. The United Nations is making
a real contribution to the Bosnian settlement. We value
highly the concrete work of the International Police Task
Force (IPTF) in helping ensure freedom of movement, in
supervising the safe return of refugees and displaced
persons, in creating safe conditions in which elections can
be held and in trying to reform law enforcement bodies in
Bosnia. The United Nations Mission is actively involved
in confidence-building on the ground and in coordinating
the efforts of other United Nations specialized agencies.
9
Security Council 3842nd meeting
Fifty-second year 18 December 1997
An important role is being played by the United Nations
Mine Action Centre. We support the further continuation of
the activities of the United Nations Mission and of the
IPTF in the framework of the current mandate, worked out
with the agreement of the Bosnian sides, which is a
combination of the relevant provisions of the Peace
Agreement and the decisions of international structures on
a Bosnian settlement, including the decisions of the Bonn
Peace Implementation Conference.
This approach is reflected in the draft resolution, of
which Russia is one of the sponsors.
The Russian Federation, as an active participant in the
Bosnian settlement, is firmly convinced that at this current
crucial stage of the peace process, all international
institutions involved are required, as never before, to
monitor closely the situation neutrally and dispassionately
and to comply strictly with the spirit and the letter of the
Dayton/Paris Agreement. In this way, the successful
implementation of a lasting peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Bosnia's emergence as a unified,
democratic, multi-ethnic and prosperous State can be
guaranteed.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of the Russian Federation for the kind
words he addressed to me, and particularly for mentioning
the very welcome visit to Costa Rica of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Primakov, some days ago.
Mr. Monteiro (Portugal) (interpretation from
Spanish): Portugal and Costa Rica are both part of the
Ibero-American family, and our two countries have been
taking advantage of our presence in the Security Council to
step up our cooperation. For this reason, it is with great
pleasure that I see Mr. Fernando Naranjo Villalobos
presiding over this meeting of the Security Council.
(spoke in English)
Considerable progress has been made in implementing
peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The holding of municipal
elections in September and the maintenance of an
environment of security culminated a year of combined
efforts by the international community to help the Bosnian
people establish a long-lasting peace.
But, while there has been progress, much still remains
to be done.
The United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) and the International Police Task
Force (IPTF) play a crucial role in the implementation of
the Peace Agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and it
is clear that their tasks have been carried out effectively
over the course of this last year.
It is a difficult mission and a complex one, which
also requires essential input from other international
actors, in particular the Stabilization Force (SFOR) led by
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), which
provides the security environment necessary for the
implementation of the Peace Agreement.
In the final analysis, however, the international
community’s efforts in Bosnia will not amount to very
much if the Bosnian parties themselves are not fully
committed to peace and to cooperating fully with the
United Nations, SFOR, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and other international
organizations, as well as with each other.
This is the only way to establish a self-sustaining
peace in Bosnia. We urge the parties to make increased
efforts to address inadequate progress, including in the
following areas: the functioning of common institutions,
the protection of human rights, the return of refugees,
economic management and cooperation with the
International Tribunal. Furthermore, the implementation
of the results of the municipal elections must be
completed, and serious problems of local administration
must be addressed.
We welcome the conclusions of the Bonn Peace
Implementation Conference, which built on the work of
previous Peace Implementation Council meetings held in
London and Sintra, in setting out very clearly what still
needs to be done by the Bosnian parties. Taken with the
Peace Agreement, they represent the blueprint for peace
in Bosnia. And, as the Peace Implementation Council
confirmed in Bonn, there is no alternative to the Peace
Agreement. Therefore, the mandate of UNMIBH, and
thus of the IPTF, should be extended so that it can
continue its important work in the areas of police reform,
as well as the other tasks entrusted to it and to the
civilian unit of UNMIBH.
Without an adequate security arrangement, however,
the work of the United Nations and others in the
implementation of the civilian aspects of the Peace
Agreement will be compromised. This security
arrangement is currently provided by SFOR. But an
10
Security Council 3842nd meeting
Fifty-second year 18 December 1997
adequate security arrangement must be established after the
end of SFOR’s mandate in order to ensure the continuity of
the international community’s efforts in Bosnia.
Portugal has over 60 personnel serving with the IPTF
and over 300 serving with SFOR. We believe very strongly
in the need for adequate security.
The United Nations, in supporting the implementation
of the civilian aspects of the Peace Agreement, also
cooperates with the OSCE and with the High
Representative. Their work, and that of others, is crucial to
the process of consolidating peace in Bosnia. We pay
tribute to the High Representative, Mr. Carlos Westendorp,
as well as to United Nations and other international
personnel who are working hard to help bring lasting peace
to Bosnia, often in dangerous, if not fatal, circumstances.
Portugal regrets the loss of life in the helicopter crash of 17
September 1997.
The efforts of the international community in Bosnia
and Herzegovina have been significant, and we must not
forget that, not too long ago, there was open fighting in
Bosnia, and civilian populations were subjected to daily
bombardments.
The time for the withdrawal of the international
community has not yet come. For now, the international
community must remain in Bosnia and Herzegovina to help
consolidate peace. This will permit the intensification of the
process of economic reconstruction and development. It is,
above all, essential to ensure the true reconciliation of the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, where the rule of law
will replace the rule of war.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of Portugal for his kind words addressed
to me.
Mr. Matuszewski (Poland): Let me begin by saying
how pleased my delegation is to see you, Sir, presiding
over today’s meeting of the Security Council.
In the light of Poland’s alignment with a statement to
be made by the Ambassador of Luxembourg on behalf of
the European Union and associated countries, my statement
is intended to highlight some points which are of particular
significance for my country.
Poland, like other members of the international
community, attaches great importance to the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. With the signing of the Peace
Agreement, this friendly country has embarked upon a
difficult journey towards peace and stability based on the
harmonious coexistence of all component parts of its
multi-ethnic society. The very future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as an independent country and the prospects
for sustainable peace in the whole region hinge on how
smooth and fast this journey is.
The progress that Bosnia and Herzegovina has made
since the conclusion of the conference in Dayton, Ohio,
is significant. It constitutes yet further evidence of the
political far-sightedness of the architects of this complex
and unique construction known as the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and,
indeed, does credit to the international community’s
multidimensional support for a peaceful and prosperous
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Having participated in the Peace Implementation
Conference held recently in Bonn, Poland fully identifies
itself with the Conference’s assessments and conclusions.
We join other members in appealing to the authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to fulfil what they have
repeatedly declared themselves to be committed to: to
make peace in their country and to make its entities self-
sustainable. To achieve this, further progress is necessary
in building functioning governmental structures, to
advance the process of democratization, to institute
adequate protection of human rights, to reform the law
enforcement institutions and the judiciary system, to
create necessary conditions for the successful completion
of the return of refugees and displaced persons and to
cure the economy of its many diseases.
Let me focus on two issues which are, in the view
of my delegation, of particular importance for the future
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and, as a matter of fact, for
the future of the whole region. The first is the problem of
interested countries’ cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. We regret
to have to note that there are still those who seem to take
lightly their obligations under the terms of the Peace
Agreement and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council. In our view, progress in the administration of
justice is essential for the prospects of national
reconciliation, peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in the whole region. We join others in
calling upon the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
ensure that those indicted are tried as stipulated in the
decisions of the Security Council.
11
Security Council 3842nd meeting
Fifty-second year 18 December 1997
The second issue that I would like to briefly touch
upon is the return of the refugees and displaced persons. By
the number of those who have decided to return to their
original domiciles one may, in fact, measure quite
accurately the progress made in any other part of the
process of the normalization of the country’s political,
social and economic life. We understand very well the
complexity of this whole problem, but at the same time we
believe that more efforts will have to be made, and they
should be better focused in order to achieve a genuine
breakthrough in this area.
My delegation is of the opinion that the International
Police Task Force (IPTF) has played an extremely
important role in creating conditions conducive to a secure
and durable peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We welcome
the progress made in other aspects of IPTF activities,
including assistance in restructuring and training the local
police, as well as in promoting model democratic standards
among the country’s police force. As the Secretary-General
pointed out in his latest report, however, much remains to
be done, and the further IPTF presence is in our view
indispensable. It is important, however, that IPTF monitors
continue to be covered by adequate security arrangements,
which at present can be secured only by a credible
international military force.
The magnitude of the task in Bosnia and Herzegovina
warrants a great deal of organization and coordination on
the part of the international actors present in the country.
We believe that their achievements deserve our deep
appreciation. Today’s debate and the beginning of a new
phase of the implementation of the Peace Agreement
coincide with the final preparations for Poland’s assuming
the post of Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe for the year 1998. We
stand ready to cooperate with all our partners in order to
assist the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina in building a
peaceful, prosperous and stable country.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of Poland for his kind words addressed
to me.
Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): Mr. President, let me start
by saying that it is an honour for me to participate in this
debate under your distinguished presidency.
Expectations were high when the Dayton Peace
Agreement was reached two years ago. Here and there, they
might have been too high, which has caused frustration and
impatience in many quarters. Against this background, it is
important not to lose sight of what has actually been
achieved.
After the success of military implementation, we
have witnessed the establishment of a collective
presidency and a Council of Ministers. We have seen
increased freedom of movement, economic revival in
certain areas and progress in the field of arms control and
confidence- and security-building measures. The media
situation has improved. Three major elections have been
held — parliamentary in September 1996, local elections
in September 1997 and, most recently, special elections in
the Republika Srpska. In phases, the election processes
have increased the possibilities of advancing the civilian
implementation of the peace accords. Of particular
importance is also the recent increase in the number of
indictees held in custody by the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia.
Although far from sufficient, recent developments
have at least opened the perspective of a viable future for
hundreds of thousands of individuals, and paved the way
for further progress. In Bosnia and Herzegovina today,
islands of normality do exist, both in political and civic
life.
This progress is mainly due to the improved
coordination of the international community’s efforts, with
guidance from the High Representative, the Contact
Group, the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council and the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
As regards the United Nations Mission, I want to
pay a special tribute to Mr. Kai Eide, under whose skilful
leadership the Mission has effectively carried out its
mandate. I would particularly like to highlight its
successful programmes for reform and restructuring of the
local police, both in the Federation and more recently in
Republika Srpska. The close cooperation and efficient
distribution of responsibilities between the International
Police Task Force (IPTF) and the Stabilization Force
(SFOR) should also be mentioned. By extending the
mandate of the United Nations Mission, including the
IPTF, the Security Council will send a clear signal of its
continued commitment to peace implementation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
When looking at the progress in peace
implementation, due respect should also be given, of
course, to the thousands of initiatives and decisions taken
by individuals and non-governmental organizations in
12
Security Council 3842nd meeting
Fifty-second year 18 December 1997
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Together, they have demonstrated
that there does indeed still exist a Bosnian identity,
transcending ethnic lines.
Unfortunately, the contribution to the process by the
leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina has so far not been
convincing. It is disappointing that many of the key issues
are still unresolved, mainly because the political leaders
stick to old nationalistic approaches.
From the very outset of the Dayton Peace Agreement,
Sweden has stressed the importance of having a long-term
perspective of its implementation. After so many months of
suffering and destruction, it does take time to rebuild
confidence and acceptance among ethnic groups to live
together again.
Although that long-term perspective cannot at all times
be expressed in binding resolutions, Sweden is satisfied
that, in practice, the international community increasingly
acts with this perspective in mind. The determination that
was expressed through the Bonn declaration last week is a
clear indication of this. Among the tasks ahead is to ensure
that the elections in September 1998 will be free and fair.
The issues of freedom of movement and functioning
nationwide communications have to be moved forward. In
this connection, continued demining activities and removal
of illegal checkpoints are of major importance.
Like the High Representative, Sweden believes that
efforts in 1998 should be focused on free media and on a
democratically controlled police. It is also essential to
enable refugees and displaced persons to return to their
homes, including those in so-called minority areas. The
success of refugee return during 1998 will be crucial for the
whole reconciliation process. Of particular importance is the
call, at Bonn, for the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to introduce a
regional approach for refugee return, covering Croatia and
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia as well. In this context,
we noted with satisfaction the declaration in Geneva
yesterday by the representative of the Republika Srpska that
“all spontaneous minority returns from asylum
countries as well as from the Federation are
supported”.
I am convinced that when this is put into practice it will
trigger similar movements elsewhere in the region.
The setting up of functioning common institutions as
well as the adoption and implementation of key pieces of
legislation are already overdue. These matters need to be
addressed fully and without further delay.
Last, but certainly not least, the indicted war
criminals have to be brought to the Tribunal in The
Hague. It is increasingly disturbing that some of them are
allowed to continue to exercise decisive control over
political life in Pale.
The time has not yet come to relax the international
involvement in securing the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. My country is committed to continuing its
full support for the peace process in Bosnia and in the
region at large. We remain convinced, however, that the
success of all our efforts in the civilian implementation,
including through the IPTF, is contingent upon the
continued existence of a credible international military
force in Bosnia. Sweden is prepared to continue to
contribute to such a force after SFOR, provided that it is
still United Nations-mandated, led by the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) and with United States
participation on the ground. In this context, we warmly
welcome the statement made today by the President of the
United States, Mr. William Clinton.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of Sweden for the kind words he
addressed to me.
Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): First of all, let
me join others in extending to you personally, Mr.
President, a welcome here this afternoon.
Before beginning my prepared statement I should
like on behalf of the British Government to welcome the
latest action by the Stabilization Force (SFOR), acting
under authority contained in the relevant Security Council
resolutions, to detain two Bosnian Croats indicted for war
crimes. We congratulate SFOR troops on a brave and
successful operation. Other war crimes indictees still at
large are hereby put on notice that they too remain
accountable. They should surrender themselves to the
International Criminal Tribunal without delay. And all the
parties to the Peace Agreement should comply fully with
their commitment to transfer those indicted for war crimes
to The Hague. Justice is indispensable for true peace and
reconciliation in Bosnia. Last night’s action by SFOR
underscores this.
The Bonn Peace Implementation Council set an
accelerated agenda for civilian implementation for next
year. It reaffirmed that the only way forward is a unified
13
Security Council 3842nd meeting
Fifty-second year 18 December 1997
State of Bosnia and Herzegovina with two multi-ethnic
entities, sovereign and secure within its existing borders.
The United Kingdom is determined to put its whole
weight behind the peace process. We strongly support the
High Representative’s intention to use his full authority
under Dayton to drive implementation forward. Bonn
reaffirmed the full backing of the international community
for his efforts.
Our goal, like that of all the international community,
is a democratic and prosperous Bosnia taking its place as a
modern nation in Europe. The international community is
putting enormous effort into this, and members of the
United Nations and other international organizations
engaged in Bosnia, especially Carlos Westendorp and Kai
Eide and their teams, deserve our praise and support for
their considerable achievements in the two years since
Dayton. The tragic loss of 12 international personnel in a
helicopter crash in Bosnia on 17 September bears witness
to the courage and commitment of those who are trying to
bring peace to this troubled country.
We have kept our side of the bargain. It is now time
for Bosnia’s leaders to deliver theirs. The Bonn Peace
Implementation Conference made this very clear. We
expect action from the Bosnian authorities on media
freedoms. We expect action to allow refugees and displaced
persons to return home and for property laws to be changed
so that they are fair. We expect progress on consolidating
the central institutions and on introducing good government
practices, particularly in the area of transparency in public
accounts. We hope that the new Republika Srpska
Assembly and Government will meet soon and emphasize
that all political institutions throughout Bosnia will be held
to internationally accepted standards of democratization and
accountability.
And, as I said a moment ago, we expect action from
the authorities in Bosnia and its neighbours to surrender
those indicted for war crimes to the International Tribunal
in The Hague, as they have committed themselves to do.
We also expect the deadlines set at Bonn to be
followed. We regret that the parties fell at the first fence by
failing to adopt the citizenship law. We welcome the move
by the High Representative to have the law applied on an
interim basis until passed by the parliamentary Assembly.
The United Kingdom has welcomed the readiness this
year to use SFOR directly to support civilian
implementation. Continued success in this area will depend
on maintaining a secure environment. Following the
meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) on 16 December, NATO is
now examining possible options for a follow-on force to
succeed SFOR when the latter’s mandate expires in June
of next year.
British troops have been on the ground in Bosnia
since the beginning of the United Nations Protection
Force (UNPROFOR) and remain the largest European
contingent. British Ministers have made it clear that they
are ready to stay for the foreseeable future if others are.
We warmly welcome therefore President Clinton’s
commitment in principle to contribute United States
troops and United States command to a follow-on force.
This will help to ensure the success of a post-SFOR
mission and to consolidate SFOR’s considerable
achievements in advancing civilian implementation. We
look forward to the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia, including the International
Police Task Force (IPTF). The commitment and
professionalism of the IPTF’s members is a major force
for change in Bosnia. The United Kingdom is a firm
supporter of the strengthened role envisaged for them at
Bonn, notably in training the Entity police forces so that
these can serve their communities in a professional and
non-discriminatory way in maintaining the rule of law.
The United Kingdom is delighted that a British Deputy
Chief Constable, Mr. Richard Monk, has been appointed
as the new IPTF Commissioner. We shall give him every
support in his important task.
We believe that the extension of the IPTF mandate
for six months — on a renewable basis to bring it in line
with SFOR’s mandate — is strategically coherent while
offering the best way of meeting operational
requirements. We hope that this extension will be agreed
without difficulty.
We all want to see Bosnia regain normality. No one
expects it is going to be rebuilt in a day, and the United
Kingdom is prepared to stay the course if others do. We
have invested over £1 billion so far financially and
militarily. I said at the beginning of my remarks that our
goal was to see Bosnia participate fully in Europe. But
that and the lasting peace which would underpin such a
role is not in the international community’s gift, however
hard we work in Bosnia. Ultimately, it is the action of
Bosnia’s leaders that will determine how Bosnia meets
the twenty-first century. They are accountable to history,
to the international community and to their own people.
14
Security Council 3842nd meeting
Fifty-second year 18 December 1997
Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
Allow me to say how honoured we are today to be holding
our proceedings under the presidency of the Foreign
Minister of a country that has become a symbol of the
quest for peaceful settlement of disputes and
implementation of the rule of law.
We are entering the third year of the implementation
of the Peace Agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina and are
also at the mid-point of the period of consolidation.
The consolidation plan adopted last year for a two-
year period rested on a new rationale — that of a
conditional, contractual approach to the peace process. That
approach can be summed up easily: there is no credible
alternative to the Peace Agreement, and the responsibility
for implementing it falls primarily to the elected authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
A simple comparison with the situation that prevailed
only two years ago in Bosnia and Herzegovina fortunately
enables us to see that there has been progress. The military
side of the Peace Agreement has been largely completed. A
considerable effort of reconstruction has been undertaken in
the country, and for this we must congratulate the
authorities.
The European Union is honoured to be far and away
the largest contributor of aid towards the restoration of the
economic structures of Bosnia and Herzegovina. However,
it is to be recalled that continued international assistance is
linked to respect by the parties for the obligations in the
Agreement. That conditionality must be perceived in a
positive light: those who cooperate in good faith in the
implementation of the Agreement, whether at the central,
local or municipal level, can be assured of our support.
This huge effort, however, cannot lead to a lasting
restoration of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
unless necessary reforms are undertaken and the central
institutions are able to function in a more satisfactory
manner. Respect for the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and implementation of the physical and
political conditions needed for the operation of those
institutions at all levels are priorities.
Beyond these difficulties that relate to the functioning
of central institutions, progress still needs to be made in
many areas — strengthening of democratization, developing
of pluralistic media, reform of the police and the judiciary
and in the struggle against corruption. France underscores
also the importance of improving the situation with regard
to respect for human rights and the return of refugees and
displaced persons. To date, of more than 2 million
refugees, fewer than 200,000 have been able to go home.
France unequivocally urges that all indicted persons
be handed over to the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. There again, the primary
responsibility for handing over the war criminals being
sought falls to the parties. France, which was involved in
the creation of the Tribunal from the beginning, France,
whose army paid a heavy price in the service of peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina — 70 dead, 700 wounded —
was deeply shocked by recent statements in the press
questioning the conduct of States participating in the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) in the implementation of the
Tribunal’s decisions. As recently confirmed by the
Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), all of the allies and the countries
participating in the Stabilization Force, indeed, share the
same resolve to ensure that indicted war criminals are
brought to justice. The arrest in central Bosnia of two
indicted persons, which has just taken place, is an
example. This is a joint effort under a single chain of
command and in accordance with identical rules of
engagement. The policy followed in this domain is
decided by the NATO Council. The French officers
present in Bosnia and Herzegovina today, like others,
follow those directives set jointly by the allies and strictly
apply the rules of engagement laid down by NATO for
the apprehension of persons sought by the Tribunal.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina calls for
additional efforts by all, especially by the parties. Only
one year remains before the completion of the
consolidation plan and only a few months before the
holding of the next general election. Thus, this is an
urgent matter. The Peace Implementation Conference that
has just taken place in Bonn clearly indicated the path to
be followed.
The High Representative charged with the
implementation of the civilian aspects of the Peace
Agreements will continue to play a central role in
coordination in this respect. The tireless efforts of
Mr. Carl Bildt and those today of Mr. Carlos Westendorp
have greatly contributed to the successes achieved in
Bosnia and Herzegovina since the end of hostilities. The
High Representative may rely in this regard on the
constant support of my Government.
The United Nations is also making an important
contribution to stabilizing the situation in Bosnia and
15
Security Council 3842nd meeting
Fifty-second year 18 December 1997
Herzegovina and the region through the work of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina and, in
particular, of the International Police Task Force. France in
that regard thanks the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Coordinator of United Nations
Operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Eide, for his
efforts in support of the peace process, and we today assure
Ms. Elisabeth Rehn, who is to succeed him, of our full
support.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of France for his very kind words about
my country.
Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): It
gives me great pleasure to preface my statement by
welcoming your Excellency, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Costa Rica, as President of this Council. Costa
Rica is a State that has constantly made constructive
contributions in support of the edifice of world peace.
The Security Council meets today to discuss and
evaluate the implementation of the Dayton Peace
Agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the framework of
the Council's discharge of its primary responsibilities for
the maintenance of international peace and security. This
responsibility extends to include following up on the
implementation of all peace agreements in all conflict areas
with a view to ensuring that no setbacks occur in such
areas and also to monitor the effective and balanced
implementation of the provisions of these agreements in
order to ensure the interests of all concerned parties in
achieving security, stability and peace.
Our general debate today assumes a special importance
in view of the fact that it is being held in positive
circumstances of attaining many achievements in the
implementation of the Dayton Agreement. Foremost among
these are probably the presidential elections, followed by
the municipal elections and other elections of legislative
bodies. All these are indications that the implementation of
the Dayton Agreement is proceeding in the right direction
in some fields.
However, a thorough analysis of the balance of the
implementation of the provisions of the Peace Agreement
makes it clear that, despite the progress made, that
implementation, in some fields, continues to be lagging to
a degree which causes concern, indeed fear, that the entire
Peace Agreement might collapse.
It is noteworthy that the progress made recently in
implementation of the Agreement is closely linked to the
efforts made to deal with and settle the question of war
crimes. Despite the difficulty of dealing with this
problem, the fact that the Stabilization Force (SFOR) on
10 July 1997 did apprehend one of the indicted war
criminals, and the fact that yesterday evening it also
apprehended two Croatian war criminals, has proved
beyond a shadow of a doubt that SFOR is indeed capable
of dealing with this question. This is particularly so
because out of a total of 78 indictees, only 20 have been
apprehended: 14 Croats, three Bosnians and three Serbs.
Only two of them have been tried and sentenced. Five
more are currently being tried in two different cases. It is
also noteworthy here that the Bosnians were the only
party that extradited all the indictees under their
jurisdiction — all three of them — and that Croatia has
displayed a great deal of good faith. The Republika
Srpska is the only party that, until now, refuses to
cooperate with the International Criminal Tribunal. Out of
57 Serbian indictees, only three have been apprehended,
which means that a good number continues to be at large.
A thorough analysis of the statistics I have just
mentioned and of the fact that major suspects, including
Karadzic and Mladic, continue to be at large and even
continue to exert a great deal of political influence, leads
us to state that the peace process in Bosnia will not
continuously progress without the apprehension of those
indictees, and that the reconciliation process will not
succeed without their being tried.
The Security Council bears a historic responsibility
at this important juncture to mandate SFOR and the force
to succeed it in the future to pursue the war criminals and
bring them to trial. The Council also has the additional
responsibility of providing the Tribunal with the necessary
financial support in order to enable it to discharge its
tasks with the requisite dispatch and efficiency.
The constitutional crisis that took place in the
Republika Srpska caused the international community
grave concern. It has proved that the lack of supervision
of the implementation of the Peace Agreement and
leaving the war criminals at large could lead to more
separation rather than unification. The de facto division of
that Entity into two parts, one administered from Pale and
the other from Banja Luka, is concrete evidence of the
results of such a situation, particularly in view of the
clear struggle for power to which some war criminals are
parties.
16
Security Council 3842nd meeting
Fifty-second year 18 December 1997
In spite all this, the parliamentary election held last
November brought a glimmer of hope. It is our hope that
it will lead to a rectification of the situation. However, this
cannot come about without the full implementation of the
results of the elections and in a manner that permits the
reunification of that entity. In this regard, the international
community must pursue an approach that links economic
aid on the one hand and the achievement of the desired
political objectives on the other, especially in Republika
Srpska.
The implementation of Annex 7 of the Dayton Peace
Agreement concerning the voluntary, free and safe return of
refugees and displaced persons, particularly in minority
areas, has become a disappointing and discouraging
process. This process makes it clear that the excessive
attention accorded to the political aspects of the Dayton
Agreement at the expense of the humanitarian and ethnic
aspects carries with it an inherent danger that threatens
peace entirely in Bosnia.
Of a total of more than 2 million displaced persons at
the end of the hostilities, only 381,000 — 171,000 refugees
and 210,000 displaced persons — have returned to their
homes. Until now, there has not been an opportunity for the
rest of the refugees and displaced persons to return to their
homes.
Despite the relative success of the open cities plan
launched by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, a plan that contributes to the delivery of
economic aid to the refugees and the internally displaced
persons at their current places of residence, and despite the
comprehensive plan adopted by the international community
for the return of large numbers of refugees, the political
obstacles impeding the implementation of these plans
remains great. Therefore, the need has become urgent to
take decisive measures, the most important of which is the
recision of the ethnically based property laws throughout
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the organization of a swift
return of refugees and displaced persons to their original
homes, and not — I emphasize “not” — to any other place
that they might be compelled to go to.
Human rights, freedom of movement and freedom of
the press throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina — which
have assumed increasing importance with the passage of
time — must be fully respected and guaranteed.
I turn now to the implementation of the military and
regional stability provisions of the Dayton Agreement. The
date set for the implementation of the second phase of arms
reduction under the Agreement on Subregional Arms
Control was 31 October 1997. However, Republika
Srpska continues to refuse to make the deep cuts
necessary to comply with the provisions of that
Agreement, casting doubt on its military intentions,
especially in view of the fact that the Federation’s
military capabilities remain far below the maximum
established by the Agreement. In this regard, the fears and
concerns expressed by Republika Srpska vis-à-vis the
equipment and training programme are unjustified if it has
the political will to reconcile and avoid military
confrontations.
The Security Council therefore bears a special
responsibility for the implementation of this part of the
Dayton Agreement, not only to prevent the eruption of
conflict in this region in the future, but also within the
context of exercising its Charter responsibility for the
regulation of armaments.
As concerns the formation of the common
institutions, Egypt has closely followed the results of the
various meetings of the Peace Implementation Council,
the most recent of which was in Bonn on 9 and 10 of this
month. We would reiterate once again that the triumph of
the forces of reunification will depend to a great extent on
the creation of the common institutions. It is not logical,
for instance, to speak of reunification at a time when
there are no direct telephone contacts between the
Federation and Republika Srpska; when there is no
common currency; when laws of citizenship have yet to
be enacted; when there is no economic capacity to create
these institutions; and in an environment that does not
provide the necessary freedom of movement.
In this framework, the efforts for reconstruction and
economic development must be given high priority within
the struggle to reunite Bosnia, in the context not only of
implementing the Dayton Agrement, but also of the
international community’s unrelenting efforts to help
Bosnia. The donors honoured their pledge of $1.8 billion
in 1996; they have also pledged $1.24 billion for 1997.
And yet, Republika Srpska’s refusal to attend the annual
donors’ conference and to respond to the efforts for
integration and unification raises serious questions about
the intentions of this entity at this complex stage of the
implementation of the Dayton Agreement.
What is currently impeding the reconstruction and
development of Bosnia and Herzegovina are
considerations of political control over the economy, as
well as the lack of a minimum degree of transparency on
17
Security Council 3842nd meeting
Fifty-second year 18 December 1997
economic questions. This is undoubtedly the result of the
lack of trust among the various parties. The reconstruction
efforts must therefore be linked to the responsiveness of the
parties to the political efforts being made. This year’s
General Assembly resolution on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has sent the correct message by linking
economic assistance to the responsiveness of the parties to
efforts to achieve a political settlement. It is our hope that
this will lead to improved responsiveness to those political
efforts.
I have set out Egypt’s view of the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which is shared by all the States members
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference Contact
Group on Bosnia and Herzegovina. We deem it extremely
important that the role of the Security Council in Bosnia
and Herzegovina not be confined to the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, despite its valiant
efforts contributing to the stabilization of the situation, or
to the efforts of the International Police Task Force (IPTF)
to restructure the local police. All these efforts are clearly
reflected in the report before the Council today. We feel
that it is imperative that the Security Council set a number
of guidelines to address the aforementioned problems in
coordination with the Peace Implementation Council in
Bosnia. We also deem it important that the Security
Council assign a larger role to the Stabilization Force and
the force to succeed it in June next year, in order to impose
the will of the international community and of the people
of Bosnia to create a unified, multiethnic State whose
people live together under one roof, enjoying independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity within their
internationally recognized boundaries.
In conclusion, I wish to pay tributes to the efforts
made by the High Representative for Bosnia, Mr. Carlos
Westendorp, especially in the current circumstances in
which he is assuming his tasks. I also wish to commend the
efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to
Bosnia; the Commander of the IPTF; the leaders of SFOR;
and all the men and women working in trying
circumstances to bolster peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of Egypt for his kind words addressed to
my country.
Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): I wish to join previous
speakers in welcoming you, Sir, to New York to preside
over this important meeting. We pay tribute to you for the
consistent efforts your country has been making in the
interests of peace.
Looking back over the progress that has been made
in the two years since the conclusion of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, we can see that, indeed, much has been
achieved. Bosnia and Herzegovina is today a very
different place than it was in 1995, with far greater
stability, far less violence, and the promise of a brighter
future. These positive developments are due in large part
to the coordinated involvement of a host of international
players operating in the region, including the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the High
Representative and his staff, the courageous men and
women of the Stabilization Force, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the United Nations
specialized agencies and a range of non-governmental
organizations. The Republic of Korea greatly appreciates
all their dedicated efforts to advance peace and stability
in the war-ravaged country and pays high tribute to those
who have made the ultimate sacrifice and lost their lives
in that noble process.
In assessing the overall situation, my delegation
recalls the High Representative’s report in April of this
year, which outlined three courses of action in Bosnia to
be avoided or prevented: first, the military option;
secondly, the option of secession; and thirdly, the option
of domination by one ethnic group.
It is encouraging to note that the military option is
now neither feasible nor realistic, and that no ethnic group
considers it a serious or attractive alternative at this stage.
However, there is a risk that some party may once again
come to favour this option if the commitment of the
international community to peace in Bosnia wanes or is
withdrawn entirely.
The option of overt secession, we are pleased to
note, also appears to have lost its appeal for all involved.
A danger persists, however, of slow creeping secession
and we need to continue our vigilance in this regard.
As regards potential dominance by a single ethnic
group, we are also pleased to see that common
institutions comprising all three major ethnic groups are
now in place in Bosnia and that the danger of dominance
by one over another has receded. Nonetheless, the current
operation of those common institutions reveals that
smooth cooperation and coordination among the leaders
of the three groups has yet to take shape.
Having said that, the Republic of Korea reiterates its
conviction that the implementation of the Peace
Agreement is the only way to attain a comprehensive
18
Security Council 3842nd meeting
Fifty-second year 18 December 1997
solution. Under the direction of the Peace Agreement and
the guiding principles and conclusions of the Peace
Implementation Council’s successive meetings, multi-ethnic
political and social structures need to be created and
economic rehabilitation fostered.
In this context, we wish to highlight six areas in which
we believe further and more focused action is clearly
warranted.
First, urgent action must be undertaken by the
concerned parties to ensure that refugees and displaced
persons can safely return to their homes, including to those
areas in which they are the minority, and that their property
rights are sufficiently protected.
Secondly, all parties must redouble their efforts to
cooperate with the International Tribunal with a view to
strengthening a sense of justice and the rule of law in their
homeland. Peace in Bosnia cannot endure if it is not a just
peace. For the sake of the victims in the region, and
because of the terrible precedent it would set, war criminals
must not be allowed to go unpunished.
Thirdly, full respect for human rights, irrespective of
ethnicity, by all parties concerned is an essential
prerequisite for the creation of a multi-ethnic, democratic
Bosnian State.
Fourthly, common institutions in the central
Government must function effectively in order to
reintegrate Bosnian society and reconcile people of all
ethnicities. The leaders of the respective ethnic groups need
to show greater flexibility in taking step-by-step action to
that end. At the same time, the results of municipal
elections held in September of this year must be fully
implemented without delay.
Fifthly, international economic assistance should
continue to be linked to the degree of compliance by the
various authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina with the
obligations and conditions set out in the Peace Agreement
and subsequent relevant international meetings. Economic
reconstruction and the political democratic process must go
hand in hand.
And, sixthly, it is essential that local police
restructuring, which was so capably undertaken by the
International Police Task Force (IPTF), be further pursued
and that this crucial process be combined with
comprehensive judicial reform. The IPTF’s recent initiatives
aimed at tackling financial crime and corruption also
deserve the support of the international community.
Finally, we believe that, building upon the significant
progress that has been achieved thus far, the United
Nations and the international community can and should
do a good deal more to bring about durable peace and
stability, not only in Bosnia and Herzegovina, but
throughout the Balkan region. The continuation of a
credible international military presence there will be
pivotal towards that end. Let us hope that the substantial
time and energy we have invested will produce further
dividends of peace for its war-weary people.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of the Republic of Korea for his kind
words addressed to me.
Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from
French): My delegation would like to thank you, Sir, for
being so kind as to preside over this open meeting of the
Security Council on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Your presence among us bears witness to
the important contribution of your country, Costa Rica, to
international affairs. I would like, with your permission,
to take this opportunity to underscore the important role
of the delegation of Costa Rica in the Security Council
and to say how much we have appreciated being able to
cooperate with it under the skilful and diligent guidance
of Ambassador Fernando Berrocal Soto.
As we approach the Christmas holiday, which is the
best time for each and every one of us to renew or
consolidate family ties, I would like, on behalf of my
delegation, to express our affection for the families of the
12 men and women of the International Police Task Force
(IPTF) and the Office of the High Representative who
lost their lives in the tragic helicopter accident last 17
September. I wish to extend the heartfelt condolences of
my delegation to all those families in their suffering.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has the sad distinction of
having numerous conferences and debates focused on its
tragic destiny — among them those of the Security
Council — aimed at finding a fair and peaceful settlement
of the conflict tearing it asunder.
We have seen that the peace process is continuing,
but the progress achieved has been very slow, and
sometimes even modest. This means that there is a great
deal yet to be done. It is obvious that the success of all
the activities intended to establish durable peace in Bosnia
19
Security Council 3842nd meeting
Fifty-second year 18 December 1997
and Herzegovina depends essentially on the implementation
of the Dayton Agreement, and that however important the
role of the international community, it is up to the
authorities of that country to work towards the
establishment of a lasting peace. It is also up to them to
work responsibly towards the implementation of the
Agreement into which they freely entered. It is therefore
important that all the parties commit themselves with
determination to honour their commitments stemming from
the Agreement, first and foremost by ensuring the proper
functioning of their common institutions.
We are pleased to note today that progress has been
achieved in several areas. Nevertheless, as was pointed out
by the delegations that preceded us, much remains to be
done in order that the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina
can live together in complete peace and security.
We note with bitterness that the humanitarian situation
in that country remains difficult. The future of a large
number of refugees and displaced persons remains
uncertain. Those people have the right to return to their
places of origin if they so desire, with the assistance of the
High Commissioner for Refugees, in accordance with annex
7 of the Dayton Agreement and thanks to the generous
assistance of the host countries. In this regard, we
commend the efforts being made by United Nations
agencies, the European Union, bilateral donors and others,
including non-governmental organizations that set up and
carry out projects to facilitate their freedom to return if they
so desire, to ensure their safety and to improve their future
economic prospects.
We take pleasure in noting that the Open City
initiative is continuing.
Local communities that have chosen to declare open
cities should be encouraged, and should be given financial
assistance. On behalf of my delegation, I wish to reaffirm
our commitment to the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to the
enjoyment by the populations of that country of their
constitutional rights.
We are concerned by the constant refusal, particularly
in the Republika Srpska, to provide services to minorities;
we believe that there must be no discrimination against
those populations and that they should have access to basic
health care. As citizens of their own country, their health
should not be subject to political considerations; all those
in need should have access to adequate care.
The international community has a role to play in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. For its part, the multinational
Stabilization Force (SFOR) has played an indispensable
role in helping to create an environment that will foster
the civilian aspects of the Peace Agreement. We welcome
the good cooperation between the United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the United Nations
International Police Task Force (IPTF), and the way in
which they have coordinated their activities on the
ground. We note with satisfaction that UNMIBH is
considering improving the structure of the IPTF so that it
can better focus its work on other activities — as it has
done in the sphere of human rights.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s analysis, as
contained in his recent report, and we agree with him
about the future role of the United Nations. That is why
we agree with and support his recommendation to extend
the mandate of UNMIBH for 12 months. An effective
United Nations presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
still necessary for consolidating peace and the other
achievements we have welcomed. In particular, we agree
that there must be a reform of the judicial and penal
system in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and that the fight
against financial crime must be encouraged. Here again,
we think there is a decisive role for UNMIBH; with
additional human and financial resources it can proceed
to the consolidation of peace and the economic
development of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We welcome the conclusions of the Peace
Implementation Conference held at Bonn on 9 and 10
December 1997, including the conclusion that there is a
need to maintain an international military presence in
Bosnia and Herzegovina after June 1998. Such a presence
is required for the consolidation of peace and the
maintenance of the security and stability that Bosnia and
Herzegovina so sorely needs. We hope that the
conclusions of the recent Bonn Conference will help in
accelerating and consolidating the peace process.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of Guinea-Bissau for the kind words he
addressed to Costa Rica and to Ambassador Berrocal
Soto.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of Argentina, in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
20
Security Council 3842nd meeting
Fifty-second year 18 December 1997
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Petrella
(Argentina) took the seat reserved for him at the side
of the Council Chamber.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): The next
speaker is the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, on
whom I now call.
Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Thank you,
Sir, for honouring the Security Council by presiding over
today’s debate. Let me express my delegation’s confidence
in the work of Costa Rica as the presiding member of the
Security Council for this month. We are most pleased to
have had such good, cordial and businesslike relations with
your delegation during this month, and on previous
occasions.
In the interests of transparency, I must also thank you,
Sir, for another allowance that you made for us, and must
admit to something. Frankly, my delegation was neglectful
and failed to give me a complete copy of my presentation
to the Council, so I had to ask for my presentation to be
delayed until this time. I took a look at the Permanent
Representative of Chile, who had a very strange look on his
face when he realized that he had to speak at a time when
he was expecting me to speak. I looked away, of course,
because I did not wish to respond to his look of
astonishment and, maybe, anger.
But this small difficulty on the part of my delegation
may actually have been a blessing in disguise, because it
gives me the opportunity to take note in my statement of
some of the points raised in the statements of some
members of the Council.
Let me take the opportunity to thank you, Mr.
President, and the other members of the Council for having
scheduled today’s discussion on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It appears to some that, after having been the
subject of so many debates before this body, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has strangely fallen off the visible agenda of
the Security Council. Some believe this may be because the
United Nations has failed in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
This brings me to the second point: the United Nations
has not failed in Bosnia and Herzegovina. However, neither
has it yet succeeded. The faults that exist lie with those
who could and should have done more themselves, but
who left the United Nations with a job that it could never
fully and gloriously complete. Under the circumstances,
the United Nations could be seen as having been partially
successful at best. It was left to be projected as
embarrassingly inadequate, with all its flaws revealed.
Still, we would be lacking intellectual and moral
perspective if we failed to note the lives that were saved
through the efforts of the United Nations and its various
agencies and people and, just as relevantly, if we did not
recognize the commitment of the individuals involved,
particularly the ones who sacrificed their lives in Bosnia.
On the other hand, the sheer fact that over 250,000
Bosnians — over 5 per cent of our population — lost
their lives and that 50 per cent of Bosnia’s population
was displaced and made into refugees, mostly through the
campaign of ethnic cleansing, reveals why the efforts of
the United Nations cannot be termed a success.
Furthermore, the fact that the consequences of ethnic
cleansing remain intact and its perpetrators largely remain
free is an even greater blemish.
But is the United Nations to blame? Clearly not
alone, and certainly not as an institution. More relevantly,
however, we must now examine whether the United
Nations is part of a solution that is still forthcoming in
Bosnia and Herzegovina; the answer is, “Yes”.
Increasingly, the United Nations is being asked to play an
ever-more-prominent role in securing and enhancing the
peace in Bosnia. Let me emphasize here that over the last
two years peace has borne positive fruit, and we are
confident of an improvement in dynamics.
We welcome the extension of the mandate of the
multilateral force led by the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) in Bosnia and Herzegovina beyond
the deadline of the summer of 1998. It will be the
linchpin of concerted efforts to secure a real and lasting
peace in our country, with all the beneficial consequences
for a better life for all the people of Bosnia. Nonetheless,
as the last two years have shown and as has been
recognized by many of the leaders today, the military
aspect of implementation will prove to be rather hollow
without a coordinated and revitalized effort on the so-
called civilian aspect of implementation.
The Office of the High Representative must receive
the necessary support to most assertively implement the
High Representative’s mandate. Let me refer here to the
21
Security Council 3842nd meeting
Fifty-second year 18 December 1997
words of the Permanent Representative of Japan and take
note of his invitation to our athletes. In this context, I
would like to point out that at the moment Bosnia and
Herzegovina does have a flag and an anthem, but they are
not endorsed by all. We recognize that change is
forthcoming, and we recognize that we must have a flag
that is endorsed by all and an anthem and a passport that
are endorsed by all. We encourage the High Representative,
if in fact a flag cannot be agreed to, that one be imposed.
But we must demand one flag, one anthem, one passport
and one currency.
I would also like to take note of the fact that the word
“fratricidal” is used around this table. I wish to draw the
attention of the Security Council to such a small event as
a basketball game played recently in Sarajevo. Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the national team, was playing the national
team of the Republic of Croatia. On the national basketball
team of Bosnia and Herzegovina the best player — the
highest scorer — happens to be a Bosnian Serb. We all
know it, but we do not talk about it, as a matter of
civilized, polite behaviour; we just cheer for him and for
the Bosnian team as a whole. When the Bosnian team took
the floor, this gentleman, this wonderful basketball player,
received the cheers of the entire Sarajevo crowd, regardless
of their ethnicity. By coincidence, on the team of the
Republic of Croatia there is a gentleman of Bosnian
Muslim background. As would be the case with many
opponents, he was booed. I apologize to the Republic of
Croatia for this incident involving over-zealous sports fans,
but it shows that we are not talking here about ethnic and
religious hatred. I would also like to make a happy note of
the fact that the team of Bosnia and Herzegovina did defeat
the team of the Republic of Croatia on that one occasion —
I must be a nationalist sometimes.
The various agencies and organs of the United Nations
in Bosnia will be decisive in the success of peace. The role
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) in rolling back the consequences of
ethnic cleansing and facilitating the return of refugees from
abroad is essential. The International Police Task Force
(IPTF) will catalyse concerted efforts to enhance
democracy, human rights and respect for the law, as well
as freedom of movement and the return of refugees
throughout the country. The role of this United Nations
institution is determinative. We wholeheartedly support the
draft resolution before us.
I am certain that here I will not be able to specifically
refer to the whole range of efforts in which the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina is involved, but
I must finally mention what is, perhaps, the most critical:
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, established by the United Nations. At this
time, I must take the opportunity to most humbly thank
Governments, particularly those of the United Kingdom
and the Kingdom of the Netherlands, for the commitment
and the courage of their troops in recent efforts — one of
which actually took place this morning — to bring
indicted war criminals to justice. Those Governments
seem to be most sensitive to the crucial role that the
Tribunal has in securing not only justice, but also
reconciliation, implementation of the Dayton/Paris accords
and a lasting peace. As someone who was in Dayton, I
must also emphasize here that the Dayton/Paris accords,
as well as relevant Security Council resolutions and our
own Constitution, sanction these efforts.
However, we are concerned by recent reports, widely
publicized in the press, which seem to some to indicate a
lack of respect, or even disdain, for the Tribunal’s
mandate. It is especially disquieting if this disregard
comes from some quarters — not from countries in the
region who have in the past refused cooperation, but from
some officials from those countries around this table who
were instrumental in bringing about the Tribunal as well
as the Dayton/Paris accords. To refer to the Tribunal as
a “show court” is unacceptable.
Let me make certain that we are understood. I have
no fear for Judge Louise Arbour. In fact, we may even
have some differences with her; I suppose that we
frequently do. I am certain that in a court of law this 1.5
metre Prosecutor is a match for any man around this
table; she can take care of herself.
We are concerned, however, about the lack of
dignity shown to the Tribunal, about the perception of the
Tribunal that this promotes and about the political
consequences thereof. First, under the accords signed in
Paris, the Tribunal is enshrined in the Constitution of
Bosnia and Herzegovina as the court of highest authority
in our country — it is our court. A lack of respect for this
Tribunal has a direct bearing on us and on respect for our
country. Secondly, the Tribunal is not a colonial court. It
has not been established only to dictate justice and to
have access only to a group of subject people, mainly
Bosnians, Serbians and Croatians. By its mandate, it has
jurisdiction over all potential witnesses and suspects
related to war crimes and genocide that may have been
committed in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the former
Yugoslavia as a whole.
22
Security Council 3842nd meeting
Fifty-second year 18 December 1997
Here I must also emphasize our concern, expressed on
so many occasions by the President and Prosecutor of the
Tribunal, regarding the large number of States that still
have not adopted domestic legislation in line with full
cooperation with the Tribunal. Again, I must highlight, we
are speaking here of countries not only in our own region
but, most incomprehensibly, the democracies of the world.
This brings me to the third point. In view of the lack
of cooperation of some countries and parties in the region
with the Tribunal, and the excuses offered with respect
thereto, what kind of disquieting message —
encouragement — is being offered to these parties, to these
countries, if there is a lack of respect and commitment
shown to the Tribunal by some officials in some
democracies? I emphasize “some officials”.
Let me again try to be clear. My statement is not
intended to be an indictment of any country. The quality of
leadership, courage and commitment is not determined by
the flag of the individual involved. While I had a rather low
opinion of one military commander who came from that
country and who served in Bosnia, it is also a personal
opinion that the most courageous and forthright commander
who served in Bosnia in the United Nations Protection
Force (UNPROFOR) also came from the United Kingdom.
He does deserve to have his name mentioned here: General
Rupert Smith. He made peace possible in Bosnia. Frankly,
sometimes I am still troubled by how he has been forgotten
while other less distinguished past commanders paraded
before television cameras and promoted themselves. He
never did.
We are also aware of the tremendous courage and
commitment exhibited by so many French troops and, in
particular, the inordinate sacrifices. Their sacrifices deserve
to be recalled here again. We are also thankful for the
timely leadership and courage of French leaders at crucial
points during the critical stages of the peace process.
While political decisions, for good or bad, may have
been made in capitals, it is the individual that exhibited
courage or cowardice, morality or shame, legality or
illegality on the ground in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is the
individual soldier or officer that witnessed the good and the
bad, the acts of compassion as well as acts amounting to
crimes and genocide.
The only duty of States now, in this context, is to
ensure that full evidence is provided and that the Tribunal
has full access to witnesses and culpable individuals.
Finally, I ask United Nations Members to remember
that, despite the many contributions their nations have
made, in terms of lives and resources — and I repeat that
we are sincerely most grateful — it is the Bosnians that
paid the highest price, and it is Bosnians of all
backgrounds that seek from the Tribunal the greatest asset
that civilization can provide: justice.
So, as we approach a new and, hopefully, better turn
on the road to a lasting peace in Bosnia, yes, we must
underscore that the future is mostly the responsibility of
Bosnians, all Bosnians. However, we cannot sit around
this table and not take note of the responsibility of all our
countries, all members’ countries to contribute. This is
especially critical in situations in which we all establish
multilateral institutions, organs of this United Nations. For
the sake of the victims, for the sake of this United
Nations, for our common future, we cannot say one thing
here around this table, but do something else at home.
Keeping in mind this primary criterion for both
integrity and mutual benefit, I am certain that with the
assistance of all, and particularly the United Nations,
Bosnians will secure lasting peace, with all its benefits.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina for his
statement and for his very kind words regarding Costa
Rica, and in particular regarding the members of the
Permanent Mission of my country here in New York.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Pakistan. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Kamal (Pakistan): It is my pleasure to address
the Council under your presidency, Sir, as you are the
Foreign Minister of Costa Rica, a country which shines as
a beacon in its commitment to peace and security.
The people of Bosnia and Herzegovina have
witnessed the most savage and barbaric conflict since the
Second World War. They were subjected to diabolic and
deleterious genocide and “ethnic cleansing”. Though the
war has finally come to an end, the effects of the four-
year-long conflict have not yet disappeared. The scar of
the bitter past in the minds of the aggrieved community
is deep. The healing process is arduous, considering the
deep fissures and cleavages caused to the very fabric of
society.
23
Security Council 3842nd meeting
Fifty-second year 18 December 1997
Since the signing of the Dayton Peace Accords two
years ago, important progress has been achieved towards
resurrecting the unity and territorial integrity of the State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, but there still remains a lot to be
done. The areas where progress has not been satisfactory
include the return of all refugees and displaced persons;
freedom of movement across the inter-entity boundary lines,
and the effective functioning of the common State structure,
namely, the Presidency, the Council of Ministers and the
Parliamentary Assembly. While the Government of Bosnia
and Herzegovina has extended full cooperation in achieving
these goals the Serbian entity demonstrated a lack of
commitment, seriously hampering international efforts.
In the military field, the Serbs also continue to evade
their obligations under the Agreement on Regional
Stabilization and the Agreement on Arms Control, which
are vital for ensuring regional stability. We must ensure that
all parties fulfil their declared reduction liabilities and
implementation of other related obligations.
On the issue of criminal proceedings against the
perpetrators of genocide, the international community must
ensure compliance with the relevant provisions of the
Dayton Accords by all parties, particularly the Serbian
entity, in apprehending the indicted criminals. The United
Nations troops on the ground must also cooperate with the
International Tribunal in achieving the ideal of peace with
justice in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In this regard, we
welcome the role of British and Dutch troops in
apprehending some indicted war criminals in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The perpetrators of mass killings must not go
unpunished, be it in Bosnia, in Afghanistan or in Kashmir.
During the last two years, the United Nations troops
in Bosnia and Herzegovina have contributed enormously in
ensuring relative security in the entire region. We support
the continued presence of the United Nations forces in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, providing a secure environment
for the implementation of the civilian aspects of the peace
plan beyond June 1998.
The International Police Task Force (IPTF) faces
enormous opposition from the Bosnian Serbs in reforming
the police institution, which is a matter of concern to all of
us. We support the efforts of the IPTF in the restructuring
and training of the police to operate according to the
principles of democratic policing, carry out weapons
inspections, promote freedom of movement and prevent
financial crime, smuggling and corruption. These efforts
will bear fruit if accompanied by a reform of the judicial
system, for which we must provide adequate resources and
qualified personnel. In supplementing the efforts of the
United Nations in these areas, Pakistan has provided 100
police personnel for the IPTF and has expressed readiness
to provide additional police personnel whenever required.
We are also implementing a programme for the training
of 200 Bosnian military personnel.
My delegation supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the IPTF
to pursue the work entrusted to them in accordance with
Annex 11 of the Peace Agreement.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Pakistan’s
unqualified moral, political and economic support for the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Our support has
always been based on our conviction that no nation
should be victimized because of its smaller size and that
no peoples should be brutalized because of their ethnic
origin. We also believe that no nation and no people
should be denied their inherent right to self-determination
and their right to wage a legitimate struggle for their
liberation.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of Pakistan for his kind words about
Costa Rica.
The next speaker is the representative of Norway. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Biørn Lian (Norway): Allow me first of all to
thank the Costa Rican presidency for organizing this open
debate on Bosnia in the Security Council, and to voice
our satisfaction at seeing you, Mr. Foreign Minister,
presiding over this important meeting. It is indeed an
honour to take the floor under your presidency.
We see today’s meeting as a timely occasion for the
members of the Council and for other United Nations
member countries to take stock of the situation and again
demonstrate their commitment to a continued international
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We would also like
to congratulate Ms. Elisabeth Rehn of Finland on her
appointment as new Special Representative and
Coordinator of United Nations Operations in Bosnia to
succeed Mr. Kai Eide of Norway. We can assure Ms.
Rehn of our full cooperation and assistance in fulfilling
her mandate.
24
Security Council 3842nd meeting
Fifty-second year 18 December 1997
The international community has invested heavily in
the peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. At the Peace
Implementation Conference in Bonn last week it was
agreed that important progress has been achieved, but also
that a lot remains to be done. Norway supports a more
persistent approach to ensure that the parties fulfil their
commitments and take increased responsibility in the
implementation of the Peace Agreement. We welcome the
intention of the High Representative to make full use of his
mandate in order to push the peace process forward.
International involvement and support will still be needed
in Bosnia. Norway will remain actively engaged, but we
demand at the same time full cooperation from all parties.
In our opinion, there is no alternative to the Dayton
Agreement and compliance with this Agreement will
continue to be a condition for Norwegian aid and assistance
to Bosnia.
Norway highly appreciates the important work that the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) and the International Police Task Force (IPTF)
continue to perform in the implementation of the civilian
aspects of the Dayton Peace Agreement, including in the
areas of police reform, return of refugees, mine clearance
and humanitarian and economic assistance.
We therefore fully support the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to extend the UNMIBH/IPTF mandate
for a further period that would add up to 12 months unless
there were substantial changes in the security arrangements
produced by the Stabilization Force (SFOR), and we would
welcome a decision by the Security Council to this effect.
Within the framework of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), we have now also started the
process of considering post-SFOR options in Bosnia.
Norway firmly believes that the stabilizing presence of a
NATO-led military follow-on force, authorized by a
Security Council mandate, will also be required after June
1998, when the current SFOR mandate expires, in order to
consolidate our gains and provide vital support to the
civilian agencies involved. Together with our allies and
partners, Norway will continue to participate with troops in
such a common endeavour.
Continued support from a robust and credible NATO-
led military force will not least be crucial to a successful
completion of IPTF’s efforts to restructure, retrain and
reform the local police and judicial system in Bosnia in
order to help them handle public security in a manner
which is professionally sound, democratic and observant of
human and minority rights. Norway doubts whether any
other formula can realistically function more effectively
than the SFOR-IPTF cooperation.
There seems, furthermore, to be an emerging
agreement that mandating the arming of IPTF personnel
to take on law enforcement tasks is not a viable option.
Norway remains convinced that the right way to go is,
rather, to increase international assistance to IPTF’s
efforts. For our part, we are about to provide $400,000
for the support of police academies and the purchase of
uniforms in Bosnia, thereby bringing our 1997
contribution to over $1 million. We also intend to step up
our contributions for next year, by providing more IPTF
police personnel with special qualifications, including
training skills, and by making further financial
contributions to the IPTF’s police reform efforts.
Norway continues to be concerned about the serious
landmine problems in Bosnia. We will therefore also
carry on our support of mine clearance efforts, both
through the programmes of the Norwegian People’s Aid
and the activities of the United Nations Mine Action
Centre.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to pay
a special tribute to the men and women working for
UNMIBH and IPTF, including those who have tragically
lost their lives, and to pay the same tribute to those
working for other organizations and non-governmental
organizations in the service of peace and a better life for
the Bosnian peoples.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of Norway for his kind words addressed
to me.
25
Security Council 3842nd meeting
Fifty-second year 18 December 1997
Several speakers inscribed on my list have not yet
taken the floor. In view of the lateness of the hour, with the
concurrence of members of the Council I will now suspend
the meeting. The meeting is suspended until tomorrow,
Friday, 19 December 1997, when it will resume at 10.30
a.m.
The meeting was suspended at 6 p.m.
26
United Nations S/PV.3842 (Resumption)
97-86794 (E) This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fifty-second Year
3842nd Meeting
Friday, 19 December 1997, 10.30 a.m.
New York
President: Mr. Berrocal Soto . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Costa Rica)
Members: Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Somavía
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Qin Huasun
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Elaraby
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dejammet
Guinea-Bissau . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lopes Da Rosa
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Owada
Kenya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mahugu
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Matuszewski
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Monteiro
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Park
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dahlgren
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Sir John Weston
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Richardson
Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/1997/966)
Security Council 3842nd meeting (Resumption)
Fifty-second year 19 December 1997
The meeting was resumed at 10.45 a.m.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Malaysia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Marzuki (Malaysia): Mr. President, my
delegation is pleased to participate under your able
chairmanship in this formal meeting of the Council to
consider extending the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including the
International Police Task Force (IPTF). Malaysia recognizes
the important role played by the IPTF in promoting civil
security by working closely with the parties to achieve the
fundamental reforms in law enforcement institutions in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We therefore welcome the
extension of its mandate by this Council. Malaysia is
privileged and honoured to be part of the IPTF in
implementing its important tasks as outlined in annex II of
the Dayton Peace Agreement. We call on the international
community to provide the IPTF with the necessary financial
and material assistance so as to enable it to carry out the
additional tasks assigned to it by the London and Bonn
Conferences of the Peace Implementation Council.
My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
express our sincere appreciation to the men and women
from various countries serving under the Stabilization Force
(SFOR) and the IPTF and other international organizations
who have contributed so significantly to the current peace
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to offer our condolences to
the families of the 12 dedicated officers who lost their lives
in a tragic helicopter crash last September.
Thanks to the presence of the multinational force, a
relatively safe and secure environment has now prevailed.
Important efforts towards building a unified Bosnia and
Herzegovina have begun to take root. The common State
institutions have been formed and are functioning, albeit
inefficiently. Increasing numbers of the displaced Bosnians
are beginning to feel confident enough to return to their
homes. At the same time, the international community has
made a significant contribution in the reconstruction efforts,
helping to put Bosnia and Herzegovina back on its feet
economically.
However, we are concerned that serious obstacles
continue to impede the full implementation of the Dayton
Peace Agreement. Mutual mistrust and animosity among the
different ethnic groups continue to obstruct efforts towards
realizing the ultimate objective of making peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina an irreversible process. We wish to
remind the parties concerned that there is no viable
alterative to the Peace Agreement as the foundation for
building lasting peace and prosperity in a multi-ethnic,
multicultural and multireligious Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The attainment of this goal requires the full commitment
of the Bosnian leaders themselves. They all must be
willing to take bold steps towards establishing a
multiethnic State within its internationally recognized
boundaries, with fully functioning common State
institutions that command the support and confidence of
the people.
When the parties accepted the Dayton Peace
Agreement two years ago, they made a contract and a
commitment to, inter alia, respect the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It is therefore imperative that they keep
their commitments, including ensuring that all the joint
State institutions are duly constituted and functioning
efficiently and effectively, and that all the attributes of a
sovereign State are fully bestowed on Bosnia and
Herzegovina to enable it to take its rightful place within
the family of nations. In this regard, the Bosnian entities
must work strenuously towards resolving the problems
now confronting the State, from the issue of appropriate
State symbols to the question of the currency and to
various laws that need to be passed by the parliamentary
Assembly.
My delegation believes that a durable peace can be
guaranteed in Bosnia and Herzegovina only through
reconciliation among its people on the basis of the
principles of justice and the rule of law. It is therefore
imperative that the perpetrators of the horrendous crimes
against humanity in Bosnia and Herzegovina be made to
face the consequences of their past actions. In this regard,
we are seriously concerned that many of the indicted war
criminals, including the most-wanted indictees, Radovan
Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, are still at large and continue
to exercise political influence and leadership in the Serb
entity. Their continued freedom constitutes a major
obstacle to the efforts to create a lasting peace in a
unified Bosnia and Herzegovina. If the long-term
prospects for peace are not to be undermined, they must
be immediately apprehended and brought to trial before
the Tribunal established for this purpose in The Hague.
The trial and appropriate punishment of those guilty of
the heinous crimes against humanity are indispensable in
bringing about national reconciliation, on which so much
of the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina depends. My
delegation believes that SFOR has a critical role to play
2
Security Council 3842nd meeting (Resumption)
Fifty-second year 19 December 1997
in apprehending these indicted war criminals. In this regard,
we commend the courageous action of SFOR in arresting
the two indicted war criminals.
To his great credit, the President of the Tribunal,
Judge Antonio Cassese, in presenting the Tribunal’s fourth
annual report to the General Assembly last month, was
forthright in singling out the Serb entity and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia as the parties that have repeatedly
refused to cooperate with the Tribunal. We view their
refusal to recognize the authority of the Tribunal established
by this Council as a direct affront to the Council and the
United Nations as a whole and one which should not be
allowed to continue with impunity.
My delegation is concerned at the continued violations
of freedom of movement and at the harassment, destruction
of property and discrimination on the basis of ethnicity and
political affiliation that occur in many areas, especially in
the Serb entity. This has hampered the safe return of
refugees and displaced persons, and only a quarter of the
estimated 2 million refugees and displaced persons have
been able to return, most to the areas in which they belong
to the ethnic majority. It is essential that all the relevant
agencies, including SFOR and the IPTF, provide the
necessary support to the High Representative and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) in the successful implementation of the return
programme, particularly with regard to minority returnees,
who have thus far encountered political, security and
administrative impediments. Clearly, the success of the
return programme is critical to the realization of a viable
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As the peace implementation process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina enters its most critical stage, it is imperative
that the relatively safe and secure environment created by
the presence of the multinational force be maintained and
further consolidated to ensure that all the efforts and
resources invested so far will bear the desired results. The
international community cannot take the risk of
withdrawing the multinational forces from Bosnia and
Herzegovina at a time when State institutions are still weak,
suspicions and mistrust are still very much in evidence and
indicted war criminals are still free and exercising influence
and authority in the background.
In this regard, Malaysia welcomes the ongoing
discussions on the future role of the international
peacekeepers after the expiration of the SFOR mandate in
June 1998. We hope for a final consensus on this vitally
important issue and are encouraged by some positive
developments in that direction. We welcome in particular
the decision of the United States to extend the role of its
forces in SFOR. We consider a continuing military role
by the United States as pivotal to the viability of the
international peacekeeping force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We believe that the further presence of an
international force is necessary, and, as a troop-
contributing country, Malaysia will be prepared to engage
in consultations on that subject.
Clearly, there is a need to build confidence,
understanding and friendship among the ethnic groups in
Bosnia and Herzegovina so that it may be able to sustain
the process of national reconciliation. For this purpose,
Malaysia is prepared to make a modest contribution by
organizing a series of informal forums or workshops with
the participation of Bosnian groups and individuals and
international experts and facilitators. With the support of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Malaysia proposes to convene
this forum in Malaysia soon. We believe that, given its
unique multi-ethnic, multilingual and multireligious
background and experience at nation-building, Malaysia
can make a positive contribution in this area. While the
international community will continue to assist, the main
responsibility for carrying out the tasks of nation building
ultimately lies with the Bosnian people themselves. Only
when they earnestly and sincerely carry out their
commitments under the Peace Agreement will the peace
settlement be truly achieved and the peace process
irreversible.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Slovenia. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Türk (Slovenia): Mr. President, I wish to begin
by expressing our sincere appreciation of the fact that this
meeting of the Security Council is taking place under the
presidency of Costa Rica. The role of your country in
international peace is exemplary, and we believe that it is
most fitting and symbolic that the discussion and the
search for durable peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
taking place under your presidency. We are sure that this
month of December will be successful for the Security
Council.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina continues
to be a matter of international concern. While some
progress has been made in the implementation of
Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement, as noted in the Secretary-
General’s report on the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
3
Security Council 3842nd meeting (Resumption)
Fifty-second year 19 December 1997
and Herzegovina, it is obvious that further sustained efforts
of the international community are indispensable to stabilize
the situation and to make the peace process irreversible.
There have been some developments that should
encourage our common effort for peace. The Peace
Agreement concluded two years ago has been an important
achievement in itself. It stopped the war and opened the
path towards preservation of the independence, sovereignty,
legal continuity and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The implementation of the Peace Agreement
has established the lasting cessation of hostilities and
represents important progress in the domain of arms
reduction. The efforts of the High Representative have
gained wide international recognition and support. A
plethora of international organizations, financial institutions
and non-governmental organizations have contributed to
various aspects of the efforts to achieve economic
reconstruction and a durable peace.
Slovenia has actively joined these efforts. Recently, it
assumed further responsibility by becoming member of the
Stabilization Force (SFOR), and we are cooperating closely
with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in
contributing to various options for the post-SFOR operation.
In addition, Slovenia is in the process of establishing an
international fund for demining and for assistance to mine
victims.
The international concern for the peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has been most clearly expressed at the meeting
of the Peace Implementation Council held in Bonn on 9 and
10 December 1997. The Peace Implementation Council
reaffirmed that there is no alternative to the Peace
Agreement as the foundation for political and economic
reconstruction in Bosnia. The vital contribution of the
multinational Stabilization Force in providing a secure
environment for the implementation of the Peace
Agreement has been widely recognized. The Peace
Implementation Council confirmed an emerging consensus
on the need for an international military presence to
continue beyond June 1998. This remains indispensable for
any progress in the peace process in the future, and we
welcome the recent decisions in that connection.
The message of the Peace implementation Council is
clear: The responsibility for consolidating the peace rests
primarily with the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The immediate neighbours of Bosnia and Herzegovina are
expected to take a constructive approach to achieving this
end and must assist in the endeavours for peace. Finally,
the international community has to take a robust stance
towards all the major problems impeding the peace
process.
These messages were echoed and strengthened in
resolution 52/150 on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, adopted by the General Assembly earlier
this week on 15 December. Slovenia is gratified that the
resolution was adopted by consensus, which clearly
reflects the unity and resolve of the entire international
community to work together for a just and durable peace
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and for the removal of all
obstacles that still impede that process.
Among the impediments to peace, some are obvious,
as are the measures to expedite their removal. Stricter
measures are needed to remove the war criminals from
their positions of influence over decision-making and to
transfer them for trial to the international war crimes
Tribunal. The efforts to secure compliance with the orders
of the Tribunal have to be supported and the courage of
those involved in such efforts, including the most recent,
have to be commended. The Security Council should
encourage further efforts to bring the criminals to justice
and enhance the effectiveness of the Tribunal, which the
Security Council established in 1993. This would not only
strengthen justice as a value in itself and safeguard the
credibility of the Security Council, but would also create
important conditions for the success of the peace efforts
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Security Council should also render its political
support for the voluntary repatriation of refugees and for
the removal of obstacles which hinder the process of
repatriation. Harassment of the returnees, intimidation and
killings designed to discourage the voluntary return of
refugees must be stopped and, if that becomes necessary,
the Security Council should consider specific measures
against those responsible for such acts.
The return of refugees is also vital for the proper
functioning of the elected institutions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and for the restoration of the ethnic diversity
that has always represented the essence of the identity of
the country. Therefore, it is essential for the very
existence of Bosnia and Herzegovina as an independent
and united country. The need to prevent attempts to
undermine the sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina or
to achieve domination by a single group over the common
institutions will be best met by ensuring the restoration,
to the largest extent possible, of the ethnic balance in the
country. The basic guarantee to achieving this is to ensure
the necessary level of security of the population in Bosnia
4
Security Council 3842nd meeting (Resumption)
Fifty-second year 19 December 1997
and Herzegovina. This is a requirement which could
gradually lose its centrality in the peace process, in
accordance with the overall progress. However, it is of
central importance now and every effort must be made to
strengthen it. A continued international military presence
and the strengthening of the police component are the main
pillars of a secure environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We support the suggestions of the Secretary-General
concerning the strengthening of the International Police
Task Force (IPTF) monitoring of police activities with a
view to effectively dealing with problems like corruption,
smuggling and financial crime. One important area of these
activities is also the functioning of the border-control police
units.
In addition to providing a secure environment, the
multinational Force should also take an even more active
role in supporting the Peace Agreement and those who
implement it. On the other hand, the Force should take
active steps against those who oppose the Peace Agreement
or refuse to comply with its provisions. The multinational
military and police forces need to play a role in
apprehending the indicted war criminals and in clearing the
obstacles to the safe and voluntary return of refugees and
displaced persons.
The success of other aspects of the peace process will,
to a large extent, depend on the completion of these tasks.
In this area, we see the primary challenge for the High
Representative. We therefore welcome and support the
strengthening of his mandate, in accordance with the
conclusions of the Bonn Peace Implementation Conference.
Let me conclude by saying the following: The efforts
of the international community so far have brought some
important progress in the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We should renew and reinforce our
commitment to pursuing this process further and rendering
it irreversible.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of Slovenia for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Turkey. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Çelem (Turkey): At the outset, my delegation
would like to commend the Costa Rican presidency and the
Security Council for scheduling an open debate on this very
important subject at this crucial stage. We expressed our
views in depth on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the General Assembly in the debate under
agenda item 47 three days ago. Therefore, I will be brief.
It is noteworthy that considerable progress has been
made in implementing peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina since the signing of the Dayton/Paris Peace
Agreement. The fact is that, since the signing of the
Peace Agreement, considerable progress has been
achieved in the military field. Nonetheless, lack of
compliance on some crucial civilian aspects of the
Agreement indicates that the task undertaken by the
international community is far from complete. As
accurately reflected, most recently in the conclusions of
the Bonn Peace Implementation Conference of 9 and 10
December 1997, the fragility of the situation in the
country compels us to maintain a stable security
environment. The Secretary-General’s reports of 8
September and 10 December 1997 and the latest report of
the High Representative for the implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina all point to
the fact that the peace process has not yet become
irreversible.
In this respect, I would like to reaffirm Turkey’s full
support for the General Framework Agreement for Peace
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the annexes thereto. They
constitute the basis for the establishment of a durable and
just peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In order to heal the
wounds of the war and to attain lasting peace, it is
incumbent upon the international community to exert
every effort to help Bosnia and Herzegovina in its
arduous endeavour for reconciliation and reintegration.
Turkey, along with other States, is actively participating
in the implementation of both the military and civilian
aspects of the Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement and is
ready, on its part, to continue doing so.
With its resolution 52/150, the General Assembly
recently reiterated its full commitment to the stabilization
and consolidation of peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and reconciliation among its constituent peoples. We
welcome this unanimous decision reaffirming its concern
about non-compliance with the peace agreement and
demonstrating its willingness to take the necessary
measures in its power to obtain full implementation. For
this purpose, it is essential that all the conditions
envisaged by the Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement — inter
alia, cooperation with the International Tribunal, the
return of refugees and displaced persons to their homes
5
Security Council 3842nd meeting (Resumption)
Fifty-second year 19 December 1997
and the establishment of common institutions — materialize
without delay.
It is not possible to overstate the importance of the
work of the International Tribunal for the process of
reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Turkey supports
fully the efforts of the International Tribunal aimed at the
prosecution of persons responsible for serious violations of
international humanitarian law committed in the territory of
the former Yugoslavia since 1991 and believes that States
and parties to the Peace Agreement must meet their
obligations to cooperate with the Tribunal.
The conclusions of the Peace Implementation
Conference on Bosnia and Herzegovina held in Bonn drew
particular attention to the failure of the authorities of the
Republika Srpska entity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to
carry out their obligations. It is the duty of the international
community to exert the necessary pressure on the parties
which do not live up to their legal obligations of
cooperating with the Tribunal. At this juncture, it is
important to recall that, under the Dayton Accord, the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) is
responsible for the Serbian entity’s cooperation and
compliance, as well as its own.
Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), the Sintra
Political Declaration of the Ministerial Meeting of the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council and,
just recently, the Bonn Peace Implementation Conference
all confirmed that international economic aid is conditional
upon compliance with and implementation of the Peace
Agreement. In this regard, we would like to stress the need
for timely information about the level of cooperation and
compliance so that necessary assessments can be made.
Turkey welcomes the positive steps taken towards a
normalization of relations between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. However, there is ample room for progress in
this respect. Therefore, we call upon the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to fulfil
immediately the requirement of establishing full and
unconditional diplomatic relations with Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We believe that such a development will
provide the necessary tool to remove some of the existing
hurdles on the road to normalization.
Turkey also welcomes the successful conclusion of the
local elections of 13 and 14 September 1997. We expect
full and unconditional implementation of the election
results. Any attempt not to implement them will hamper
the delicate process underway.
Economic revitalization is essential for the process
of reconciliation, the improvement of living conditions
and the maintenance of durable peace, both in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in the region. However, we are
dismayed that the package of essential legislation
establishing the common institutions of economic
management has not been implemented in full; nor has
the State-level legislation specified in the Sintra
Declaration been adopted. We hope that necessary steps
will be taken immediately, so that Bosnia and
Herzegovina can have an economic policy framework
which would allow it to start taking advantage of the
multilateral economic assistance already available. As
urged by the Organization of the Islamic Conference
Contact Group on 7 December 1997, the international
community must disburse expeditiously the funds pledged
for the rehabilitation and reconstruction programme of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Implementation Force (IFOR) has played a
crucial role in preserving peace and order and in ensuring
progress on the peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Turkey believes that the Stabilization Force (SFOR), as
the successor to IFOR, has been indispensable for the
maintenance of a stable security environment essential for
deterring or, if necessary, halting a resumption of
hostilities. We welcome the emerging consensus on the
need for a military presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina
to continue beyond June 1998. As pointed out by the
Secretary-General in his last report,
“Much has been achieved, but much also remains to
be done.” [S/1997/966, para. 45]
At this volatile stage of the peace process, it is
essential that the international community continue to
exert itself persistently in order to achieve a lasting peace
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of Turkey for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Hungary.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Erdös (Hungary) (interpretation from French):
Hungary welcomes this discussion in the Security Council
6
Security Council 3842nd meeting (Resumption)
Fifty-second year 19 December 1997
of the activities undertaken by the international community
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and of the tasks that remain to
be completed in order to implement the decisions made in
the framework of the Dayton Agreement. We note in
particular the importance of the conclusions of the Peace
Implementation Conference held recently in Bonn, which
emphasized building on the achievements of the peace
process, continuing international assistance and
strengthening the role of the High Representative.
Hungary, which neighbours the Balkan region, is
profoundly attached to a political settlement of the issues of
conflict on the territory of the former Yugoslavia. It is also
attached to the preservation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and of all the
other successor States of the former Yugoslavia. We reject
vigorously the proposals that have been made here and
there suggesting the dismemberment of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a solution. It is not necessary to dwell at
length on the possible negative repercussions of such
destructive ideas.
We welcome the determination of the international
community to proceed on the track of carrying out the
civilian aspects of the Dayton Agreement. We also
welcome the intention of the Security Council to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina for an additional period. Hungary joined the
peacekeeping operations in 1996 by opening a base for the
Stabilization Force at Taszár, in the south of our country,
and by sending a logistical contingent of 500 people, which
last year was able to rebuild 20 bridges used for railway
and surface transportation. That contingent also began
demining operations in the immediate vicinity of those
bridges. This year the contingent is continuing its
reconstruction activities without interruption, in order to
facilitate the resumption of normal economic and
commercial life in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Likewise, my country has participated in the
operations of the International Police Task Force since it
was created and at the beginning of this year again
increased the number of its personnel serving in the Force.
Nevertheless, we note that the efforts made to improve
the economic situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina could be
accelerated further if the necessary economic legislation
were implemented and if the functioning of the central
bodies were made more effective. It is harmful for Bosnia
and Herzegovina that the laws which are absolutely
necessary for the recovery of the country’s economic life
have not yet been approved by the competent bodies
because of differences in views, a lack of confidence or
the absence of political will.
Nor can we fail to underscore the importance of
reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, for if peace and
political and economic stability are not accompanied by
the corresponding psychological changes in the citizenry,
the situation in the country will remain fragile and the
results of the peace process may be reversed.
Administering justice, monitoring respect for human
rights — including the rights of minorities — education,
spreading the values of democracy and a free press could
contribute greatly to this process.
We note with satisfaction the arrest in Bosnia and
Herzegovina of two more individuals accused of war
crimes. We encourage the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the Stabilization Force to continue
their activities in this sphere, while emphasizing the need
to secure the full cooperation of all three communities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and of neighbouring countries
as well, so that the number of those brought to justice
will accurately reflect the true dimensions of the atrocities
committed there. It is time we remembered the bitter
lessons of this bloody century of ours, recalling the words
spoken at Nuremberg in November 1945 by the United
States judge Robert Jackson:
(spoke in English)
“The wrongs which we seek to condemn and
punish have been so calculated, so malignant and so
devastating that civilization cannot tolerate their
being ignored, because it cannot survive their being
repeated”.
(spoke in French)
One might well wonder how many times the horrors
of the past will have to be repeated. The parties in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the immediate neighbours of that
country must also shoulder their share of the
responsibility in efforts to reject vigorously aggressive
nationalist, racist and ethnocentric theories — theories
that in fact contributed greatly to kindling the inferno in
the former Yugoslavia.
We are convinced that in spite of the difficulties and
the passage of time, the international community must not
turn away from the developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and must maintain its civilian and military
presence in that country. Here, Hungary welcomes
7
Security Council 3842nd meeting (Resumption)
Fifty-second year 19 December 1997
yesterday’s announcement on this matter by the President
of the United States, and is prepared to continue to
contribute to reaching the objectives of the Dayton
Agreement. The Security Council can play an enormous
role in the uniquely complex endeavour aimed at restoring
normalcy to this sorely tried country.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): The next
speaker is the representative of Ukraine. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Yel’chenko (Ukraine): It gives me special
pleasure, Mr. President, to take part in this meeting under
your leadership. It is by coincidence that I had the honour
today to transmit to the Permanent Mission of Costa Rica
to the United Nations my foreign ministry’s agreement to
the appointment of the first Ambassador of Costa Rica to
Ukraine.
Looking at the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
after more than six years of United Nations involvement
and two years after the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina was signed, the
international community can feel some sort of relief and
cautious optimism concerning the future of that country.
Despite the problems and the persistent difficulties on the
road towards the establishment of a democratic, multiethnic
State of Bosnia and Herzegovina, we cannot deny the
remarkable progress that has been made.
There is no doubt that it has been achieved thanks in
the first place to the efforts of the parties to the Peace
Agreement. However, the process could have been much
more difficult had it not been facilitated by the continuous
assistance of the international community. It is also true
that, despite signs of overall improvement, the present
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as that in the
whole region, will continue to require agile efforts.
The Peace Implementation Conference held at Bonn
earlier this month demonstrated once again the existence of
a strong international commitment to the process of
reconciliation and nation-building in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
The international community must concentrate on
preventing the political development of the country from
moving in a direction contrary to the Peace Agreement. In
this regard we should remove the temptation to use military
force and the fear that the latter will be used. Ukraine
shares the view that the Stabilization Force (SFOR)
authorized by Security Council resolution 1088 (1996)
continues to be an important element in securing the first
outcomes of the ongoing process of reconciliation and
State-building in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as in
contributing to the stabilization of the situation in the
Balkans.
We believe that the continued military presence in
Bosnia and Herzegovina should not be limited by specific
time limits, but should be measured by the progress in the
implementation of the Peace Agreement. This presence
can only ensure the concentration on the political,
economic and social issues and challenges that is so
desperately required.
Therefore, my delegation fully supports the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH), which includes the International
Police Task Force (IPTF), to pursue the work entrusted to
it in accordance with annex 11 of the Peace Agreement.
With this in mind, my country stands ready to extend its
participation in a feasible post-SFOR operation to be
mandated by the Security Council beyond June 1998.
The delegation of Ukraine is convinced that the role
of the United Nations in the process of reconciliation and
civilian consolidation in Bosnia remains indispensable. At
the same time, inasmuch as further success in
implementing the Peace Agreement depends largely on
the fulfilment of its civilian aspects, the United Nations
role in the solution of the humanitarian problems should
be increased. In our view, the issues of demining,
economic reconstruction, human rights, the return of
refugees and law enforcement are of special importance.
The proper coordination of humanitarian efforts between
the United Nations bodies in the field and all other
international structures involved, including the Office of
the High Representative, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, non-governmental
organizations and others, as well as between SFOR and
the IPTF, will be extremely helpful to that end. As no
agency has the lead in the field of human rights, further
coordination among the various organizations dealing with
different aspects of this problem is also necessary.
Demining still represents one of the serious obstacles
hampering the effective implementation of the civilian
aspects of the Agreement. There is no doubt that the
solution of this problem would substantially contribute to
the return of refugees, increased freedom of movement
and the economic reconstruction of the whole country.
8
Security Council 3842nd meeting (Resumption)
Fifty-second year 19 December 1997
As one of the contributors of personnel to the IPTF,
Ukraine notes with satisfaction that the Force has become
more assertive in focusing on enhancing freedom of
movement, police training and protection of human rights.
A high level of cooperation between the IPTF and SFOR
on the ground has proved to be very effective and should
thus be further developed.
The progress reached under IPTF guidance in police
reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina is also remarkable and
commendable. At the same time, we are of the view that
the multifaceted process of implementation of the civilian
aspects of the Dayton accords, in particular police reform
in the Federation and the Republika Srpska, should acquire
a more integrated character. Future progress cannot be
achieved in one sphere without being complemented by
relevant measures in another. We therefore share the view
that police reform in Bosnia necessitates adequate changes
in the country’s whole judicial and penal systems.
It will be difficult to achieve final success in the peace
process in Bosnia unless the process is supported by
effective economic reconstruction in the country with the
continued assistance of the international donor community.
Top priority should be given to projects aimed at promoting
economic cooperation between the Federation and the
Republika Srpska, as well as within the Federation itself.
Both multiethnic entities and the three constituent peoples
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, along with all other peoples
residing in the country, should equally enjoy the advantages
of economic recovery, including international financial aid.
In this context, I should like to stress that all these
practical measures aimed at improving everyday life should
be guided by the need to build confidence and mutual trust
among the multi-ethnic entities in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
However, the primary responsibility for building a
viable democratic society as well as lasting peace and
reconciliation lies with the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. This will become a reality only with the full
implementation of the Peace Agreement by the parties
themselves, since it is up to them alone to define the
destiny of the country.
Finally, my delegation would like to join previous
speakers in paying special tribute to those who have
tragically lost their lives in the name of peace and a better
life for the Bosnian people. I should like also to take this
opportunity to confirm Ukraine’s steadfast commitment to
the cause of peace in Bosnia in the pursuit of a secure and
prosperous future for that country and in the Balkans as a
whole, which, hopefully, has come closer during the past
year.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of Ukraine for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Canada. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Fowler (Canada) (interpretation from French):
Canada is pleased to participate in this meeting of the
Security Council in its consideration of the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
including the International Police Task Force (IPTF).
Canada is pleased to continue its support for and
contribution to the IPTF in Bosnia. The IPTF is the
largest international police mission ever fielded. Its
existence is an indication of the increasing importance of
the role of civilian police in peacekeeping operations.
Civilian police provide the transition from military to
civilian authority, from peacekeeping to peace-building.
In democratic societies, there is a security covenant
between the government and the people. This covenant is
still fragile in Bosnia, hence the role for the international
military and civilian police forces. The military provides
space between factions, and the police mission provides
monitoring and training for local forces, so that
democratic institutions can take root.
Democracy and national reconciliation depend on the
rule of law. The establishment of a capable, professional
and motivated multi-ethnic Bosnian police force is key to
achieving that goal.
Canada supported the call for a strengthened IPTF
for Bosnia at meetings held in October and December
1996 in Paris and London. That support was reinforced at
meetings of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council in Istanbul, Sintra, and, last
week, in Bonn. The IPTF has begun to show results.
Throughout Bosnia, it is carrying out rigorous weapons
inspections, reducing the number of illegal checkpoints
and applying pressure to ensure that joint police uniforms
and vehicles are used. It has also started a restructuring
and training programme with the Republika Srpska police.
However, it will take some time for training in the rule of
law and in democratic, community-based policing to have
some effect on ingrained attitudes.
9
Security Council 3842nd meeting (Resumption)
Fifty-second year 19 December 1997
(spoke in English)
Canada is pleased that the training component of the
IPTF’s role is now expanding. This is all the more reason
for careful coordination between training agencies, the
United Nations Civilian Police (UNCIVPOL) and IPTF
contributors. We would welcome an update on the training
programme which discusses its effectiveness and future
plans.
The IPTF faces structural challenges inherent to any
large United Nations mission. It could be more effective if
there were better screening and training of international
police before deployment. Improved administration and a
clearer chain of command would also enhance the IPTF’s
capabilities. In addition, it must work with small groups of
civilian police who arrive in Bosnia with different training
backgrounds and capabilities, and who are then placed in
mixed units in isolated police stations throughout the
country. Despite the evident difficulties, this approach
offers, of course, the opportunity for civilian police to
exchange training methods, and demonstrates to the local
population that multi-ethnic policing can be effective.
The IPTF’s mandate, role and, indeed, its very
existence in training and monitoring are linked for the
foreseeable future to the continued presence of a military
stabilizing factor — currently the Stabilization Force
(SFOR), led by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) and authorized by the United Nations Security
Council. In order to gain the confidence of all parties, the
IPTF must be unarmed. However, the ability of the IPTF to
call on SFOR is equally important in carrying out its
operations. Recent successes with regard to investigations,
removal of roadblocks, weapons inspections and prison
monitoring would not have been possible without backing
from SFOR to enforce IPTF requirements.
Recently, some have suggested that there may be a
gap between the mandates of SFOR and the IPTF which
should be filled by armed police. This might be better
characterized as an attitude gap. SFOR and the IPTF have
unique and mutually supporting responsibilities for
establishing sustainable security and the transition to peace-
building in Bosnia. However, and this I emphasize, we
should not lose sight of our goal: reinforcement of the
capacity and willingness of the local police and
Government to fully assume their responsibilities within a
context of peace. These are their responsibilities, which we
urge them to assume and exercise. We, the international
community, must avoid the temptation of displacing these
authorities. This would send the wrong message, and the
underlying local conditions would remain unchanged.
In a related effort to empower Bosnian authorities,
the United Nations will shortly begin transferring the
authority of the Mine Action Centre to the local
government. This is a significant responsibility which
Bosnian leaders will need to address seriously. The
scourge of land mines is very real in Bosnia and will
require new leadership on the part of Bosnian politicians
from all sides. For its part, Canada provided the largest
in-kind contribution of demining experts of any
participating nation to the Mine Action Centre from April
to September 1997, and continued to provide personnel
until just recently. We expect we will also provide
personnel to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Mine Action
Centre next year.
In another related effort, as part of the international
community’s drive for justice and peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Canada announced the day before yesterday
an additional financial contribution of $600,000 and five
additional crime analysts to the International War Crimes
Tribunal to support its work of exhuming mass graves in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Close cooperation between the IPTF and SFOR in
recent months has been effective in implementing the
Dayton peace agreements and in ensuring that local police
function effectively. SFOR and the IPTF must continue to
combine their efforts, taking action in a coordinated and
creative fashion, using their respective strengths as part of
a long-term commitment by the international community.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Luxembourg. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Wolzfeld (Luxembourg) (interpretation from
French): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union —
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland, Romania and Slovakia — and the associated
country Cyprus, as well as Iceland, align themselves with
this statement.
The European Union wishes first of all to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Coordinator of United Nations Operations in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Kai Eide, for the tireless efforts that he,
10
Security Council 3842nd meeting (Resumption)
Fifty-second year 19 December 1997
his deputy and the other members of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in particular the
members of the International Police Task Force (IPTF),
have made to assist in the establishment of a lasting peace
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We would also like to take this
opportunity to congratulate the new Special Representative,
Ms. Elizabeth Rehn, and to assure her of our full
cooperation and assistance in the discharge of her important
responsibilities.
The adoption without a vote by the General Assembly
on Monday, 15 December 1997, of the resolution on the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina was a clear message of
support for the peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina on
the part of the international community.
The European Union wishes to recall that there is no
alternative to the Peace Agreement, which is the foundation
for the political and economic development of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its two multi-ethnic entities. The process
initiated two years ago has been characterized by the fact
that it has been possible to implement efficiently the
military aspects of the agreements. Furthermore, the
international community has launched a substantial effort to
rebuild infrastructure in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Full respect for human rights and the rights of
minorities is closely linked to the restoration of a multi-
ethnic Bosnia and Herzegovina, with institutions operating
in full respect for the rule of law and in conformity with
universally recognized principles of justice.
One of the most delicate areas, which remains a
determining factor for the return to normality in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, is the training of police forces. Indeed, a great
many refugees and displaced persons, including those from
regions in which they were members of minority groups,
have still not returned home for fear of acts of intimidation
and violence. Administrative and legal measures must be
taken immediately to put an end to such acts. If these
measures are to be implemented promptly and without
discrimination, action by a police force imbued with
democratic principles is essential.
The European Union welcomes the progress made in
the two entities in restructuring the police thanks to the
tireless activities of the International Police Task Force. In
particular, we wish to welcome the disbandment of the
special units, the re-entry into the regular civilian police of
some qualified members of those units and the creation of
mixed police patrols. Furthermore, we wish to underline the
importance of organizing in the territory of both entities
courses on respect for human dignity and on the role of
the police in a democratic society, as well as the
importance of reopening and developing police academies
to ensure the training of police in accordance with
democratic principles.
Improved cooperation between the IPTF and the
local police, in the context of promoting freedom of
movement between and within the entities, and with the
assistance of the Stabilization Force, has enabled many
illegal checkpoints to be dismantled. The number of
checkpoints has been considerably reduced, and we wish
to welcome this positive development.
The close cooperation between the International
Police Task Force and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) made it possible to hold
orderly local elections on 13 and 14 September 1997 and
for the Assembly of Republika Srpska on 22 and 23
November 1997. This cooperation bodes well for the
general elections scheduled to take place in 1998 in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. To this end, the reform of the
media must be successfully completed so that they can
operate in a democratic and pluralist manner. The multi-
ethnicity of the parties needs to be developed.
The European Union wishes to pay tribute to the
work carried out by other divisions of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in particular the Civil
Affairs division, the Human Rights Office and the Office
of Press and Information. Furthermore, the European
Union wishes to underline the importance of the Mine
Action Centre, which will be called upon to continue to
play an essential role in Bosnia and Herzegovina after 1
January 1998, with the implementation of the Agreed
Principles for Demining, which have been agreed upon by
the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
While 1997 has seen real progress, further efforts
will have to be made in such diverse areas as the
re-establishment of security, the bringing to justice of
those responsible for war crimes, the establishment of a
free press, the return of refugees and displaced persons,
economic rehabilitation and the holding of local elections.
It is true that the results achieved will remain fragile if
further progress is not made soon. It is obvious that much
more could have been achieved had the authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina contributed fully to the
construction of a civic and democratic society in the
country. As we enter the third year of implementation of
the Peace Agreement and the last phase of the
consolidation period, major efforts are still needed to
11
Security Council 3842nd meeting (Resumption)
Fifty-second year 19 December 1997
ensure the functioning of viable structures in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its two entities. The European Union is
concerned about the fact that the central Government in
Bosnia and Herzegovina operates without any organic law,
secretariat or fixed headquarters. The Assembly has met
only five times since its election last year. The central
budget is not funded by the entities, which withhold
customs revenues or do not collect them. Large sums are
being managed without the necessary transparency and
outside the legal process. Bosnia and Herzegovina still has
neither a flag nor a common currency.
The Peace Implementation Council met in Bonn on 9
and 10 December 1997 to examine progress made since the
London Conference on 4 and 5 December 1996 and the
Sintra Ministerial Meeting. The European Union welcomes
the convening of the Bonn Conference and fully supports
its conclusions. We hope that the decisive impetus given to
the peace process during that Conference will be
complemented by the full cooperation of all the parties
concerned.
We fully support the High Representative in the
difficult discharge of his duties. This action, as well as that
of the international community, remains indispensable in
the foreseeable future. Our ultimate aim is a Bosnia and
Herzegovina with an impartial administration that is finally
capable of governing itself and living within borders
respected by its neighbours.
The European Union reaffirms that it will not tolerate
attempts within the entities to undermine the sovereignty of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, nor will it tolerate attempts by
any group to dominate the political institutions of that
country.
The European Union would remind the neighbouring
countries of their obligations under the Peace Agreement.
These obligations must be fulfilled in their entirety,
voluntarily and immediately.
Furthermore, we would recall that in the framework of
its regional aid, the continuation of the European Union’s
international assistance is linked to full compliance by the
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina and by the
neighbouring States with the Peace Agreement as well as
all subsequent obligations.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of Italy.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Fulci (Italy): Italy associates itself with the
statement made on behalf of the European Union by the
Permanent Representative of Luxembourg.
We strongly support the conclusions of the Peace
Implementation Conference held in Bonn from 9 to 10
December 1997, which sets the stage for further progress
in the peace process in Bosnia. Since the last Peace
Implementation Conference in London, and thanks also to
the tireless efforts of the High Representative and his
office, it is fair to say that progress has been made.
To consolidate these achievements and make the
peace process irreversible, the international community
should take a careful look at the future. It is now up to
the parties to show renewed determination to respect the
commitments they have freely entered into, and work
toward the full stabilization of the country and the region.
In this respect, we note that, thanks also to the action of
the High Representative, earlier this week the Bosnian
parliament adopted two of the three laws agreed upon in
Bonn. We also welcome the provisional entering into
effect of the law on citizenship.
In our view, improvements are needed in the
following areas.
First, the common institutions must function
properly. The elections held in Bosnia since 1996 have
favoured a trend toward a more pluralistic political
scenario. Consequently, the enhancement of political, civil
and media freedom, and the establishment of pluralism in
opinions and political parties must become priority
objectives. The ultimate goal should be political
stabilization through a continuing series of democratic
elections supervised by the international community.
In this context, respect for human rights and the rule
of law are the basis for all societies that intend to grow
towards prosperity and development. We trust that the
parties will commit themselves to protecting and
promoting these basic rights and be firmly committed to
ensuring respect for them in every sector of society.
Secondly, fostering good relations with and between
neighbouring countries is crucial to the implementation of
the Peace Agreement. But special relationships between
the entities and other countries should be in full
compliance with the Dayton Agreement. In this context,
I would like to recall Italy’s assistance to the Bosnian
Presidency of the Central European Initiative in 1997,
12
Security Council 3842nd meeting (Resumption)
Fifty-second year 19 December 1997
which only a few weeks ago successfully organized this
year’s summit in Sarajevo.
The maintenance of an international military presence
in Bosnia after the Stabilization Force (SFOR) mandate
expires in June 1998 is essential to ensuring security and
stability in Bosnia and the region. Italy therefore welcomes
the consensus that is emerging on this need. We are ready
to work with our partners on identifying the best possible
options. We believe that a presence led by the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) continues to be
necessary and must have as broad a participation of
countries as possible. In this regard, we warmly welcome
the announcement made yesterday by President Clinton that
the United States will keep its troops in Bosnia. Let me
also stress that nobody, nobody can deny the extent of
Europe’s current commitment, both in military and
economic terms. Italy, which is contributing many troops to
SFOR, will certainly continue to play its part, also in the
eventual multinational follow-up force.
My country is one of the major contributors of
emergency assistance and reconstruction aid to Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
We believe that an effective use of reconstruction
funds may prove crucial to fostering and consolidating
peace. Aid must be used as a catalyst to ensure genuine
reconciliation. Economic assistance should also be seen as
a way to encourage democratization in the whole region.
Conditionality does not mean penalizing or discriminating
against one or another party: it means encouraging everyone
to take a positive attitude towards the peace process. These
criteria should be applied to every aspect of the peace
process, such as respect for human rights — how
fundamental is respect for human rights, especially there —
the return of refugees, media restructuring, and the fight
against corruption.
Another essential aspect of the peace process is full
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. It is our strong hope that the parties
will translate their commitments into effective and concrete
collaboration.
The Council is in the process of renewing the mandate
of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which is playing a crucial role in stabilizing the country,
especially the restructuring of law enforcement institutions,
through the International Police Task Force (IPTF), to
which Italy already contributes personnel and to which it
intends to allocate additional funding. In the context of the
peacekeeping operation in Bosnia, the IPTF has the
essential function of reassuring the civilian population and
paving the way toward national reconciliation and
peaceful coexistence. We welcome the Secretary-
General’s intention to expand the Force’s areas of
operation to key public security issues, such as financial
crime, smuggling and corruption, and judicial reform. The
IPTF’s activities are of a long-term nature. We share the
Secretary-General’s assessment that this progress is still
fragile, and therefore the Mission’s engagement in Bosnia
will be needed for a long period to come. In this regard,
we agree that future security arrangements should be
carefully considered since they impact on the IPTF’s
ability to function effectively.
Italy fully supports the draft resolution before the
Council, which it co-sponsored.
To conclude, allow me to assure the Council that my
country will continue its commitment to contribute to
international efforts aimed at restoring peace, security and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region as a
whole.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of Croatia. I invite him
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Simonovic´ (Croatia): Since I have already
elucidated Croatia's general views on the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, in the General Assembly debate
on Monday, it is my intention to limit my comments
today to the role and the results of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia as they
relate to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I wish to emphasize that Croatia assigns special
significance to the International Criminal Tribunal and its
work. Indeed, my country was instrumental in the
Tribunal's establishment. When it was ultimately
established in May 1993, one of its primary aims was to
contribute to peace by dispensing justice. This laudable
aim is not adequately reflected in the results to date.
Croatia does not condition its cooperation with the
Tribunal upon the reciprocal cooperation of any other
country or entity. Croatia has always considered
cooperation to be its legal, political and moral duty. We
believe that all other countries should have the same
attitude towards the Tribunal.
13
Security Council 3842nd meeting (Resumption)
Fifty-second year 19 December 1997
Due to its limited capabilities in comparison to the
magnitude of the crimes committed, it is apparent that the
Tribunal can only carry out its work in a selective manner.
Therefore, discretion in deciding which crimes and
perpetrators to pursue carries significant weight. Croatia
cannot be wholly satisfied with the exercise of this
discretion to date.
International sources have estimated that Bosnian
Croats and Muslims are responsible for about 10 per cent
of all the crimes committed in Bosnia and Herzegovina
during the conflict, while Bosnian Serbs are responsible for
about 90 per cent. Yet, at this moment, Bosnian Croats
represent 73 per cent of those in the custody of the
Tribunal. Furthermore, in spite of ample evidence, no
indictments are forthcoming for the crimes committed
against Bosnian Croats. The Croatian Government
maintains its insistence that the Tribunal must take action
in respect of these crimes.
The Tribunal's objective of dispensing justice, in
which my country and Bosnia and Herzegovina have placed
much hope, cannot be achieved if the present pattern is
maintained.
Concerning the recent arrest of two Bosnian Croats,
we wish to affirm that it is partly in order to avoid the risk
associated with the use of force that the Republic of Croatia
has encouraged the voluntary surrender of indictees.
Moreover, while the arrests are based on international law
and are within the scope of the mandate of the Stabilization
Force (SFOR), they have brought to an even higher level
the already existing disproportion of detainees, in terms of
the involvement of their ethnic group in war crimes.
While this debate proceeds, the architects of ethnic
cleansing walk freely in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and Republika Srpska. General Mladic attends sporting
events in Belgrade, fraternizing with other former and
present senior Yugoslav army officers, some of whom are
responsible for the atrocities committed in Vukovar.
Radovan Karadzic gives interviews for foreign television
from Pale, where he pulls the strings in Republika Srpska.
Milan Martic, who ordered the shelling of Zagreb and is
indicted by the Tribunal for that crime, lives in a villa in
the immediate vicinity of SFOR headquarters in Banja
Luka. We should ask ourselves, what kind of message does
this send?
There is no doubt that the responsibility for war
crimes is always individual and that all perpetrators have to
be brought to justice. At the same time, due to its limited
resources, the Tribunal cannot prosecute all perpetrators.
Therefore, it is essential for the peace process that the
Tribunal in its future work better reflect the level of
involvement and degree of responsibility of the different
sides in the conflict. The fact that it has not so far done
so detracts from the achievement of justice and
reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of Germany. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Rudolph (Germany): At the outset I would like
to state that Germany fully supports the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of Luxembourg,
Ambassador Wolzfeld, on behalf of the European Union.
The latest report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) shares the analysis of the Peace
Implementation Conference hosted by Germany on 9 and
10 December 1997 in Bonn: namely, progress has been
made, but many steps are still to be taken towards a self-
sustaining peace, lasting reconciliation, tolerance and
democracy.
We firmly believe that the importance of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
process of civil implementation of the Peace Agreement
can hardly be overestimated. In close cooperation with the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) troops, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the other
international organizations and agencies present in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the United Nations personnel, and in
particular the police officers of the International Police
Task Force (IPTF), face the unique challenge of serving
both as monitors and partners in dialogue of the local
authorities in order to establish a stable, non-
discriminatory environment of law, order and tolerance.
This engagement by men and women from 40 countries
deserves our respect and our full support.
A lasting, self-sustaining security and police
structure in Bosnia and Herzegovina, based on the
confidence of the citizens of all three constituent peoples,
cannot be established by international decree; it needs the
cooperation of the local authorities. The absence of war
can be imposed by international troops, but reconciliation
has to root in the peoples' hearts and minds.
14
Security Council 3842nd meeting (Resumption)
Fifty-second year 19 December 1997
We share the Secretary-General's observation that
UNMIBH should increase its contribution to the peace-
building process in an even more effective way, within the
limits of the current mandate, as outlined in Annex 11 of
the Dayton Agreement. While the monitoring continues, the
training programme for the local police will be enhanced.
Specialized education and training by international experts,
particularly in fighting economic crime and corruption, will
help not only to expand the capacities of the local police,
but also to limit the illegal profits of those opposing the
peace process.
Our increased input of international experience and
police skills in order to support the police of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in fighting crime and maintaining public
security will remain ineffective without a democratically
legitimized judicial system that guarantees fair
investigations and trials as well as acceptable circumstances
of detention. The international legal assistance should be
welcomed by all the parties as a chance, not as interference.
Last week's request of the High Representative's Supervisor
in Brcko to review the privatization programme of the
Republika Srpska shows the intention to work out adequate
regulations in a joint effort.
Germany therefore welcomes the Secretary-General’s
intention also to increase the efforts of IPTF in the area of
judicial reform, as well. Germany is the second largest
police contributor to IPTF, having provided 166 well-
trained and experienced police officers. Germany has also
provided a prosecutor and other experts. We have extended
invitations for training courses in Germany to Bosnian
police officers. My Government is now considering ways
to meet the request contained in both the final document of
the Peace Implementation Conference and the Secretary-
General’s report, for more contributions in the form of
training, funds and equipment.
UNMIBH and IPTF cannot operate in Bosnia and
Herzegovina without the necessary security arrangements.
At present, a secure environment for United Nations
personnel can be guaranteed only by the international
military force. In our opinion, the current distribution of
responsibilities between IPTF and SFOR has been effective
and has met the challenges. The civilian and military
international engagement are mutually reinforcing. Only a
successful civilian implementation under the protection of
the military forces can lead to a self-sustaining peace that
may finally make an international military presence
unnecessary.
But while UNMIBH — like SFOR, the High
Representative, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the European Union and many
more — stands ready not only to continue, but to enhance
its efforts, all authorities of the central Government and
the two entities must know that they themselves are
responsible for achieving reconciliation, stability and
democracy. The support offered by the extension of the
mandates of UNMIBH and IPTF must be met by their
full compliance with the Peace Agreement and subsequent
obligations. These commitments include, in particular,
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia.
Germany welcomes the arrest of two more persons
indicted for war crimes by members of SFOR on
Thursday night. The operation in Vitez underlines once
more the resolve of the international community to bring
the indicted persons to trial in The Hague. If justice is not
brought to Bosnia and Herzegovina, peace and
reconciliation will remain a distant goal.
At the Bonn Conference, it was clearly pointed out
that the patience of the international community is not
unlimited. Those who ignore or boycott their obligations
to cooperate, in particular in the joint Presidency, should
know that time is not on their side. Therefore, the Peace
Implementation Conference strengthened the position of
the High Representative. Germany welcomes the first use
of his new competences on 16 December, when the High
Representative imposed new legislation on citizenship,
effective 1 January 1998, after the Federal Assembly
failed to come to an agreement.
I want to close by expressing our gratitude and deep
respect for the work of the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative, Ambassador Kai Eide, and his staff, who
can claim credit for the successful work of UNMIBH and
IPTF thus far. Ms. Elisabeth Rehn has all our best wishes
and support as she takes over Mr. Eide’s task to work
towards establishing a lasting and self-sustaining peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of Argentina. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (interpretation from
Spanish): It is a great honour to take part in this debate
under your presidency, Sir. You fittingly represent a
country that has played a key role in the successful
15
Security Council 3842nd meeting (Resumption)
Fifty-second year 19 December 1997
achievement of peace in Central America and that has for
a long time been an example of good government for the
entire hemisphere.
Argentina participated in the Security Council's
adoption in 1995 of the first resolutions designed to
implement the General Framework Agreement for Peace,
which was initialled in Dayton on 21 November of that
year. In our view, any assessment of the process that began
there must take into account the contrast between the
prevailing scepticism of that time and today’s relative
optimism.
It is true that much remains to be done. A fully
functioning central Government, the practice of good
government, the return of refugees and displaced persons to
their places of origin, the exercise of freedom of
expression, cooperation with the International Tribunal and
the holding of municipal elections are some of the matters
that must be addressed as soon as possible. The difficulties
they present should not be cause for discouragement, nor
should they justify delays that jeopardize areas of
agreement or long-term objectives.
We are encouraged by the description in the Secretary-
General’s report of the progress made in the
implementation of the Peace Agreement, especially as
regards the functioning of the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and, specifically, the fulfilment of
the mandate of the International Police Task Force. The
United Nations and all the agencies mentioned by the
Secretary-General that are involved in implementing the
Peace Agreement deserve our fullest confidence so that
they can successfully continue their difficult task.
We fully support the initiative to extend the mandate
of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We also hope that the International Police Task Force,
which is part of that Mission, will have the necessary
military support to carry out its functions during the period
of its mandate.
We would like to express our special appreciation for
the work being done by Mr. Kai Eide, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and by
Mr. Manfred Seitner, Commissioner of the International
Police Task Force. At the same time, allow me to express
my gratitude to all the countries that, in various ways, are
contributing to this delicate mission. Argentina is honoured
to have been part of the International Police Task Force
since its inception and will continue to participate as long
as is necessary.
Allow me to say, as we approach the conclusion in
this important debate, that what has happened in that
region and its consequences can be only partially rectified
by the tools available to this Council. We therefore
believe that every avenue of solidarity and assistance
must be pursued, in order to return as much hope as
possible to those who have suffered so much.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of Argentina for his kind words
addressed to my country.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless I hear any
objection, I shall put the draft resolution (S/1997/989) to
the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Chile, China, Costa Rica, Egypt, France, Guinea-
Bissau, Japan, Kenya, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Russian Federation, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
The President (interpretation from Spanish): There
were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1144 (1997).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Richardson (United States of America)
(interpretation from Spanish): It is an honour to
participate in this meeting under your able guidance as
President and in light of the leadership shown by your
country in this and in many other issues.
(spoke in English)
The action of the Security Council today to approve
the extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including the
International Police Task Force (IPTF), demonstrates our
continuing commitment to peace in the region. Since
yesterday, we have assembled to debate in open session
on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, a little more
than two years after the General Framework Agreement
for Peace was signed. We face many challenges ahead,
16
Security Council 3842nd meeting (Resumption)
Fifty-second year 19 December 1997
but our debate has highlighted the impressive level of
accomplishment thus far and should give us a renewed
sense of hope and resolve, however tempered by the
difficulties before us now.
Most importantly, a stable military environment exists.
Stockpiles of armaments are being reduced, and the
Standing Committee on Military Matters is helping to
bridge the gap between former adversaries. Thanks to the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the
multinational Stabilization Force (SFOR), the threat of war
has receded, affording the parties the opportunity to make
peace and to build a stable and democratic society. The
presence of these international armed forces is the biggest
factor contributing to implementation of the Peace
Agreement at the current time.
Despite lingering memories of war and conflict, the
seeds of reconciliation are growing. With the assistance of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), democratic elections have been successfully held
for all levels of government, and new governmental
institutions are beginning to function. National institutions
have been established, and Federation joint institutions are
formed and operating. Although municipal election results
are being contested in some areas and implementation can
be slow, multi-party democracy is beginning to take hold in
Bosnia. While many of these institutions and structures may
not yet function fully or independently, the fact that they
exist and provide a potential forum for joint decisions and
policy-making was inconceivable to many just last year.
Meanwhile, economic prospects are brightening. In the
Federation, the gross domestic product is rising and
unemployment is falling. International reconstruction
assistance has made great strides in rebuilding
infrastructure, providing electric power, utilities, housing
and schools. Progress is being made on an integrated
telecommunications system, and airports in Sarajevo, Banja
Luka and Mostar are being opened to civil air traffic. We
hope that increased cooperation on implementation of the
Peace Agreement in the Republika Srpska will soon allow
more international assistance to be made available in that
entity as well. Assistance from the international community
must remain conditional on compliance with the Peace
Agreement and subsequent obligations.
Despite the encouraging signs, we cannot deny that the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina — and the international
effort to assist them — continue to face daunting odds.
While there has been progress on common institutions,
more is needed. The leadership in Bosnia and Herzegovina
must do more to make economic revival self-sustaining.
Return of refugees and displaced persons also has not
been as rapid as we would like, even though it is perhaps
the key element of the reconciliation and rebuilding effort.
On this issue in particular we must make a concentrated
and concerted effort, on an urgent basis. While more than
400,000 refugees and displaced persons have returned
home, four times as many were displaced by the war.
Moreover, the remaining returnees are mainly those from
areas in which they are “the minority” group and where
they face even greater obstacles to their return. If we fail
to support the right of refugees to return home in safety,
we accept and legitimize the results of ethnic cleansing
and brutality on a scale which has no place in the late
twentieth century. Even worse, we create the conditions
for a new cycle of displacement and conflict which will
threaten lasting peace in the region.
Our focus on reconciliation also means political and
material support for the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia and continuing the pressure for
the surrender of all persons indicted by the Tribunal.
While gratified by recent improvement in cooperation
with the Tribunal by some parties, and strongly
supporting recent SFOR actions in this regard, we
reiterate that other parties' failure to cooperate can mean
only continued isolation.
The full establishment of independent media
throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina is also a pressing
priority for reconciliation efforts.
Another essential factor in the reconciliation process
and the rebuilding of civic life is the International Police
Task Force, which we have just addressed. The IPTF has
made valuable contributions to the retraining and
restructuring of local police and in helping to achieve
significant improvement in freedom of movement.
Increased and enhanced international contributions to the
IPTF are needed, especially in providing monitors with
specialized qualifications, and we warmly welcome the
pledges that have already been made in this regard. Police
reform is critical for all aspects of Dayton
implementation, including refugee returns, freedom of
movement and good governance. We strongly support the
recommendations made at the Peace Implementation
Conference in Bonn to restructure the IPTF to provide
maximum support to the most pressing civilian
implementation needs, particularly the creation of
specialized units to train Bosnian police to address more
effectively key public security issues.
17
Security Council 3842nd meeting (Resumption)
Fifty-second year 19 December 1997
The meeting of the Peace Implementation Council held
in Bonn last week demonstrated that the international
community remains unified and resolute in its efforts to
help the parties create lasting peace in the region. The
Council reinforced the authority of the High Representative
in the broad range of responsibilities related to civilian
implementation of the Peace Agreement. We strongly
support the important initiatives taken by the Peace
Implementation Council to ensure that the civilian
implementation effort has adequate authority and
sufficiently robust mechanisms to function assertively and
decisively, especially when addressing the serious problem
of corruption.
For our part, we will remain actively engaged with
NATO allies and SFOR partners in considering options for
the multinational follow-on force to SFOR to provide a
secure environment for civilian implementation in Bosnia
beyond June of 1998. It has become clear that continued
progress in Bosnia necessitates a follow-on military force,
led by NATO, after SFOR ends. In that light, President
Clinton yesterday announced that the United States can take
part in a security presence in Bosnia when the multinational
Stabilization Force withdraws this summer, to enable
intensified civilian and economic efforts in the region to
proceed in an atmosphere of confidence.
My Government agrees with the Secretary-General's
view that the future of the IPTF is closely linked to the
continued presence in Bosnia of a NATO-led peacekeeping
force. It therefore makes sense that further extensions of the
IPTF's mandate should be considered only when the details
of what will follow SFOR become clearer. That is why we
have supported a six-month extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As the debate on an SFOR follow-on force moves
ahead, we expect that IPTF will assume as much
responsibility for public security as it can. We should all
be thinking about how IPTF can play a more effective
role in pursuing our shared goals. My Government has
made a number of suggestions to improve IPTF’s
performance under its current mandate. We believe these
should be implemented, especially those related to reform
of personnel policies. We do not claim a monopoly on
good ideas, however, and we welcome suggestions from
other IPTF contributors and the Secretary-General.
We have not pressed for changes in IPTF’s mandate
in the context of this renewal. However, a prolongation of
the status quo is not acceptable. We have not foreclosed
the option of changing the mandate in the future if that
would help to improve IPTF’s effectiveness. In the
meantime, we look forward to a constructive dialogue
with our United Nations partners on how to maximize
IPTF’s contribution to peace and stability.
I would also add that my Government believes that
changes, for now, can be kept within existing financial
resources. Our vote in favour of this resolution should not
be interpreted as authorizing any increase in costs for the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Finally, we join in expressing our deep appreciation
to the Secretary-General’s Special Representative and all
the international personnel serving the cause of peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We remember, in particular the
victims of the 17 September helicopter crash. Their
sacrifice and those of many, many others in the years
since the war began strengthen our resolve as we continue
our efforts to ensure a just and lasting peace in the
region.
The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of the United States for his kind words
addressed to my country.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of
its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.
18
