United Nations S/PV.3853
98-85057 (E) This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fifty-third Year
3853rd Meeting
Thursday, 5 February 1998, 11.10 a.m.
New York
President: Mr. Oye Mba . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Gabon)
Members: Bahrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Al-Dosari
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Amorim
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Qin Huasun
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Sáenz Biolley
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dejammet
Gambia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Sallah
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Konishi
Kenya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Amolo
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Soares
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fedotov
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Türk
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dahlgren
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Mr. Gomersall
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Soderberg
Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 1136 (1997) concerning the situation in the Central
African Republic (S/1998/61)
Security Council 3853rd meeting
Fifty-third year 5 February 1998
The meeting was called to order at 11.10 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President (interpretation from French): As this
is the first meeting of the Security Council for the month
of February, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to Mr. Alain Dejammet,
Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations,
for his service as President of the Security Council for the
month of January. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Security Council in expressing my sincere appreciation to
Ambassador Dejammet for the great diplomatic skill with
which he guided the work of the Council last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
resolution 1136 (1997) concerning the situation in
the Central African Republic (S/1998/61)
The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 1136 (1997)
concerning the situation in the Central African Republic,
document S/1998/61.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1998/102, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents: S/1998/86,
letter dated 30 January 1998 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council;
S/1998/88, letter dated 28 January 1998 from the President
of the Central African Republic addressed to the President
of the Security Council; and S/1998/97, letter dated 4
February 1998 from the President of the Republic of Gabon
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless I hear any
objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from
French): I am of course very grateful, Mr. President, for
the kind words that you addressed to my country. Allow
me to also tell you how honoured we feel to be meeting
today under your presidency, as you are the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Gabon, an African State whose very
practical, imaginative and energetic diplomacy forms an
integral part of the constant quest for peace and security
in Africa and throughout the world, thus providing a
vibrant example of the manner in which we should all
endeavour to serve the principles of the Charter.
After the many troubles faced by the Central African
Republic, the Bangui Agreements of January 1997
established a process for peace and national reconciliation.
The Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation
of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB) has supported this
process. France pays tribute to the action taken by the
President of the Gabonese Republic, Mr. Bongo,
Chairman of the International Mediation Committee. He
has constantly striven to ensure respect for the Bangui
Agreements. We also pay tribute to efforts made by the
States that have contributed troops to MISAB: Burkina
Faso, Gabon, Mali, Chad, Senegal and Togo.
Finally, we also commend the Secretariat, which has
tirelessly supported MISAB's activities. That Mission is
a quite remarkable example of preventive diplomacy,
which is the very objective of much United Nations effort
to prevent conflict and the deterioration of situations that
threaten regional or international security and stability. It
is thanks to MISAB that significant progress has been
achieved.
The situation in the Central African Republic
remains precarious nonetheless and continues to threaten
stability and security in the region. Persistent efforts must
therefore be pursued in support of national reconciliation
in the Central African Republic. Indeed, it is necessary to
prepare for the forthcoming legislative elections in
September, to restructure the security forces and to
implement vigorous measures in the economic and social
spheres. These activities can be undertaken only if
2
Security Council 3853rd meeting
Fifty-third year 5 February 1998
security is preserved and safeguarded by a peacekeeping
operation.
The Secretary-General has made recommendations for
a possible follow-up to MISAB. These recommendations
provide, inter alia, for the establishment of a peacekeeping
operation.
France supports the Secretary-General's
recommendations. That is why it will vote today in favour
of the draft resolution before the Council. This draft
resolution will, in effect, allow the Secretariat to prepare
operational proposals on which the Security Council will
decide on 16 March. We are confident that, in response to
the expectations of Africa, you, Sir, and the Secretary-
General, the Council's decision at that time will be
unanimous and positive. We feel certain that it will also be
so today.
The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Central African Republic, in which
she requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite that representative to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Ms. Kpongo
(Central African Republic) took a seat at the Council
table.
Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): The Chinese delegation warmly welcomes you,
Sir, the Foreign Minister of Gabon, as you preside over
today's meeting of the Security Council.
China endorses the extension of the mandate of the
Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the
Bangui Agreements (MISAB) in support of the
International Mediation Committee's efforts to help the
Government of the Central African Republic and all sides
concerned resolve the crisis in that country. The Chinese
delegation will therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us.
As a true friend of Africa, China has always been very
concerned by developments in the situation in the Central
African Republic. We are deeply disturbed by the
sustained unrest brought about by the political and
military crisis in that country. We wish to express our
concern and sympathy for the people in their suffering.
China sincerely hopes that the Central African Republic
can resolve the crisis as soon as possible and that its
people will soon be able to enjoy a secure and prosperous
life.
We are pleased that all sides concerned in the
country have firmly and actively committed themselves to
the restoration of peace and stability there. We support
the Government of National Union established a year ago.
We also welcome the progress made over the past year by
all sides concerned in implementing the Bangui
Agreements. We believe that, so long as all sides
concerned take into account the basic interests of the
people while treating each with sincerity and proceeding
with determination, perseverance and confidence in a
spirit of reconciliation, they can certainly overcome their
difficulties and differences in order to implement fully all
the tasks laid down in the Bangui Agreements and to
achieve national reconciliation, peace and prosperity for
the people.
In order to help the Central African Republic resolve
the crisis and achieve reconciliation, the African
countries — especially those of Central Africa — have
risen above their own difficulties and made tremendous
contributions. In this regard, we highly appreciate the
critical role played by MISAB, led by President Bongo.
China has always encouraged and supported the
African countries in their efforts to rely on their own
strengths in resolving their regional problems. We hope
that all sides concerned in the Central African Republic
will cooperate closely with MISAB so as to bring those
regional efforts to fruition as soon as possible. At the
same time, we view with favour the Secretary-General's
proposal to deploy peacekeeping forces.
China has always held that the international
community should attach importance to African issues in
active support of the efforts of African countries to
resolve their own crises and to achieve regional peace and
stability. We hope that all sides concerned will respond to
the appeals of the Governments of Africa and the
Secretary-General to provide active assistance on behalf
of peace and reconstruction in the Central African
Republic. China will continue to make its own efforts.
3
Security Council 3853rd meeting
Fifty-third year 5 February 1998
Mr. Konishi (Japan): At the outset, Mr. President, let
me also welcome your presence on this important occasion.
Last August, in order to prevent a resurgence of the
conflict in the Central African Republic, the Security
Council made the political decision to authorize the
Member States participating in the Inter-African Mission to
Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements
(MISAB), and those States providing logistical support, to
ensure the security and freedom of movement of their
personnel. My delegation would like to express its sincere
appreciation to all involved, including those who took part
in the activities of MISAB, the International Monitoring
Committee and France, which provided much needed
support for those activities. I would also like to pay special
tribute to President Bongo of Gabon in his capacity as
Chairman of the International Mediation Committee, who
has played an indispensable role.
Japan has been engaged in the effort to devise an
effective strategy for the prevention and early resolution of
conflicts in Africa and to explore just what role the
Security Council can play in such a strategy. As a member
of the Council since last year, Japan has taken a keen and
active interest in the Council's deliberations on this issue.
In the light of these efforts, my delegation is of the view
that the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in the Central African Republic should be
considered a part of this strategy. It recognizes that while
there is relative stability on the ground, thanks to the
excellent work of MISAB, a continued international
presence will be essential once MISAB's mandate expires.
For these reasons, my delegation will vote in favour of the
draft resolution before us, including its intention that the
Council take a decision by 16 March on the establishment
of a peacekeeping operation in the Central African
Republic. I also consider that extending the authorization of
MISAB until 16 March will give President Patassé the time
to make good his promise to implement the Bangui
Agreements.
I would like to reiterate that it is extremely important
that President Patassé, as the Head of the Administration,
fulfil his commitment and responsibility to the people of the
Central African Republic, in particular the soldiers and
officials of the Government. This is indeed the prerequisite
for true and lasting peace and stability in the country. There
are many difficulties to be overcome, including the
restructuring of security forces and the adoption of the new
electoral code. My delegation looks forward to the
Secretary-General's report, to be submitted later this month,
describing the progress made in these areas, as well as the
details regarding the peacekeeping operation to be
established. In the meantime, Japan, for its part, will
continue to assist the Central African Republic in its
effort to restore stability and achieve greater prosperity.
Mr. Amorim (Brazil) (interpretation from French):
At the outset, Mr. President, I should like to say that we
are greatly honoured to see you, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Gabon, presiding over the Security Council.
Your presence among us ensures that our work will be
conducted wisely and effectively. I also want to express
my best wishes to Ambassador Dangue Réwaka, who will
be guiding us this month. I should also like to pay tribute
to Ambassador Alain Dejammet for his effective
presidency of the Council in the month of January.
Since the adoption of resolution 1136 (1997), there
have been favourable developments in the situation in the
Central African Republic. We note, for example, the letter
of President Patassé, contained in the latest report of the
Secretary-General, which represents an important step in
the right direction. We also want to stress the crucial role
played by President Omar Bongo in the peace process.
However, despite all of the efforts undertaken by the
signatories of the Bangui Agreements, and in particular
those of the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB),
whose neutral and impartial contribution deserves our full
recognition, there are elements that are not necessarily
favourable to the peace process. The fact that the leaders
of the Groupe des onze partis politiques de l'opposition
(Group of Eleven) and the four groups of affiliated trade
unions have decided to withdraw from the preparatory
committee for the conference is a new cause of concern.
The draft resolution under consideration, which we
support, would extend the authorization for the operation
of MISAB until 16 March. Furthermore, the Council
supports the intention of the Secretary-General to appoint
a special representative for the Central African Republic
and encourages the Secretary-General to proceed with this
appointment without delay. We are convinced that a
special representative will be able to make a significant
contribution to the peace process.
With regard to the establishment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation, the draft resolution provides that
a decision be taken by 16 March on the basis of the
report that the Secretary-General is to submit by 23
February. This report should contain a proposal regarding
the structure, goals and financial implications of
4
Security Council 3853rd meeting
Fifty-third year 5 February 1998
establishing a peacekeeping operation in the Central African
Republic.
Of course, the primary responsibility for the peace
process remains with the various political actors in the
Central African Republic. In that context, President Patassé
has a central role to play. I am sure that, in the light of
actual developments on the ground, the international
community will be prepared to play its part in the process
of reconciliation and national reconstruction in the Central
African Republic.
Mr. Al-Dosari (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
My delegation would like to express its appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report; to the
International Mediation Committee, under the chairmanship
of President El Hadj Omar Bongo of Gabon; to the
Chairman and members of the International Monitoring
Committee; to the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB); and
to the countries concerned.
We should also like to extend our gratitude to the
United Nations Development Programme and all the United
Nations agencies and programmes that are making efforts
in the Central African Republic to achieve lasting peace,
stability and national reconciliation in that country.
My delegation shares the concern expressed by the
Secretary-General, in paragraph 24 of his report, regarding
the fragility of the progress made in improving the situation
of the Central African Republic. My delegation therefore
requests the urgent implementation of all the Bangui
Agreements, which will of course require a commitment by
all the parties to their implementation.
My delegation also calls for continued support by the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), by other
specialized agencies of the United Nations and by Member
States for the Central African Republic and for security and
stability there. We reiterate how important it is to ensure
the security and political stability of the Central African
Republic.
For these reasons we shall vote in favour of the draft
resolution before the Security Council, convinced as we are
that it will support the peace process in the Central African
Republic.
It is not possible to foretell the situation that will
follow the withdrawal of the African troops, and we must
therefore give serious consideration to establishing a United
Nations peacekeeping operation in the Central African
Republic. We support this, and look forward to the report
of the Secretary-General on the details of the
establishment of such an operation, as requested in
paragraph 11 of the draft resolution before us. This would
have a positive effect and would strengthen security and
stability in the Central African Republic.
Mr. Amolo (Kenya): The delegation of Kenya is
pleased to see you, Sir, the Foreign Minister of the
Gabonese Republic, presiding over the work of the
Security Council today, when the Council is discussing an
issue of great importance to Africa. As an African
country that has employed regional initiatives to resolve
some of its political and security problems, Kenya is
proud of the impressive leadership role played by
President Bongo of Gabon — and indeed by the whole
nation of Gabon — in the situation prevailing in the
Central African Republic. We also wish to pay tribute to
all the countries currently involved in ensuring that
relative stability continues in the Central African
Republic. In that regard, the contribution made by the
Government of France is particularly laudable. Finally, we
commend the Secretariat for its continued focused
cooperation with regard to the valiant efforts of those
nations.
The Secretary-General's report of 23 January 1998
gives a clear picture of the current situation in Bangui and
an indication of the shape of our future involvement in
that country. We support his efforts and welcome his
recommendations. We in Kenya are painfully aware of
the fragility of the current situation and its implications
for regional stability and international peace and security.
The Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation
of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB) has without doubt
done an exemplary job under very difficult circumstances,
and we are encouraged that it is willing to continue to
assist the Central African Republic in consolidating what
is still a fragile peace. We are also happy to note that the
long-expected National Reconciliation Conference, with
the participation of all political groupings, has been
scheduled for the week of 23 to 28 February 1998. We
think that this is an important step in bringing together
the people of the Central African Republic, who are tired
of conflict.
However, the anticipated withdrawal by mid-April
1998 of French logistic and financial support, on which
MISAB is fully dependent, would disrupt MISAB's
operations and would undoubtedly reverse the progress so
far achieved and destabilize the fragile peace in the
5
Security Council 3853rd meeting
Fifty-third year 5 February 1998
country. It is precisely for those reasons that we are in
agreement with the conclusion set out in the Secretary-
General's report that
“Bold and far-reaching measures have therefore to be
taken without further delay to redress the current
situation in the Central African Republic”. [S/1998/61,
para. 24]
My delegation considers that the draft resolution
before us seeks to address these concerns by extending
MISAB's mandate until 16 March 1998 and that it
expresses the Council's intention to take a decision on the
establishment of a peacekeeping operation that would be
critical in moving the peace process in the Central African
Republic forward. Kenya will therefore vote in favour of
the draft resolution.
In conclusion, we would like to put on record the
warm appreciation of all the African delegations in the
Security Council for the excellent spirit of cooperation and
goodwill that was clearly demonstrated by all delegations
during our discussions on the draft resolution. It is our
fervent hope that this spirit will be extended to our
continued appeals for contributions to the Trust Fund
established for the Central African Republic.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Kenya for the kind words he addressed
to me.
Mr. Soares (Portugal) (interpretation from French):
I wish first of all, Sir, to express my delegation's
satisfaction at seeing you presiding over this meeting of the
Security Council. Your presence is logical not only because
Gabon holds the presidency of the Council for this month,
but also as a reflection of the role that your country, your
President and you yourself have played in the resolute
search for a solution to the problems of the Central African
Republic.
(spoke in English)
The Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB) in the
Central African Republic is a good example of what Africa
can do to prevent conflicts and to stabilize crises. The
activities of MISAB, however, require complementary
support from the international community. In this regard we
commend France for the vital assistance it has been
providing thus far. But the United Nations will have to
consider soon how best to capitalize on these efforts so as
not to jeopardize the success so far achieved.
Portugal would like again to pay tribute to the
African mediation initiative and to the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), and to reaffirm its support for the
International Monitoring Committee and for MISAB and
its troop-contributing States — Burkina Faso, Chad,
Gabon and Mali — in their very important role in the
ongoing process of national reconciliation in that country.
In that same context, we would like to praise the efforts
of the Chairman of the International Monitoring
Committee and of President Bongo of Gabon, who have
been playing an important role in the resolution of the
crisis and in the monitoring of the implementation of the
Bangui Agreements. As I said before, Mr. President, your
presence here today is a reflection of the important role
played by your country in this process.
The situation in the Central African Republic
remains precarious. The disruption of the current volatile
security, social and economic conditions would have
serious repercussions for the region as a whole.
Therefore, Portugal welcomes the Secretary-General's
recommendations regarding the concepts for a future
United Nations presence after the withdrawal of MISAB
forces on 16 March. We agree in general terms with the
Secretary-General's evaluation of the still-fragile peace
process and the international environment in that
subregion of Africa. We also share the view expressed in
the Secretary-General's report that the parties concerned
should fulfil, as soon as possible, all the provisions of the
Bangui Agreements, and that substantial reform should be
undertaken to revitalize the country's economy and to
improve the living conditions of the population.
Given the progress already achieved, which should
not be compromised, as well as the enormous tasks that
lie ahead for the full implementation of the Bangui
Agreements and long-term stability in the Central African
Republic, Portugal agrees that there is a need to establish
a peacekeeping operation in that country as a major
preventive measure, as referred to by the Secretary-
General. In this context, Portugal supports the draft
resolution before us today.
Mr. Sallah (Gambia): Allow me, Sir, to express my
heartfelt gratitude at seeing you, as Foreign Minister of
Gabon, chairing and addressing this formal meeting of the
Security Council. My delegation feels honoured by your
presence here. It is a fitting occasion, since we are
6
Security Council 3853rd meeting
Fifty-third year 5 February 1998
dealing with the issue of the Central African Republic, in
which the Gabonese Republic is playing a leading role.
Once again, I wish to pay tribute to the Secretary-
General for his very informative report on the Central
African Republic. Our heartfelt appreciation and gratitude
go to the Republic of France and to the member countries
of the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation
of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB), as well as to the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), whose very vital and
timely intervention in the crisis in the Central African
Republic contributed immensely to the restoration of peace
and tranquillity in that country.
The Bangui Agreements constitute the foundation of
the peace process in the Central African Republic, and the
authorities concerned, with the participation of MISAB and
other international agencies, are taking giant steps towards
the successful implementation of these provisions.
However, the task of meeting the financial obligations vis-
à-vis a very sensitive sector of the population of the Central
African Republic will certainly require the rapid
intervention of the international community in order to
prevent the emergence of social unrest and general
insecurity. This would negate the whole peace process and
might return the situation back to square one. Therefore,
my delegation urges the donor agencies and the Bretton
Woods institutions to come forward and offer financial
support to the operations in Bangui.
As a result of the effective intervention and continued
presence of MISAB in the Central African Republic,
relative peace and security reign in Bangui, but it is evident
that this state of affairs is very fragile, for the smouldering
embers of violence are yet to be completely extinguished.
Now and again, they manifest their existence through
various forms of retrogressive activities in the country.
Thus, with the imminent withdrawal of the French troops
and the eventual expiration of the mandate of MISAB, a
vacuum could be created that could make things fall apart,
thereby leading to the return of general chaos and insecurity
in the country. Such a precarious situation could also
threaten peace and stability in the whole region.
In this regard, the maintenance of a credible
peacekeeping mission in the Central African Republic will
be a decisive step in the right direction in safeguarding the
Bangui peace process and allowing stability to be firmly
rooted in the country. Such a mission could be very
instrumental in creating an atmosphere conducive to the
holding of legislative and presidential elections.
It would be inconceivable to abandon the Central
African Republic in the middle of the Rubicon, thereby
rendering futile all the laudable efforts that have been
exerted so far in the restoration of a credible peace and
security in that country. Thus we add our voice to that of
President Patassé in requesting that the United Nations
consider positively establishing a peacekeeping mission in
the Central African Republic in order to ensure that there
is no gap in the continued presence of peace and stability
in that country, for the slightest vacuum in this regard
could result in the country, or even the region, falling
back into the conflict situation that we have worked so
hard to prevent.
The clarion call made by the Gabonese delegation to
the international community to come to the rescue of the
Central African Republic in particular, and Africa in
general, at this crucial moment is worth reiterating. Thus
my delegation supports the extension of MISAB until it
is replaced by a United Nations peacekeeping force, as
stated in paragraph 33 of the report of the Secretary-
General.
The Gambia supports the draft resolution before us,
and we will vote in favour of it.
Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): The International
Monitoring Committee and the Inter-African Mission to
Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements
(MISAB) are playing an important role in facilitating a
return to peace and security in the Central African
Republic. Today, we wish to express our particular
appreciation to all those involved in these efforts — to
the Chairman of the International Mediation Committee,
President Bongo, to its members, to the troop contributors
and other contributors to MISAB, and to the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
Progress has been achieved over the past year in
implementing the Bangui Agreements. We hope that
concerted efforts will now be made to implement the
outstanding provisions, as set out in the letter dated 8
January 1998 from the President of the Central African
Republic to the Secretary-General. Sweden supports the
extension of the Security Council's authorization to
MISAB until mid-March.
We also see the need for a continued international
presence in the Central African Republic after the end of
MISAB's mandate. The United Nations is responsible for
international peace and security. We therefore support the
proposal that the follow-up to MISAB take the form of a
7
Security Council 3853rd meeting
Fifty-third year 5 February 1998
United Nations operation. We look forward to the detailed
concept of operations which the Secretary-General intends
to submit to the Security Council.
We attach particular importance to the preventive and
multifunctional aspect of the envisaged United Nations
operation. The military and civilian components of that
mission will need to pull together in close cooperation with
United Nations agencies and the Bretton Woods institutions.
Sweden will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before the Council today.
Mr. Türk (Slovenia): We are honoured to have you,
Sir, the Foreign Minister of Gabon, in the presidency of the
Security Council on this important occasion. Our best
wishes are also addressed to the Permanent Representative
of Gabon, the President of the Security Council for this
month. We are convinced that his leadership of the Security
Council will be effective and successful. We would also
like to take this occasion to express our appreciation to
Ambassador Alain Dejammet of France for his effective
leadership as President of the Security Council for the
month of January.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General for the
detailed report concerning the situation in the Central
African Republic and also for the report of the International
Committee for the Follow-up of the Bangui Agreements.
We would like in particular, Sir, to express our admiration
for the President of your country, Mr. Omar Bongo, and for
his efforts to establish peace and normalcy in the Central
African Republic.
We note with appreciation, from the reports that were
received by the Security Council recently, the positive role
of the Inter-African Force to Monitor the Implementation
of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB). Its efforts have
resulted in the gradual restoration of peace and security to
Bangui since the signing of the Bangui Agreements. We
also note with satisfaction the third report of the Member
States participating in MISAB and the efforts for the
implementation of the Bangui Agreements referred to in
that report.
The situation in the Central African Republic and the
peace process are still very fragile. Therefore we are
encouraged by the willingness of the States participating in
MISAB and the Central African Republic to extend
MISAB's mandate in order to complete its mission,
assuming that the United Nations peacekeeping operation
established after that will follow.
We attach the highest importance to the expeditious
implementation of the outstanding provisions of the
Bangui Agreements. In that connection, we recognize the
support provided by the United Nations Development
Programme, and we encourage it to continue with its
efforts.
The commitments to the implementation of the
provisions of the Bangui Agreements expressed by
Mr. Patassé, President of the Central African Republic, in
his letter to Secretary-General of 8 January 1998, are
essential and ought to be fulfilled expeditiously.
Slovenia also believes that further support by the
international community is necessary. We thus attach the
highest importance to the extension of MISAB until 16
March 1998 with the prospect of the peacekeeping
operation to be established by United Nations. We support
proposals to that effect made by the Secretary-General.
The political will of the international community and
the efforts of the affected country itself are essential for
the construction of stable peace and security, as well as
for the successful implementation of the structural-
adjustment programme.
Hence, we are encouraged by the fact that all
political parties in the Central African Republic have
expressed their intention to participate in the National
Reconciliation Conference in Bangui from 23 to 28
February 1998.
In conclusion, I wish to express the Slovenian
delegation's satisfaction that the draft resolution submitted
for action by the Security Council today addresses all the
relevant issues of the situation in the Central African
Republic at this stage. We congratulate the group of
African States which, under the leadership of Kenya,
prepared the draft resolution. We shall vote in favour of
the draft resolution.
Mr. Gomersall (United Kingdom) (interpretation
from French): My delegation welcomes your presence
here, Mr. President, and the effective and amicable
presidency your delegation is sure to provide this month.
The United Kingdom would first like to commend
the great efforts of President Bongo of Gabon, as
Chairman of the International Mediation Committee, to
achieve lasting peace in the Central African Republic.
8
Security Council 3853rd meeting
Fifty-third year 5 February 1998
The United Kingdom pays tribute to the efforts of the
Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the
Bangui Agreement (MISAB), which continues to play an
essential role in maintaining peace in the Central African
Republic. We also hail the efforts of the African troop-
contributing countries and the role played by France in its
logistical support of MISAB.
(spoke in English)
The United Kingdom notes the Secretary-General's
recommendation that a United Nations operation should
take over the role of MISAB subject to certain conditions
and his request that the Security Council should agree in
principle to this proposal. The United Kingdom will
certainly give this request its positive consideration.
We also support the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the deployment of a United Nations
operation should be made conditional on the Government
of the Central African Republic addressing the need for
fundamental adjustments in its social, economic, financial
and security policies. We welcome the Secretary-General's
intention to establish a United Nations political office in
Bangui to monitor the Republic's progress in the
implementation of these reforms.
For these reasons, my delegation will vote in favour
of the draft resolution before us.
Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
French): Our delegation is pleased to have this opportunity
to see you, Sir, presiding over this meeting of the Security
Council on the question of the Inter-African Mission to
Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreement
(MISAB). This happy occasion is especially symbolic
Mr. Foreign Minister, since your country, and in particular
President Omar Bongo, have made and continue to make
such a crucial contribution to a political settlement in the
Central African Republic.
(spoke in Russian)
The Russian delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution to extend the authorization for MISAB until 16
March. We proceed from the premise that international
assistance in support of the Bangui Agreements is of great
significance for the stabilization of the situation in the
Central African Republic. We also note that although
progress has undeniably been made in restoring peace and
bringing about reconciliation in that country, it is not yet
irreversible.
Of great significance for further stabilization is the
commitment of all to the Bangui Agreements. It is
obvious that the difficult economic and social situation
remains a major destabilizing factor. In order to improve
that, we must undertake the efforts necessary for
economic and social recovery, which would be a sound
basis for normalization as a whole.
In principle, we are prepared to take a positive view
of the establishment in the Central African Republic of a
United Nations peacekeeping operation that is limited in
time and in resources. We are prepared to take a further,
more specific decision following an additional report from
the Secretary-General on the extension of the mandate
and the possible peacekeeping operation.
Mr. Sáenz Biolley (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Spanish): On behalf of my delegation, allow me to
convey to you, Sir, our sense of satisfaction on seeing
you presiding over our work on this occasion. Costa Rica
appreciates and pays tribute to the leadership of Gabon,
in particular President Omar Bongo, for the promotion of
regional agreement on issues affecting international peace
and security in central Africa.
On several occasions we have expressed here the
importance we attach to the leadership shown by the
African countries in achieving appropriate solutions to
political and security problems affecting their continent.
In that regard, we especially emphasize the role rightly
played by the Organization of African Unity and various
subregional organs, which are participating actively and
creatively in the resolution of conflicts and the
maintenance of peace in Africa. We express our
appreciation to all of them.
Against this background, the case of the Central
African Republic should and deserves to be emphasized,
because there the countries of the subregion, in the
framework of the International Committee for the Follow-
up of the Bangui Agreements, have made a huge and
invaluable effort of preventive diplomacy and peace-
building. This work, of course, has depended and still
depends on the important political and material support of
France, which, due to its traditional ties to the region, has
made a major effort in support of peace in the Central
African Republic.
Peace and security in the Central African Republic
are based on the specific features and conditions of the
country. As with other conflicts that occur in the
developing world, this conflict is rooted in the economic
9
Security Council 3853rd meeting
Fifty-third year 5 February 1998
and social difficulties affecting the security of the
population. Therefore, from Costa Rica's perspective, an
essential condition for the resolution of the problems of the
Central African Republic is the ability of the country to
overcome the grave economic and social problems affecting
the development process. This situation should be urgently
addressed by the international community, and we are
therefore pleased at the comprehensive approach with which
our Organization, through the United Nations Development
Programme, supports and backs the International Follow-up
Committee. However, in this connection, we are of the
view that a new approach should be taken by the Bretton
Woods international financial institutions, on a special and
exceptional basis, to aid in the economic and social
reconstruction of the country.
The work being done by the Inter-African Mission to
Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements
(MISAB) in the Central African Republic is essential for
the maintenance of peace and security in the country. In
particular, we wish to stress the role it has played in
promoting the security of the population. For this reason,
we believe that this great effort should continue. My
delegation thus supports the draft resolution before us. We
feel certain that the continuity of MISAB's presence will be
of major importance for the continued implementation of
the Bangui Agreements.
We say this while fully recognizing that, undeniably,
it is for the Central Africans themselves to put the
Agreements into practice. We therefore commend the
willingness of President Patassé, as well as of all the
political parties, to strive for this goal, in particular as
regards support for national reconciliation.
Finally, I wish to state that Costa Rica attaches the
greatest importance to the deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation in the Central African Republic in
the near future. We shall support this deployment when it
is discussed in the Council.
Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): The
United States commends the contribution of the President
of Gabon, the former President of Mali, other African
States and France to the consolidation of peace and security
in the Central African Republic. In particular, we welcome
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Gabonese Republic:
your presence here today underscores the importance of
stability in the Central African Republic.
Through the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB), the
international community has re-established security in
Bangui, conducted an effective disarmament programme
and helped create the conditions necessary for the
implementation of the Bangui Agreements. For this
reason, the United States fully supports an initial
extension of the Chapter VII authorization of MISAB
until 16 March. We will vote in favour of this draft
resolution.
The United States will be prepared to take a decision
on a possible United Nations peacekeeping operation in
the Central African Republic by 16 March. We will
consider whether the process of institutional, political,
military and economic reforms in the Central African
Republic could be assisted by the security umbrella that
a peacekeeping operation could provide. We will study
closely the Secretary-General's recommendations
regarding the size, the mandate, the cost and the exit
strategy of the proposed peacekeeping operation.
We will give equal consideration to the commitment
of the parties in the Central African Republic to the
implementation of the Bangui Agreements. The
international community can assist, but cannot replace, the
efforts of the Government of the Central African Republic
to achieve long-term stability. To be effective, a
peacekeeping operation must be linked to the
implementation of fundamental political, economic and
security reforms by the Government of the Central
African Republic. We urge the Government of the Central
African Republic to undertake these reforms without
delay.
The United States supports the Secretary-General's
intention to appoint a special representative to the Central
African Republic. We believe the prompt appointment of
a special representative could help the Government of the
Central African Republic, United Nations agencies and
the international community develop a coordinated
transition programme that could resolve the crisis in the
Central African Republic and build a more permanent
peace. A group of friends of the Central African
Republic, comprising interested Governments and
organizations, could provide essential support to the
special representative's efforts.
The President (interpretation from French): I shall
now put to the vote the draft resolution contained in
document S/1998/102.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
10
Security Council 3853rd meeting
Fifty-third year 5 February 1998
In favour:
Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
The President (interpretation from French): There
were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1152 (1998).
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Gabon.
The Council, in adopting this resolution that extends
the mandate of the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB), has
just taken an important decision. The President of the
Gabonese Republic, El Hadj Omar Bongo, in his capacity
as Chairman of the International Mediation Committee for
the crisis in the Central African Republic, has conveyed to
the Security Council, in the letter he addressed to its
President, the urgent need to take all possible steps to
prevent the situation in the Central African Republic from
deteriorating once again, for lack of appropriate assistance.
I am most gratified that the resolution we have just adopted
reflects that concern.
In this regard, I would like to underscore the
prominent role played by MISAB in the Central African
Republic's political stabilization — though we must realize
that it is not yet absolutely assured. I am also pleased to
pay tribute here to the sacrifices made by the African
countries — Burkina Faso, Senegal, Chad, Togo, Mali and
Gabon — that are participating in MISAB. I also pay
tribute to the assistance provided by the United Nations
Development Programme. And I am also pleased to praise
the commitment shown by all of the partners, especially
France, whose logistical and financial contribution to
MISAB has allowed it to carry out its mandate.
At a time when the composition and the resources of
MISAB will be undergoing significant changes due to the
announced withdrawal of France, I believe it is reasonable
for the international community to demonstrate its
solidarity with the Central African people, in particular by
the timely deployment of a peacekeeping operation, as
rightly recommended by the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, in his report of 23 January 1998. By taking such
a step the Council would be contributing effectively to
preventing the resurgence in the Central African Republic
of new conflicts, the effects of which would seriously
threaten the already fragile peace of the whole Central
African subregion.
I cannot conclude my statement without expressing
the deep concern of the Government of Gabon at the
possibility of any further procrastination by the Security
Council regarding the deployment of a peacekeeping
operation in Africa.
In the present case, we feel that there is no real
justification for such an attitude. It seems to me that all
the conditions are in place for a smooth transition from
MISAB to any operation to be established in the future.
What we must bear in mind is the need to avoid another
tragedy brought about by the international community's
absence from a crisis situation in Africa.
That is why I must take this opportunity to reiterate
the appeal addressed to the Security Council by President
Bongo that it complete its task of maintaining and
consolidating peace in the Central African Republic.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of
its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.
11
