United Nations S/PV.3921
98-85713 (E) This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fifty-third Year
3921st Meeting
Friday, 28 August 1998, 11.30 a.m.
New York
President: Mr. Türk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovenia)
Members: Bahrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Buallay
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Felicio
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Shen Guofang
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Sáenz Biolley
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Thiebaud
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dangue Réwaka
Gambia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Touray
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Konishi
Kenya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Odera
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Monteiro
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dahlgren
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Mr. Richmond
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Burleigh
Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Security Council 3921st meeting
Fifty-third Year 28 August 1998
The meeting was called to order at 11.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Afghanistan, Austria, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Pakistan, Tajikistan, Turkey and
Uzbekistan, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ghalib
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Manz (Austria), Mr. Saha (India), Mr. Nejad
Husseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran),
Mr. Kazykhanov (Kazakhstan), Mr. Oussoupov
(Kyrgyzstan), Mr. Akbar (Pakistan), Mr. Alimov
(Tajikistan), Mr. Vural (Turkey) and Mr. Vohidov
(Uzbekistan) took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/1998/810, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Costa Rica, France, India, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan,
Portugal, the Russian Federation, Slovenia, Sweden,
Tajikistan, Turkey, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and
Uzbekistan.
The first speaker is the representative of Austria. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Manz (Austria): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union. The Central and Eastern
European countries associated with the European
Union — Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania and
Slovakia — and the associated country Cyprus, as well as
the European Free Trade Association countries members
of the European Economic Area, Iceland, Liechtenstein
and Norway, align themselves with this statement.
The European Union is gravely concerned at the
latest fighting and at the escalation of the conflict in
Afghanistan. We have always held the view that there is
no military solution to this conflict, and that only a
political settlement aimed at the establishment of a fully
representative, broad-based transitional government, can
lead to peace and reconciliation. We therefore call on all
factions to agree an immediate ceasefire and enter
negotiations under United Nations auspices.
The fighting is again causing enormous suffering for
the Afghan people and adds to their misery, while human
rights, fundamental freedoms and international
humanitarian law continue to be violated with impunity.
We are deeply concerned at new reports of the killing,
harassment and displacement of innocent civilians. The
European Union is particularly concerned about the
situation of the civilian population of the Hazarajat
region, where tens of thousands have already been at risk
as a result of severe food shortages in the last few
months. We are very anxious about the consequences of
the latest fighting for the Hazara and strongly urge the
Taliban to refrain from all acts of indiscriminate violence,
especially against civilians, and from using humanitarian
aid as a weapon against the civilian population.
The European Union strongly condemns the armed
attack against two staff members of the United Nations
Special Mission to Afghanistan on 21 August 1998 in
Kabul, which caused the death of an Italian national and
left a French national injured. The European Union urges
the Taliban in Kabul to take immediate steps to
investigate this heinous crime and to keep the United
Nations informed of the results of the investigation, as
requested by the Secretary-General in his statement of 24
August [press release SG/SM/6681]. The European Union
reiterates its strong concern for the security of United
Nations personnel, other related personnel, and personnel
of non-governmental organizations in Afghanistan, and
recalls the responsibility of all factions to ensure their
safety, security and freedom of movement.
2
Security Council 3921st meeting
Fifty-third Year 28 August 1998
The European Union expresses its deep concern at
reports of the capture by Taliban militia of the Consulate-
General of the Islamic Republic of Iran in Mazar-e-Sharif
and at the fate of its personnel and other Iranian nationals,
who have been missing since then. The European Union
wishes to underline that the obligations ensuing from the
Vienna Conventions on Diplomatic Relations and on
Consular Relations have universal effect and are to be
observed under all circumstances. The European Union
urges all parties concerned, in particular the Taliban, to
help in finding these missing people and in securing their
safe passage out of Afghanistan.
The European Union strongly deplores the fact that
third parties, instead of using their influence on the warring
factions to support the efforts of the United Nations to
restore peace, continue to interfere in Afghanistan’s internal
affairs in a destructive manner by supplying the factions
with weapons, fuel, arms, ammunition and other materials
for military use. We are also concerned by reports of
involvement of military personnel from outside the country.
In this connection, the European Union wishes to
reaffirm its strong commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan. It strongly urges that all kinds of strategic and
military support to Afghan factions, including involvement
of foreign military personnel, must cease. Furthermore, the
European Union considers it imperative that all countries
with an influence on the parties should exercise this
influence in a positive and constructive manner, in support
of the United Nations peace efforts. We also continue to
enforce the embargo on the export of arms, munitions and
military equipment provided for in the European Union’s
Common Position of 17 December 1996 on Afghanistan
and urge other countries to adopt a similar policy of
restraint.
The European Union is deeply concerned at the
various restrictions of access imposed on United Nations
humanitarian agencies and international humanitarian
organizations which have been operating in Afghanistan,
and in particular by the measures which the Taliban have
taken in this regard. We deplore the decision by the Taliban
in Kabul to forcefully close the offices of international non-
governmental organizations, expel foreign workers and
imprison non-governmental organizations’ local personnel.
These decisions have forced the non-governmental
organizations to abandon their much-needed help for the
innocent civilian population of Kabul, which now has to
suffer the consequences.
The European Union is the major donor of
humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan. But for the
reasons I have mentioned, the European Commission had
to suspend common funding by the Community for
projects in Kabul. We have helped the Afghan people
through years of suffering and conflict, and we earnestly
desire to continue helping them. However, aid can
continue only where it can be delivered in an effective
and principled manner, without discrimination, and where
humanitarian organizations are able to carry out their
work freely and safely. In this regard, the European
Union fully supports United Nations efforts to resolve the
crisis in Kabul and to ensure adequate conditions for the
delivery of aid, in cooperation with other international
humanitarian organizations.
With regard to mine-clearance programmes in
Afghanistan, the European Union urges all Afghan parties
to support and participate in these programmes.
Furthermore, the European Union reiterates its appeal to
the Afghan factions to put a complete halt to the use of
landmines, which continue to take a very heavy toll on
innocent civilians.
The European Union remains gravelly concerned at
persistent human rights violations and breaches of
humanitarian law in Afghanistan. We are also deeply
concerned about the situation of displaced persons in the
country, whose number is growing.
The European Union calls on all Afghan factions, in
particular the Taliban, to recognize, protect and promote
all human rights and fundamental freedoms — including
the right to life, liberty and security of persons — and to
respect fully the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
which has been repeatedly endorsed by the international
community, including Afghanistan.
The European Union denounces the continuing
discrimination against girls and women in Afghanistan.
We urge Afghan factions, in particular the Taliban, to end
discriminatory policies and to recognize, protect and
promote the equal rights and dignity of men and women,
including access to education and health facilities,
employment outside the home, personal security and
freedom from intimidation and harassment. The European
Union will continue to point out the implications of
discriminatory policies on the distribution of aid.
The conflict in Afghanistan continues to threaten
peace, security and stability in the whole region. By
creating favourable conditions for the illicit production
3
Security Council 3921st meeting
Fifty-third Year 28 August 1998
and trafficking of drugs, as well as for terrorist bases and
training camps, the conflict's repercussions reach far beyond
Afghanistan and its neighbours. They cause serious damage
to member States of the European Union and many
countries elsewhere.
The European Union is therefore committed to
reinforce the fight against illegal drugs and terrorism in
Afghanistan. Furthermore, the European Union will take
account of drug control objectives when considering
contributions to development aid. The European Union
reiterates its call upon all factions, in particular the Taliban,
to close down training camps for foreign terrorists inside
Afghanistan and to participate in and support international
efforts to combat terrorism.
As expressed in our Common Position of 26 January
1998, the European Union is determined to play an
effective role in efforts to stop the fighting and to restore
peace, stability and respect for human rights and
international principles in Afghanistan.
Let me also, in conclusion, reiterate the European
Union’s continuing commitment to use all its influence to
bring about a sustainable peace in Afghanistan, put an end
to foreign intervention and encourage inter-Afghan
dialogue, in particular through support for the central role
of the United Nations.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of Pakistan. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Akbar (Pakistan): As the Pakistan delegation is
taking the floor for the first time under your presidency,
allow me to begin by extending our congratulations to you
for your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month.
Coming to the subject which is under discussion
today, the Security Council is considering the issue of
Afghanistan at a time of significant and far-reaching
developments in that country.
The noble Afghan people had hoped to see the
restoration of peace after a decade of Soviet occupation of
their country. They wanted to rebuild their nation from the
rubble of destruction caused by prolonged foreign
occupation. Unfortunately, the fulfilment of their dream still
remains distant and elusive due to internal strife among
Afghans following the withdrawal of Soviet forces. Indeed,
the suffering has gone on too long for a valiant and resolute
people who have been instrumental in drawing a new
course for international politics at the twilight of the cold
war. They deserve a respite. There must be an end to
their despair and misery.
It is a fact that no other country has suffered more
from the conflict in Afghanistan than Pakistan. As a
consequence of continued instability in Afghanistan,
Pakistan today continues to host more than 1.5 million
refugees. We stand almost single-handed in looking after
these refugees, in the face of donor fatigue and the
indifference of the international community to their plight.
Pakistan has also been the victim of terrorism, drug
trafficking and arms smuggling as a result of conditions
inside Afghanistan.
Like the Afghans themselves, our dream is to see
peace established in Afghanistan without any further
bloodshed. Pakistan’s consistent policy has been the
promotion of a peaceful and negotiated settlement in
Afghanistan. Pakistan has been the only country which
has engaged with all the sides in the conflict.
Soon after assuming office in February 1997, the
Prime Minister of Pakistan, Muhammad Nawaz Sharif,
launched an Afghan peace initiative. This culminated in
the meeting of a steering committee in April this year at
Islamabad for the purpose of working out the modalities
for an ulema convention that would discuss the problems
of Afghanistan in accordance with the shariah and the
traditions of the country. While significant progress was
made by the steering committee, the process was derailed
by minor differences among the Afghan parties.
Not discouraged by this setback, we subsequently
made a number of efforts, together with Iran, under the
aegis of the Organization of the Islamic Conference and
the United Nations. Unfortunately, those efforts did not
yield any positive results.
I now turn to some recent developments in
Afghanistan. Pakistan firmly believes that while the
military fortunes or misfortunes of any of the parties are
purely an internal affair of the Afghan people, the new
ground realities cannot be ignored by the international
community. We must be pragmatic in our approach to
and understanding of the situation of profound magnitude
that has emerged.
Pakistan believes that there is now a distinct
possibility of the restoration of peace in Afghanistan. We
are encouraged by the positive pronouncements made
4
Security Council 3921st meeting
Fifty-third Year 28 August 1998
recently by the Afghan authorities in Kabul that, first, they
would grant amnesty to all who surrender; secondly, their
agenda was purely domestic and posed no threat to any
neighbouring country; and thirdly, the local commanders
were under strict instructions not to indulge in revenge
killings.
It is our earnest hope that the countries sharing a
border with Afghanistan, instead of raising alarms over an
imaginary threat, will join Pakistan in promoting peace and
harmony in Afghanistan. We must shed our biases and avail
ourselves of the window of opportunity in seeking a
realistic and practicable solution to the conflict in
Afghanistan.
The recent air strikes by the United States in
Afghanistan against alleged terrorist targets are likely to
complicate the situation. This action has caused deep
indignation, irrespective of the motives behind the air
strikes. The violation of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Afghanistan cannot but be a matter of grave
concern.
Terrorism, and the suffering that is caused by the loss
of innocent lives, is a heinous crime. We condemn the
terrorist acts against the United States embassies in Kenya
and Tanzania, and feel the deepest sympathy for the
bereaved families. Pakistan itself has been a victim of
repeated acts of terrorism, including State-sponsored
terrorism planned and executed from across the border.
Therefore, we stand shoulder to shoulder with the rest of
the world in the firmest condemnation of terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations and in calling for its total
eradication.
In dealing with terrorism, recourse to any means other
than established principles and international norms is likely
to have a negative effect. It could spiral out of control and
further complicate matters in a vicious circle of action and
retaliation.
It is a historical fact that the people of Afghanistan
have never tolerated foreign interference in their internal
affairs. Nor have they ever pardoned those who have
violated their sovereignty and territorial integrity. The result
of any adventurism or mis-adventurism, therefore, would be
no different from that of the earliest invasions.
Pakistan has always respected the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Afghanistan. Some countries and
Government-controlled media have recently launched an
orchestrated campaign of vilification against Pakistan,
which is unfortunate. We have repeatedly and
categorically rejected any involvement in the internal
affairs of Afghanistan. I should like to reiterate our
rejection of these allegations as ridiculous and baseless.
We reject any finger-pointing aimed at deflecting the
ground realities. In the recent past, our diplomatic
missions and personnel in Kabul and Mazar-e-Sharif have
come under severe attack. The Pakistan Embassy in
Kabul was burnt, and the Consulate in Mazar-e-Sharif
was ransacked. We lost one of our Embassy personnel.
Our Ambassador in Kabul was manhandled. We did not
point an accusing finger at any country. Similarly, we
deplore any vilification campaign targeted at Pakistan.
Pakistan is deeply concerned over the reported
disappearance of some Iranian diplomats from Mazar-e-
Sharif. At the request of Iran, we have approached the
Kabul authorities at the highest level. However, I must
stress that Pakistan's role and ability to ensure the safety
of the Iranian diplomats must not be overestimated,
particularly because we did not have any presence in
Mazar-e-Sharif at the time it was captured by the Kabul
forces.
The time has now come for the international
community to engage with the authorities in Kabul. The
United Nations must come to terms with the ground
realities in Afghanistan. It must increase its credibility as
a mediator. Hence, there is now an urgent need for the
opening of an effective channel of communication with
the true representatives of Afghanistan and its people.
Their views must be heard.
The people of Afghanistan are in need of substantial
humanitarian supplies to sustain their lives. The
international community must listen to the cry of the
distressed people of that country. The United Nations
agencies and the Member States must provide, on a
priority basis, all possible financial, technical and material
assistance without any preconditions. In this regard, we
welcome the recent agreement between the Kabul
authorities and the United Nations facilitating the
resumption of the activities of the United Nations
agencies and the international organizations in most parts
of Afghanistan, including Kabul.
The international community also has a
responsibility in helping the Afghans to rebuild their war-
ravaged country. We must contribute generously to the
reconstruction efforts in Afghanistan and to the
5
Security Council 3921st meeting
Fifty-third Year 28 August 1998
rehabilitation of the refugees, as this would demonstrate to
them the dividends of peace.
In conclusion, Pakistan appeals to the international
community to accord formal recognition to the Government
in Kabul. The Afghanistan seat at the United Nations must
be assumed by the true representatives of the people of that
country. The non-existing regime of northern Afghanistan
should cease to occupy the United Nations seat forthwith.
The President: I thank the representative of Pakistan
for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Tajikistan. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Alimov (Tajikistan) (interpretation from Russian):
The Republic of Tajikistan has actively supported the idea
of the adoption of a special resolution of the Security
Council on Afghanistan and is one of the co-sponsors of
the draft. We welcome the Council’s readiness to discuss
the dangerous development of the situation in Afghanistan
and possible steps to redress it.
It is by no means a matter of indifference to Tajikistan
as to the kind of situation that has existed recently in
neighbouring Afghanistan in connection with the approach
of hostilities directly to our border.
Our concern derives from an analysis of the real facts.
The leadership of the Taliban movement has been banking
on a military solution to the Afghan problem with the direct
and massive support from outside, and this cannot fail to be
a source of apprehension regarding possible armed actions
by the Taliban on the Tajik-Afghan border. We are
profoundly concerned over the reports from Afghanistan
regarding new, glaring violations of human rights and
international law there, including international humanitarian
law. We do not exclude the possibility of an uncontrollable
surge of Afghan refugees into our country. We are seriously
concerned by the genuine transformation of Afghanistan
into an exporter of terrorism and drugs.
We are convinced that the recent events in the north
of Afghanistan confirm the timeliness of the decision to
establish a Russia-Tajikistan-Uzbekistan “troika” to
counteract religious extremism. Support from the territory
of the Islamic State of Afghanistan of various types of
extremist forces in Tajikistan can have a highly negative
effect on the peace process in our country.
The Government of Tajikistan, based on the fact that
the external threat must not undermine the process of
national reconciliation, has undertaken measures to
strengthen the Tajik-Afghan border in those areas in
particular danger. In cooperation with partners from the
Commonwealth of Independent States, we are doing
everything in our power to protect our common interests
and security.
We agree with many of the assessments of the
present situation in Afghanistan. For our part, we would
like to emphasize that the recent events in Afghanistan
have time and again clearly highlighted the impossibility
of resolving the Afghan conflict by force. No matter how
impressive military victories of one or another of the
parties to the conflict may seem, they can only lead to a
new, more dangerous and even harsher spiral of armed
confrontation and make even more remote the prospects
for the establishment of peace and stability in
Afghanistan.
We believe that in the present situation, the United
Nations must, in fact, reaffirm its leading role in efforts
to settle the Afghan crisis. There is a need for urgent,
practical steps on the part of the United Nations aimed at
stepping up assistance for a peaceful settlement in
Afghanistan.
Tajikistan, as a member of the group of neighbours
and friends of Afghanistan, the Six plus Two group, is
ready to support those efforts and to do everything in its
power to see that the Afghan groups immediately reach
agreement on a ceasefire and engage in serious
negotiations under the aegis of the United Nations on
ways to achieve a peaceful settlement to the conflict on
the basis of the decisions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly.
In our view, there is now a need to hold in the
region high-level meetings of representatives of States
members of the Six plus Two group, at which it will be
possible to consider a concrete plan for a settlement to the
conflict. Tajikistan could render the necessary assistance
in holding such a meeting.
In our view, the resolution being adopted today by
the Security Council contains a powerful political
momentum which should exert the appropriate impact on
all of the Afghan parties and on the States on which it
has a bearing. We hope that the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, and the United
Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan, with the support
6
Security Council 3921st meeting
Fifty-third Year 28 August 1998
of interested States, will convey this message to those to
whom it is addressed so that the peace process at last will
replace the endless round of wars and conflicts on the land
of the brotherly Afghan people.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of India. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Saha (India): It is my privilege to address the
Security Council under your presidency, Sir.
I’ll begin by conveying our deep sympathy for the
people of Afghanistan. The continuing war has brought
immense suffering to them for almost two decades. The
fighting which took place this summer, despite appeals and
warnings from the international community, has
compounded their misery. We are disturbed by reports that
human rights have been violated on a large scale, in
particular through the killing of children, women and
POWs. We expect that the next report of the Secretary-
General will give us a fuller picture of what has so far
appeared in snatches in the media.
Peace and stability in Afghanistan are in our security
interest, as they are for almost all of Afghanistan’s
neighbours. We have always respected the unity,
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Afghanistan. We are particularly concerned, therefore, that
all the evidence points to a de facto invasion of Afghanistan
by foreign military forces, in support of the Taliban. It also
worries us that the fighting is both exploiting and
heightening ethnic differences. If this continues, the unity
and independence of Afghanistan will be in danger, and if
Afghanistan unravels, the impact will be felt throughout the
region.
There is an Afghan personality which transcends
ethnic consciousness. The international community must
sustain and strengthen that personality, not widen ethnic
cleavages. A genuine power-sharing arrangement in which
all Afghan people are represented must take hold if peace
is to return. Territorial gains won through force, trickery or
bribery will be short lived if the people who live there are
alienated or, as has increasingly been the case, brutalized.
There have been many debates in the Council, in the
General Assembly and in meetings organized by the United
Nations, where we have heard statements deploring foreign
interference in Afghanistan. The Secretary-General has
rightly pointed out in his report [S/1998/532] on the
situation in Afghanistan dated 19 June 1998 that this is the
key to ending the Afghan tragedy. Does the international
community, and in particular this Council, have the
resolve to take steps that would stop the continuing
foreign interference, through the provision of arms,
supplies and advisers to the warring factions, and of late,
through the direct participation in the fighting of foreign
military personnel?
The anarchy in Afghanistan has drawn terrorist
groups to it. Though the events of the last few weeks
have brought international focus to this aspect of the
Afghan problem, for years it has been known that the
most ruthless terrorist organizations have used
Afghanistan as a base to recruit, train and harbour
operatives who were sent out to carry out atrocities
abroad. The responsibility for allowing the Afghan
territory to be used for training international terrorists
falls on those who give them sanctuary.
This is an issue of particular concern to us, as India
has been the victim of state-sponsored, cross-border
terrorism in a most vicious form. We have, on many
occasions, drawn the world's attention to the presence of
the training camps in our immediate neighbourhood, in
Pakistan-occupied Kashmir and Afghanistan, where
terrorists are trained and equipped to carry out merciless,
violent and subversive activities in India, in particular in
the state of Jammu and Kashmir. The international
community has unfortunately been silent or indifferent to
these developments and unable to agree on concerted
efforts to tackle the menace of international terrorism, in
our region or elsewhere.
The crisis in Afghanistan has three main elements.
The first is the continuing war, fomented and sustained by
foreign interference. The second is that Afghanistan has
been turned into a haven for international terrorism. The
third is the lack of respect for international norms and
human rights in the areas controlled by the Taliban.
On the first element, the countries that have
instigated and participated in the Afghan fighting should
realize that a resolution can come only through peaceful
means, in direct negotiations between Afghan factions
under United Nations auspices, aimed at achieving
mutually acceptable solutions that accommodate the rights
and interests of all ethnic, religious and political groups
of Afghan society. These countries should encourage the
factions whom they support to return to the negotiating
table without delay and preconditions, and cooperate with
the aim of creating a broad-based and fully representative
Government which would protect the rights of all
7
Security Council 3921st meeting
Fifty-third Year 28 August 1998
Afghans and observe the international obligations of
Afghanistan.
On the second issue, the international community
perhaps now realizes the magnitude and the ramifications
of the problem caused by the presence and activities of
foreign mercenaries and their foreign patrons, who have not
only destabilized Afghanistan but also made it a seminary
for international terrorists. However, selective unilateral
action cannot solve the problem of international terrorism.
Only an effective international cooperative effort to identify
and act against those responsible for international
terrorism — whether individual terrorist groups or States —
will succeed.
On the third issue, a condemnation of the violation of
international norms of conduct is not sufficient. The
international community must act together now to mobilize
the human rights machinery to ensure the observance of
internationally recognized human rights in all of
Afghanistan. The perpetrators of gross and systematic
violations of human rights must not be given the
international legitimacy they crave. This would be an
appropriate message to convey as we prepare to
commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.
The President: I thank the representative of India for
his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran. I invite him
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
would like to express our appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting of the Security
Council to consider the situation in Afghanistan, which is
alarming on both political and humanitarian grounds. We
have full confidence in your ability and diplomatic skills to
steer the work of the Council successfully so that it can
fulfil its obligation under the Charter in the face of this
threat to regional and international peace and security. I
also wish to thank Ambassador Sergey Lavrov for his
leadership of the Council in July.
The escalation of conflict and tension and the further
spread of lawlessness resulting from the recent military
offensive to the north of Afghanistan by the Taliban has
justifiably caused grave concern for most neighbours of
Afghanistan and for the rest of the international community.
This concern stems from the display of absolute disregard
by the Taliban for the wishes of the international
community, as manifested by the decisions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly, the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for the rejection
of further bloodshed and the attempt to find a political
settlement in which the views of all Afghan people are
taken into account. The international concern also stems
from the recognition of the time-honoured fact that
Afghanistan, as a country with a multi-ethnic,
multicultural and fiercely independent population, cannot
be ruled by a single group, particularly when that group
is widely believed to have been organized, supported and
patronized by foreign powers.
The Afghan people have made it amply clear in their
history that they will not tolerate direct or indirect foreign
domination, no matter what the cost. This is where the
problem lies. Otherwise, it should make little difference
to Afghanistan's neighbours or to the rest of the world
which group rules the country as long as it respects the
basic principles of human rights and the rules of inter-
State relations.
It may be trite to say so, but trite or not, we
continue to believe that the problem in Afghanistan has
no military solution and that persisting to seek a military
victory will only perpetuate the internecine violence in
that war-torn country and will fail, and fail miserably, to
bring peace and normalcy to the deserving people of
Afghanistan. In our opinion as a neighbour, even if the
Taliban succeed in getting control of the entire land of
Afghanistan, they will not be able to rule over all the
Afghan people, who are of different ethnic backgrounds
and political and religious persuasions. Unfortunately,
therefore, the problems in Afghanistan will continue to
plague the Afghan people, the region and elsewhere.
Very little is known about the record, background
and operations of the Taliban in the recent political
history of Afghanistan before they suddenly surfaced as
a well-equipped and well-financed militia group in
Afghanistan. Their emergence and their mode of
operation have raised serious questions — for the Afghan
people and for the region — about their independence and
future agenda. The reports of foreign assistance to the
Taliban in the form not only of the supply of arms and
ammunition, but also of logistics, planning and foreign
military personnel in the last few years, and particularly
during the recent Taliban offensive, have strengthened the
general suspicions about them. They are ostensibly
students of religion who have now learned to fight, drive
8
Security Council 3921st meeting
Fifty-third Year 28 August 1998
tanks and fly jet fighters and helicopters. That is a
proposition that other people in Afghanistan and the region
find difficult to believe. The Taliban’s history and
emergence are suspicious, but their practice since then is
disconcerting and outright threatening.
The daily reports of abuse and gross violations of
human rights, particularly against women and girls in the
name of Islam; the murders and constant harassment of
foreign relief workers and United Nations staff; the forced
displacement of the Afghan people on ethnic and religious
grounds, which has been referred to as Taliban-style ethnic
cleansing; the daily and indiscriminate bombardments of
civilians and defenceless people in Bamian and Hazarajat
where the Taliban have blocked the transit of urgent
foodstuffs and other humanitarian aid for months, leading
to massive starvation and death; the unbridled cultivation of
and traffic in drugs to meet the increasing demand for cash
to pay for Taliban offensive operations; and the harbouring
and instigation of terrorist elements and terrorist
organizations are routine and reflect the status of the
Taliban and the conditions under which the Afghan people
continue to resist. These issues are quite worrisome to the
international community, and they destabilize and threaten
the region.
The Islamic Republic of Iran respects the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Afghanistan, a country we would
like to see continue its proud heritage of political
independence and non-alignment. The fate of Afghanistan
will be determined by the Afghan people themselves. They
will have to make the political decision to opt for peace.
Peace cannot be imposed on Afghanistan from abroad or by
outside forces. In this connection, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, like most other neighbours of Afghanistan and the rest
of the international community, earnestly believes that as
long as a lasting peace has not been achieved in
Afghanistan — a peace which can be achieved only through
political negotiation under United Nations auspices and with
the help of the Organization of the Islamic Conference
(OIC), leading to the establishment of a Government that is
representative of all the Afghan people — the world as a
whole, and the neighbouring countries in particular, will
continue to suffer and be threatened as a result of a number
of continuing and heightened problems.
As a neighbour, Iran is seriously concerned about the
following threats: first, continued violence close to its
borders; secondly, the danger of violence and conflict
spilling over into its territory; thirdly, the danger of the
flow of more refugees as a result of the escalation of the
conflict and of displacement by the Taliban of groups of
the Afghan population on ethnic and religious grounds;
fourthly, the escalation of drug cultivation and trafficking
to and through the region to meet the increasing demand
for financing Taliban military offensives and rule by
force; and fifthly, the continued presence and activities of
terrorist elements and terrorist organizations in that
country.
In the light of these destabilizing dangers and in
order to send a strong message to the Taliban that their
pursuit of a military solution is not acceptable to the
international community, and that they will continue to be
viewed unfavourably as long as they disregard the wish
of the international community and the call by the United
Nations for a political settlement in which the interests of
all Afghan groups are taken into account, my Government
co-sponsored the draft resolution under consideration in
the Council.
My Government has a greater stake in this draft
resolution. The plight of the personnel of the
Consulate-General of the Islamic Republic of Iran in
Mazar-e-Sharif, of the correspondent of the Islamic
Republic News Agency and of many Iranian relief
workers continues. The capture of the Iranian
Consulate-General and the abduction of its personnel by
the Taliban have been condemned by many States as
gross violations of the basic principles and recognized
norms of international law.
I would like to refer to Security Council document
S/1998/776 of 19 August 1998, in which the
circumstances of the capture of the Consulate by the
Taliban offensive forces in Mazar-e-Sharif and the names
of the Iranian captives are set out. I wish to add that the
taped conversation between the head of our
Consulate-General in Mazar-e-Sharif and the Foreign
Ministry in Tehran when the Consulate was captured by
the Taliban forces at 14.30 hours on 8 August is
available. The sound of automatic-rifle fire can clearly be
heard in the background.
I wish to stress that the continued detention of the
Iranian nationals by the Taliban is unacceptable to the
Islamic Republic of Iran. We certainly hope that the
demand by the Security Council for their immediate
release and safe and dignified passage out of Afghanistan
is heeded by them. We call upon other Governments to
do more and to use whatever influence they may have
over the Taliban to persuade them to release the Iranian
captives without further delay. We are grateful to the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy, Mr. Brahimi,
9
Security Council 3921st meeting
Fifty-third Year 28 August 1998
for their efforts to secure the release of the Iranian captives,
and we call upon them to redouble their efforts in this
humanitarian issue.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran for the kind words he addressed to
me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Turkey. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Vural (Turkey): There seems to be no end to the
tragic suffering of the Afghan people, and the recent
developments have compounded this painful situation. In
addition to the extensive human suffering and destruction,
the current situation poses a growing threat to regional and
international security. That is why my delegation and
Government share the grave concern expressed in the draft
resolution presented to the Security Council.
Turkey has deep-rooted historical and cultural bonds
with the people of Afghanistan and with its neighbours. The
painful situation on the ground and its implications are felt
very deeply in Turkey by the Turkish people and
Government.
Information regarding human rights violations,
especially against women and girls, in the area under the
control of the Taliban, the execution of civilians and
prisoners of war, efforts to change the demographic
structure of Afghanistan, and the displacement of
populations from North to South are extremely worrying.
These acts are deplorable. Crimes against United Nations
personnel and the situation of the members of the
Consulate-General of Iran in Mazar-e-Sharif must be
urgently addressed.
Turkey is also concerned for Afghanistan's neighbours.
Their suffering from drug trafficking, the influx of refugees
and political tension originating from the crisis in
Afghanistan seems to be increasing. The political
atmosphere in the region has begun to deteriorate. Such a
trend could impair overall stability in the region.
The recent military campaign of the Taliban cannot be
a substitute for a political solution. Military victories
achieved with external support are an illusion. They can
provide neither a lasting nor a viable solution. This is a
lesson learned from the history of Afghanistan over the last
few centuries. A political dialogue among the Afghan
people is as necessary as ever. A broad-based government
in which all groups are represented remains the only
instrument that can lead the country to a lasting peace.
Collective diplomatic efforts, with the United
Nations in the central role, continue to be the most
efficient instrument to encourage the Afghan parties to
participate in dialogue and achieve a solution. The failure
of the very valuable efforts made last spring by the
United Nations and by a number of interested countries
should not discourage the international community.
Enhanced bilateral diplomatic activity between the
interested countries can also contribute to the process.
The Organization of the Islamic Conference should
maintain its useful cooperation with the United Nations
regarding Afghanistan.
It is my delegation’s belief that today’s draft
resolution is a good framework on which future
diplomatic activities can be based. It includes almost all
the elements which can lead the Afghan parties to a way
out of the deadlock. Initial political dialogue among the
parties, aiming at a broad-based government, should be
followed by the consideration of concrete measures.
These should include the demilitarization of Afghan cities,
the prevention of the supply of arms, the assignment of
civilian police forces, and the dismantling of the camps
harbouring extremists and terrorist elements, most of them
non-Afghans.
The pledge of the international community to assist
in the reconstruction of Afghanistan once peace is
established is most valuable. The Afghan parties must
seize this opportunity. Turkey remains committed to
contributing to the future rehabilitation of Afghanistan.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Uzbekistan. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Vohidov (Uzbekistan): Today, the Parliament of
Uzbekistan had a meeting at which deep concern was
expressed regarding the continuing military action in
Afghanistan; the Parliament considered that this military
action poses a major threat to international and regional
peace and security, particularly in the region of Central
Asia.
We strongly support the preservation of the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Afghanistan. Uzbekistan has strong confidence that there
is no military solution to the Afghan conflict and that it
can be settled only through peaceful negotiations among
10
Security Council 3921st meeting
Fifty-third Year 28 August 1998
all Afghan parties. Uzbekistan calls upon those parties to
refrain from further hostilities and to come to the
negotiating table. The Republic of Uzbekistan is confident
that all parties to the Afghan conflict should be involved in
a peace process aimed at the formation of a broad-based
and fully representative government of Afghanistan.
One of the main concerns of my Government is the
continuing supply of arms and ammunition to the parties to
the Afghan conflict and the unabated foreign interference in
Afghanistan. We are also confident that it is necessary to
cease such interference immediately. It is a fact that
continuing instability in Afghanistan creates conditions
favourable to the further spread of terrorism and the illegal
production and trafficking of drugs.
We are deeply concerned at the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Afghanistan and hope that the
Afghan parties will do everything possible to create the
conditions necessary for the United Nations and other
international humanitarian organizations to provide
humanitarian assistance to all in Afghanistan who are in
need of it. We condemn violations of universally
recognized norms of international law and international
humanitarian law in Afghanistan in the field of the
treatment of prisoners of war and non-combatants in
Afghanistan.
Uzbekistan believes that the United Nations must
continue to play its central and impartial role in
international efforts towards a peaceful resolution of the
Afghan conflict.
Uzbekistan reiterates its position that the activities of
the Six plus Two group, one of the main mechanisms for
considering the situation in Afghanistan, are very important
towards the achievement of peaceful resolution of Afghan
conflict. In that connection, on behalf of my Government,
I would like to reaffirm the proposal of Uzbekistan that a
meeting of the Six plus Two group be held in the region.
We believe that such a meeting could make a positive
contribution to a political settlement of the Afghan conflict.
Tashkent is ready to host the meeting.
Taking into consideration all that I have said, the
Government of the Republic of Uzbekistan supports the
draft resolution on Afghanistan now before the Security
Council, and requests that Uzbekistan be considered as a
sponsor of the draft resolution.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Kazakhstan. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Kazykhanov (Kazakhstan) (interpretation from
Russian): Kazakhstan expresses its grave concern over the
escalation of hostilities in Afghanistan. The ongoing
armed conflict in that country poses a serious threat to
regional and international security, and is accompanied by
massive violations of human rights. One alarming
symptom of this is the evacuation from Afghanistan of
personnel of United Nations humanitarian agencies and
other international humanitarian organizations; this could
exacerbate the already drastic humanitarian situation in
that country.
Kazakhstan firmly condemns the recent killing of
two Afghan staff members of the World Food Programme
and of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in Jalalabad, and of the
Military Adviser to the United Nations Special Mission to
Afghanistan in Kabul.
We also share the serious concern of the Member
States of the United Nations regarding the fate of the
diplomats and staff members of the Consulate General of
Iran in Mazar-e-Sharif and other Iranian citizens seized in
Afghanistan.
On 15 August, the President of the Republic of
Kazakhstan, Nursultan Nazarbaev, made a special
statement in which he called on the Afghan parties to the
conflict to cease hostilities. The head of our Government
voiced the hope that the conflict would not extend beyond
the borders of Afghanistan. In case of the emergence of
a threat to the external borders of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) in that region, Kazakhstan —
together with the States parties to the Treaty on Collective
Security of the CIS — retains the right to undertake all
necessary measures to strengthen the security of the
external borders of the Commonwealth within the
framework of that Treaty.
In its practical actions regarding the situation in
Afghanistan, Kazakhstan bases itself on the need to agree
upon all actions with the States parties that attended the
meeting held in Almaty on 4 October 1996.
The current events in Afghanistan seriously threaten
to destabilize the situation in Central Asia. Therefore, on
the initiative of the President of Kazakhstan, on 22
August 1998 a meeting was held in Tashkent of the
11
Security Council 3921st meeting
Fifty-third Year 28 August 1998
Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Defence of Kazakhstan,
Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan, during which they
discussed issues linked to the exacerbation of the situation
in Afghanistan and its possible impact on the region of
Central Asia.
In supporting the efforts of the United Nations aimed
at the cessation of the conflict in Afghanistan and the
preservation of Afghanistan's territorial integrity,
Kazakhstan expresses its firm commitment to the decisions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly on
Afghanistan. Throughout the conflict in Afghanistan our
country has consistently favoured having the United Nations
play the central role in a settlement. This position of
Kazakhstan remains unchanged. Kazakhstan firmly
condemns any foreign interference in the internal affairs of
Afghanistan and supports the appeal for an immediate
cessation of the delivery of military supplies from outside
and halting active military support to the factions in
Afghanistan.
Kazakhstan is in favour of a speedy, peaceful solution
to the conflict in Afghanistan. In our view, only by taking
into account and respecting the interests of the various
ethnic, religious and political groups in Afghanistan can we
ensure the stability of the political system, as is attested to
by the history of that country. Allow me once again to
express the hope that this discussion of the question of
Afghanistan in the Security Council will yield positive
results for the settlement of the conflict and will assist in
putting an end to a war that has gone on for many years.
The President: The representative of Pakistan has
asked for the floor. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Akbar (Pakistan): We are grateful to you,
Mr. President, for giving us the floor for a second time to
set the record straight on a matter of crucial importance to
the Security Council itself, to Pakistan and to the
international community. The matter to which we are
referring has been under consideration by the Security
Council for the last 50 years. We deeply regret that another
effort was made by India today to distort the facts, which
are well known to the Security Council, as it has been the
guardian of its own resolutions which it passed 50 years
ago.
We would like to remind the Council that, in
accordance with its resolutions of 50 years ago, the state of
Jammu and Kashmir is a disputed territory. The Council
had promised the people of the state of Jammu and
Kashmir that they would exercise their right to self-
determination in a United Nations-supervised plebiscite.
This promise, unfortunately, has not been fulfilled.
The Council will know that India has consistently
and wilfully obstructed the will of the international
community to implement the Council's resolution on the
situation in Jammu and Kashmir adopted under the
India/Pakistan question. India has deployed more than
600,000 troops in Indian-held Kashmir. These troops have
committed the worst kinds of acts of state terrorism
against the innocent people of Kashmir. International
human rights organizations have catalogued those massive
violations of human rights, in which women have been
raped, places of religious worship have been desecrated
and entire villages have been burned.
India has violated every norm of international
behaviour in its ruthless campaign to suppress and
eliminate the legitimate struggle of the Kashmiri people
and to keep those people under subjugation. It has also
extended its acts of terrorism beyond its territory.
We strongly denounce any effort to distort these
facts.
The President: The representative of Afghanistan
has asked for the floor. I call on him now.
Mr. Ghalib (Afghanistan): What we heard from the
Pakistani delegation is nothing but a commitment to the
pursuit of a policy of intervention and hegemony based
on Pakistan's attitude of blatancy and impunity towards
Afghanistan. Taking into account the fact that in the
international community there is no longer any kind of
ambiguity over the situation in Afghanistan —
particularly in the wake of the recent developments in
Afghanistan which have fairly framed Pakistan's
manifested military involvement in Afghanistan one way
or another — my delegation will refrain from further
explanations.
It will suffice to say that some of the elements killed
in the recent United States missile strikes on the terrorist
camps in eastern Afghanistan have been identified by
both intelligence sources and the world news media as
Pakistani nationals, either plain-clothes army officers of
the Pakistani Government or members of the
organizations based in Pakistan evidently engaged in
terrorist activities worldwide. With all this in mind, it
comes as no surprise to any of us why Pakistan continues
12
Security Council 3921st meeting
Fifty-third Year 28 August 1998
to preach that the international community should accord
recognition to their mercenaries in Afghanistan, the Taliban.
My delegation cannot conclude without associating
itself with the common views expressed by the Member
States in their belief that only an immediate halt to the
Pakistani interventions in Afghanistan, and thereby the
establishment of a broad-based, fully representative
Government in the country, will lead to an early return of
lasting peace and civility to Afghanistan.
The President: In view of the lateness of the hour,
I intend, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, to suspend the meeting now.
The meeting was suspended at 12.50 p.m.
13
United Nations S/PV.3921(Resumption)
98-85719 (E) This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fifty-third Year
3921st Meeting
Friday, 28 August 1998, 3.15 p.m.
New York
President: Mr. Türk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovenia)
Members: Bahrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Buallay
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Amorim
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Shen Guofang
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Sáenz Biolley
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Thiebaud
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dangue Réwaka
Gambia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Touray
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Konishi
Kenya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Odera
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Monteiro
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dahlgren
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Mr. Richmond
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Burleigh
Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Security Council 3921st meeting(Resumption)
Fifty-third year 28 August 1998
The meeting resumed at 3.20 p.m.
The President: It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft
resolution (S/1998/810) before it. Unless I hear any
objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian): The international community is following with
deep concern the situation that has arisen in recent weeks
in the north of the Islamic State of Afghanistan, where
large-scale fighting is continuing. Disregarding the
aspirations of the Afghan people for the restoration of
peace and the preservation of the integrity of the country,
the Taliban have undertaken yet another attempt by force of
arms to extend their control over the entire territory of
Afghanistan. The will of the international community has
thereby been ignored and its efforts to establish an inter-
Afghan negotiating process brought to nought.
A new phase of the civil war is destabilizing the
situation in the entire region of Central Asia and beyond it.
It creates a direct threat to the southern borders of the
Commonwealth of Independent States. Such a course is
fraught with the most serious consequences for international
peace and security. The military expansion of the Taliban
movement in the northern region of Afghanistan is being
carried out with direct external assistance and the
involvement of military personnel in planning and logistical
support for Taliban operations, as well as directly in
military participation.
This support, rendered despite the repeated appeals of
the Security Council and the Secretary-General for it to
cease, only further fans the flames of dangerous military
confrontation. Foreign interference in the Afghan conflict
must cease. Attempts to conceal the truth about such
interference or obliquely to justify it by references to the
past history of Afghanistan are simply not understood by
the international community.
The Russian Federation is deeply concerned over
reports coming in from the territories seized by the Taliban
about ethnic- and religious-based persecution, ethnically
motivated acts of forced displacement of large segments of
the population and violations of international conventions
relating to the treatment of prisoners of war and of the
rights of persons not involved in combat.
Russia is shocked at attacks on United Nations
personnel in the territory controlled by the Taliban,
including the killing of Afghan staff members of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the World Food Programme in Jalalabad,
and the Military Adviser to the United Nations Special
Mission in Kabul. We demand that the necessary
investigation be carried out and that the Taliban enact
necessary measures to ensure secure conditions for the
activities of international staff which would enable them
to return to Afghanistan in the near future and to continue
their work there.
Russia strongly condemns the seizure by the Taliban
forces of the Consulate-General of the Islamic Republic
of Iran in Mazar-e-Sharif and the abduction of the staff of
the Consulate-General and other Iranian nationals. We
join our voice to the calls for the immediate release of the
Iranian nationals and their unimpeded and safe exit from
the territory of Afghanistan.
Actions of this kind are further confirmation of the
Taliban's total scorn for civilized standards of conduct and
disrespect for the basic tenets of international law. They
run counter to the age-old traditions and culture of the
noble Afghan people.
We note with concern that the continuation of the
Afghan conflict creates an environment conducive to
international terrorism and to the illegal production of and
trafficking in drugs.
In Afghanistan, particularly in the territories
controlled by the Taliban, violations of basic human rights
are continuing, particularly those of women and girls. We
call upon all States to respect the cultural and historical
legacy of Afghanistan and to use all their influence in the
country to convince the Afghan side of the need to
respect the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all
its citizens.
Convinced that there can be no military solution to
the Afghan conflict, the Russian Federation strongly
supports efforts aimed at a political settlement in
Afghanistan that responds to the interests of all Afghans.
We support the efforts of the United Nations Special
Mission to Afghanistan and advocate the continued active
role of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General in the
settlement of the conflict.
2
Security Council 3921st meeting(Resumption)
Fifty-third year 28 August 1998
Russian representatives have consistently pursued this
policy in their contacts with the parties to the conflict, both
with the northern alliance and with the Taliban. Our
position is that such contacts should make the parties to the
conflict aware that the expansion of controlled territories by
military means will lead neither to a lasting peace in
Afghanistan nor to international recognition of those who
use such methods.
A comprehensive settlement of the conflict is possible
only through establishing a government in Afghanistan that
is made up of Afghans themselves and that balances the
interests of all segments of the Afghan population,
including the representatives of the major political and
military forces. We are prepared to cooperate with such a
government so that the Afghan economy can be quickly
restored and peace and stability can be established in the
region and in the country.
All these considerations have been reflected in the
draft resolution to be adopted today by the Security
Council. The draft resolution also contains guidelines that
should help focus international efforts on the priorities of
fostering a peaceful settlement in Afghanistan.
In conclusion, we should like to thank all those who
have contributed to the reaching of agreement on the draft
resolution, which reflects a consensus of the members of
the Security Council.
Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): As a friendly neighbour of Afghanistan, China is
deeply concerned about the latest developments in that
country. The escalation of fighting has brought new
suffering to the people of Afghanistan and has also
jeopardized their national economy and security. We wish
to express our deep sympathy and concern. We call upon
the various factions in Afghanistan to reach a ceasefire
immediately.
Afghanistan is a multi-ethnic country whose ethnic
disputes have deep historical roots. This, in addition to the
involvement of outside forces, has made the situation in
Afghanistan even more complex. We believe that any
military advance is but temporary. Both the history and the
realities of Afghanistan have demonstrated that military
means are not helpful to finding a solution. The resumption
of negotiations among all the factions in Afghanistan, under
United Nations auspices, is the only way to a solution of
the conflict in Afghanistan.
China sincerely hopes that the various factions in
Afghanistan will put their national interests and the
interests of the Afghan people above everything else. We
hope they will put aside their ethnic, religious and
political differences and establish a broadly based,
representative government so as to achieve peace and
stability and rebuild their homes.
The Chinese delegation appreciates the mediation
efforts made by Mr. Brahimi, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, and the United Nations Special
Mission to Afghanistan (UNSMA). We support the United
Nations in its continuing to play a central and leading
role. After many years of war, the people of Afghanistan
are longing for peace and stability.
The resolution of the question of Afghanistan, in the
final analysis, rests with the Afghan people themselves.
We hope that the international community will respect the
choice of the people of Afghanistan. Any action by the
Security Council should help push the various factions in
Afghanistan to reopen negotiations and to seek solutions
for achieving peace and stability at an early date.
On the basis of this principled position, the Chinese
delegation participated in the consultations on the draft
resolution before us. We wish to thank the sponsors for
accepting the amendments made by the Chinese
delegation. We will vote in favour of the draft resolution.
We hope that the various factions in Afghanistan
will give a positive response to the appeal of the
international community. At the same time, we also hope
that the international community will make coordinated
efforts to prevent arms and other war matériel from
flowing into the hands of those factions, so as to create
favourable external conditions for putting an end to the
fighting within Afghanistan.
Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): The Presidency of the
European Union has already stated the common views of
its member States on this subject. Therefore, I will
emphasize only certain elements of my country's position
with regard to the situation in Afghanistan.
Since the Council last discussed the disturbing
situation in Afghanistan on 16 April 1997, the political
and humanitarian situation in the country has deteriorated
further. The latest fighting and escalation of the conflict
in Afghanistan clearly indicate that at least one of the
parties is convinced that it is in a position to take over
militarily the whole country.
3
Security Council 3921st meeting(Resumption)
Fifty-third year 28 August 1998
In reality, the warring factions must recognize that the
conflict cannot be settled on the battlefield. Any thought of
a conclusive military victory by one party is an illusion.
The past 20 years of war in Afghanistan lead us to believe
that a military victory by one of the warring parties will not
bring the fighting to an end.
Portugal stands for a political settlement in
Afghanistan on the basis of the decisions of the General
Assembly and Security Council, and for the preservation of
the unity and territorial integrity of the country. We
therefore call on all factions to agree to an immediate
ceasefire and to enter into negotiations under United
Nations auspices aimed at achieving a broadly
representative Government acceptable to all Afghans.
With the recent escalation of fighting, the
humanitarian situation in Afghanistan has deteriorated
further. I would like to express our deep concern at this
tragic situation in which the Afghan people finds itself.
Moreover, recent measures taken by the Taliban resulted in
the evacuation of all United Nations humanitarian
personnel. The humanitarian impact of the evacuation of
humanitarian personnel could be disastrous.
My Government strongly condemns the attacks on
United Nations personnel and urges the Taliban to fully
investigate the recent attacks against two staff members of
the United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan, which
resulted in the death of an Italian national.
Portugal strongly deplores the fact that foreign
countries, instead of using their influence on the warring
factions positively, continue to fuel the conflict with arms,
personnel and logistical support. Although the enmity
between the Afghan factions is deep, we are convinced that
to a great extent it is foreign intervention that has prolonged
the fighting. Like others, we call for an immediate end to
such interference.
We remain deeply concerned with the reports of
widespread violations of human rights in Afghanistan, in
particular the continuing and intolerable discrimination
imposed by the Taliban against women. All factions must
understand that they are responsible not only for complying
with humanitarian law, but also for respecting and
implementing international human rights standards
regarding each and every citizen in Afghanistan.
We are also particularly alarmed by the fact that the
fighting and the polarization of forces is increasingly taking
place along ethnic lines, thus making it more complicated
to find a peaceful political solution. In this regard, we
would like to express our concern over the reported
capture by the Taliban of the Consulate-General of the
Islamic Republic of Iran in Mazar-e-Sharif and with the
fate of the civilian population of the Hazarajat region.
Another two sources of grave concern are drug-
trafficking and the continuing presence of terrorists and
terrorist training camps in Afghanistan, both factors with
far-reaching negative effects inside and outside
Afghanistan. They constitute a serious threat to peace and
security in the whole region. In fact, these completely
intolerable and destabilizing practices represent global
threats, and they must cease immediately.
In conclusion, we fully support the draft resolution
before us, which we co-sponsor. We urge the Afghan
factions to fully comply with it to put an end to the
suffering of the Afghan people.
Mr. Richmond (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom shares the grave concerns expressed in the draft
resolution before us today, which it has chosen to co-
sponsor.
The recent fighting has only prolonged the suffering
of the people of Afghanistan and, internationally, has
threatened the peace and stability of the region. It has
done nothing to achieve a lasting solution to the Afghan
crisis. History, old and new, shows us that military
conquest is not the answer. Only a political settlement,
negotiated between the factions and accommodating the
rights and interests of all Afghans, can achieve a durable
peace. We therefore strongly support the demand that the
Afghan factions stop fighting and enter urgently into
negotiations, under United Nations auspices, aimed at
creating a fully representative, broad-based government.
One particularly worrying aspect of the current
situation is the increasingly ethnic nature of the conflict
in Afghanistan. In that context, we share the concern of
the Secretary-General's Special Envoy and others about
the consequences of the latest fighting for the Hazara
community. We urge all factions to ensure the safety of
civilian communities, to refrain from any acts of
indiscriminate violence and to facilitate the provision of
humanitarian assistance.
The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned by
continuing reports of outside interference in the affairs of
Afghanistan. All countries with an influence on the
factions in Afghanistan should do more to promote the
4
Security Council 3921st meeting(Resumption)
Fifty-third year 28 August 1998
cause of regional stability by using their influence to
prevent the supply of arms and other military support and
to encourage the parties to negotiate.
The crisis in Afghanistan has recently had a direct
impact on the international community. The United
Kingdom joins in the strong condemnation of the attacks on
United Nations personnel, including in particular the
incident in which an Italian adviser to the United Nations
Special Mission to Afghanistan (UNSMA) was killed. We
extend our condolences to the family and to the Italian
Government. We also condemn the capture by the Taliban
of the Iranian Consulate-General in Mazar-e-Sharif. We call
upon all concerned, and especially the Taliban, to cooperate
in investigating the incident in Kabul and in doing
everything possible to ensure the safe return of the Iranian
diplomats and other Iranian nationals who have been
missing since the seizure of the Consulate.
Mr. Konishi (Japan): Japan shares the deep concern
of its Asian neighbours and, indeed, of the international
community, at the fighting that has continued to rage in
Afghanistan for the better part of two decades. The recent
escalation of fighting in northern Afghanistan between the
Taliban and the various factions allied against it is
particularly disturbing. The hostilities are causing additional
hardship to the Afghan people, who have already endured
unspeakable misery and loss, and pose a grave threat to the
stability of the region, particularly as new waves of
refugees flow into neighbouring countries.
This year alone, the Security Council has issued three
presidential statements stressing that the conflict in
Afghanistan cannot be resolved militarily and calling on all
parties to cease their hostilities and engage in dialogue.
Although Japan was encouraged that direct talks were
convened in the context of the ulema meeting process, our
optimism did not last long, and the Taliban have now
renounced that process and since the beginning of this
month have occupied the city of Mazar-e-Sharif and other
northern cities, with the result that most Afghan territory is
now under their control. These developments leave little
doubt that the Taliban, or, for that matter, the other parties
to the conflict, are not seriously interested in seeking a
peaceful settlement to the conflict.
The draft resolution on which we are about to vote,
and of which Japan is a sponsor, reflects the grave concern
of the Security Council over the deteriorating situation on
the ground. We would like to express our appreciation to
the Russian Federation for its initiative in drafting this
strong and unambiguous message, and we call upon all
the Afghan parties to respond promptly to its demands.
While the United Nations plays the central role in
international efforts to achieve a peaceful settlement of
the Afghan conflict, Japan also attaches great importance
to the efforts of the Six plus Two group, which have the
support and confidence of Ambassador Brahimi, the
Special Envoy of the Secretary General for Afghanistan.
In particular, we welcome the agreement of the group, as
contained in the talking points dated 3 March 1998, to
strive to check the flow of arms and other supplies to the
warring parties. That outside support has only prolonged
and intensified the fighting. In this regard, my delegation
believes that the importance of cooperation and trust
among the members of the Six plus Two group cannot be
overstated. We are therefore especially concerned by the
seizure by the Taliban of the Consulate-General of Iran in
Mazar-e-Sharif and the disappearance of members of its
staff and other Iranian nationals in Afghanistan. Such
actions threaten to destroy the relations of trust which
have been so painstakingly developed within the group, of
which Iran is a member. We earnestly hope that the
missing persons will be released safely and promptly.
Japan strongly condemns and mourns the loss of
Lieutenant-Colonel Carmine Calo, military adviser to the
United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan
(UNSMA), as well as two local staff members of the
World Food Programme (WFP) and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), all of whom were the victims of gunfire as
they carried out their humanitarian and peaceful duties in
Afghanistan. On behalf of the Government and people of
Japan, I extend my sincere condolences to their families
on their loss.
We are also alarmed by reports of air strikes against
the city of Bamian on 13 August which, in addition to the
human loss they might have caused, also raise the fear
that the great Buddhist statue in that area, recognized as
part of the world's cultural heritage, has been damaged.
The final point I wish to raise today is one that my
delegation has made on previous occasions but which
bears repeating. Lasting peace can be established in
Afghanistan only through a political process which is
accompanied by international reconstruction assistance.
This must be a continuous, two-pronged approach. In the
conviction that reconstruction assistance is an integral part
of the peace process, Japan has decided to host the next
meeting of the Afghanistan Support Group in Tokyo next
5
Security Council 3921st meeting(Resumption)
Fifty-third year 28 August 1998
December, which will address the problems of delivering
international assistance in a situation where hostilities
continue.
The people of Afghanistan have for far too long been
deprived of their right to live in peace and to pursue their
livelihoods in a safe and secure environment. Japan will
continue to vigorously support efforts to achieve a durable
peace in Afghanistan through a comprehensive settlement
of the conflict, so that a Government which represents and
is supported by all ethnic groups can be established as soon
as possible.
Mrs. Odera (Kenya): When we last discussed the
situation in Afghanistan, my delegation expressed
disappointment at the stalemate in the peace process and
expressed the fear that the Taliban had determined that a
military solution was the only way to resolve the many
political, religious and cultural differences in Afghanistan.
That determination has increased the already great suffering
of the people of Afghanistan. The Security Council's calls
for restraint and negotiation and its appeals for an end to all
foreign involvement in the form of overt military and
financial support, have fallen on deaf ears.
We meet again today under even more disturbing
circumstances. The will to negotiate a peace has given way
to an overwhelming need to impose a military solution on
a political problem. This approach by the Taliban may seem
successful in the short term, but history teaches us
otherwise. Indeed, if the Taliban insist on a military
approach these short-term gains will eventually unravel,
leading to even more turmoil in the country and the region.
This is a cause of great concern for us.
Kenya has joined in sponsoring the draft resolution
before us because we believe that the Security Council
must again convey a clear, unequivocal message to the
combatants that the problem in Afghanistan has to be
resolved by peaceful means, through negotiation, and not by
military means. We are also fully aware that the flow of
arms, money and other supplies into Afghanistan has
definitely exacerbated the crisis in Afghanistan. Several
attempts to address this problem have not been successful.
Indeed, in his last report on Afghanistan, the Secretary-
General noted that this increasing support had made the
Taliban and the United Front believe that they could
achieve their goals by force. This deep concern is well
expressed in the preambular section of the draft resolution,
which deplores the fact that despite repeated pleas by the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the Secretary-
General for a halt to the involvement of foreign military
personnel and the supply of arms and ammunition to all
parties in the conflict, such interference continues
unabated. We strongly urge those involved to stop in the
interests of long-lasting peace.
This military conflict and its attendant excesses has
injured two officials of the United Nations Special
Mission to Afghanistan (UNSMA), claiming the life of
one. We join in the strong condemnation of this terrible
act and join the international community in calling upon
the Taliban to investigate this crime. During this time of
sorrow Kenya conveys its deepest condolences and most
heartfelt sympathies to the family and friends of military
adviser Lieutenant-Colonel Carmine Calo of Italy, and to
Political Affairs Officer Eric Lavertu of France its best
wishes for a quick recovery.
We share the disappointment expressed by others,
that the Steering Committee adjourned without completing
its work. We believe that the strategy the Secretary-
General has laid out, and which was being implemented
by Ambassador Brahimi and the United Nations Special
Mission to Afghanistan, is worth pursuing. UNSMA
should not give up in frustration, and we encourage it to
continue its efforts.
We support the Secretary-General’s approach in
encouraging the international community to speak with
one voice regarding the road map that needs to be
followed. We also think that UNSMA’s idea of a step-by-
step process in confidence-building is worth following up.
In fact, the idea of convening a genuine Grand Assembly,
or Loya Jirgah, to promote a political settlement may also
need to be considered. We believe that the principles of
national reconciliation it embodies are positive and would
enhance a true process of healing and peace.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to thank the
Russian delegation for coordinating negotiations on this
draft resolution, which we will support. We hope that the
combatants will this time take heed and listen to the
unanimous voice of the international community.
Mr. Thiebaud (France) (interpretation from
French): The situation in Afghanistan has greatly
deteriorated in recent months; this is marked in particular
by new fighting and by the unfolding of a major military
offensive by the Taliban. France is particularly concerned
at these developments, which run counter to the search
for a lasting political settlement to a conflict that seriously
threatens regional and international security and that has
caused serious, deep suffering for the civilian population.
6
Security Council 3921st meeting(Resumption)
Fifty-third year 28 August 1998
The Security Council has already laid down the
fundamental principles for a settlement of the conflict in
Afghanistan, including in its resolution 1076 (1996). The
Afghan parties must put an end to hostilities without delay
and without preconditions, and must engage in true political
dialogue aimed at achieving national reconciliation. Outside
interference, especially in the form of arms supplies, must
cease. The United Nations has a central role to play in
settling the conflict.
It must be said that no progress can be discerned on
any of these points, and that through their obstinacy the
Taliban have greatly contributed to the failure to put in
place a peaceful settlement of the conflict. This unfortunate
fact must not make us indifferent; on the contrary, it must
prompt us to do what we are doing today with the
consideration of the draft resolution before us: to stand
firm, which is the only way to preserve the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan in the long term.
France condemns the 21 August attack in Kabul
against two United Nations staff members working with the
United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan. We
urgently call upon the Taliban to investigate the
circumstances of this heinous act and immediately to
inform the United Nations of the results of that
investigation. The name of Lieutenant-Colonel Carmine
Calo of Italy, who was murdered in a cowardly attack as he
worked to promote the cause of peace, may be added to the
long list of those who have been the victims in Afghanistan
of the most reprehensible intolerance.
We also deplore the flagrant violation of international
law and of the Vienna Conventions on Diplomatic Relations
and on Consular Relations: the occupation by the Taliban
of the Consulate-General of the Islamic Republic of Iran at
Mazar-e-Sharif. France is gravely concerned at the
disappearance of staff members of the Consulate-General
and of several other Iranian nationals, and we join in the
urgent appeals to the factions, and in particular to the
Taliban, to locate these diplomats.
The conditions that prevail in Afghanistan, and in
particular the position of the Taliban, have caused the
departure from Kabul of non-governmental organizations,
United Nations agencies and other international
humanitarian organizations. This could lead in coming
months to a further exacerbation of the humanitarian
situation and of the fate of the Afghan people.
Responsibility for this state of affairs lies with those who
in Afghanistan have increasingly taken measures that flout
fundamental human rights, and in particular the rights of
women and girls; with those who have rejected the
application of principles set out in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights; with those who have
imposed increased constraints upon humanitarian activities
and who have deliberately undermined international
humanitarian law.
Although everything must be done to facilitate the
return to Afghanistan, in conditions of security, of the
international organizations and the non-governmental
organizations in order to ease the suffering of the civilian
population, we consider it to be of paramount importance
that the United Nations and the international community
not compromise on the question of respect for universally
accepted principles.
We cannot fail once again to demand — as does the
draft resolution on which the Council will be voting
today — that the Afghan factions cease harbouring and
training terrorists and their organizations, and that they
put an end to the trafficking in illicit drugs.
The French delegation will vote in favour of the
draft resolution because it expresses the determination of
the Security Council, in keeping with its Charter
responsibilities, to consider all other measures that might
be necessary for the implementation of the draft
resolution, and to restore peace, stability and full respect
for human rights and international norms in Afghanistan.
Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): Let me first say that I
fully associate myself with the statement made earlier
today by the representative of Austria on behalf of the
European Union.
More than 19 years of warfare has not brought the
Afghan conflict or the suffering of the Afghan people
closer to an end. On the contrary, the continued and
escalated fighting poses serious and growing threats to
international peace and security and has caused extensive
human suffering, large-scale material destruction, and
refugee flows and other forcible displacements of large
numbers of people. The conflict also provides fertile
ground for terrorism and illegal drug production and
trafficking, with repercussions far outside Afghanistan’s
own borders.
The Afghan conflict has no military solution. Only
a political settlement accommodating the rights and
interests of all Afghan ethnic, religious and political
groups can provide the basis for a durable solution to the
7
Security Council 3921st meeting(Resumption)
Fifty-third year 28 August 1998
conflict. That is also how the necessary conditions can be
created for the much needed reconstruction and
development of Afghan society. The draft resolution before
us demands that all Afghan factions stop fighting, resume
negotiations without delay or preconditions, and cooperate
with the aim of creating a broad-based and fully
representative government which would protect the rights
of all Afghans and would observe the international
obligations of Afghanistan. We fully support that demand.
The Afghan conflict continues to be fuelled by arms,
ammunition and other military supplies from abroad, as
well as by the apparent involvement of foreign military
personnel. As the Secretary-General has stated, the key to
ending the Afghan tragedy lies in whether or not the
international community has the resolve to address its
external aspects. Foreign interference has to end. The
regional Powers need to talk to each other and build mutual
confidence. Only then can the tireless efforts of the
Secretary-General, his Special Envoy and the United
Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan to facilitate a
peaceful solution bear fruit. The draft resolution before us
calls upon all States neighbouring Afghanistan and other
States with influence in that country to intensify their
efforts under the auspices of the United Nations to bring
the parties to a negotiated settlement. We firmly support
that call.
My country remains greatly concerned at the
humanitarian situation in Afghanistan. All parties to the
conflict must comply fully with their obligations under
international humanitarian law. They must take full
responsibility for the safety and security of all international
and humanitarian personnel, and must ensure safe and
unhindered access. Impeding the delivery of humanitarian
assistance and using this obstruction as a weapon against
the civilian population is a violation of international law. Of
equal concern to us are the continued violations of human
rights, and especially the discrimination against Afghan
girls and women.
For many years, Sweden has been one of the largest
donors of humanitarian assistance to the Afghan people. We
are ready to continue this assistance when conditions on the
ground make that possible. The decision by the Taliban
authorities to close the offices of international non-
governmental organizations in Kabul, and other restrictions
on access, have forced the suspension of assistance, with
grave consequences for the population of Kabul itself and
beyond. Sweden fully supports further efforts by the
Secretary-General and his representatives to reach an
agreement with the Taliban in order to make possible the
continued delivery of necessary humanitarian aid.
Sweden will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before us.
Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
My delegation has stressed on many previous occasions
the need to resolve the Afghan crisis through dialogue,
peaceful means and direct negotiations between all
Afghan factions. Escalation, hostilities and resort to force
are not the means to resolve that crisis. In this context,
we call on all Afghan factions to cease hostilities, to
return to the negotiating table and to cooperate in order to
reach a comprehensive solution and a durable peace in
Afghanistan. We also call on the international community
and the States with influence in Afghanistan to intensify
their efforts, in cooperation with the United Nations, in
order to help the parties reach a peaceful settlement
through negotiation.
My delegation reaffirms its full support for the
efforts made by the United Nations — as represented by
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General in
Afghanistan — as well as for the activities of the United
Nations Special Mission in Afghanistan, to facilitate the
peace process aimed at obtaining the objectives of
national reconciliation and a durable settlement in
Afghanistan.
In this context, my delegation appeals to all States,
the programmes and specialized agencies of the United
Nations and other international organizations to resume
providing humanitarian assistance to all those in need in
Afghanistan as soon as security conditions permit. We
affirm the need to guarantee the safety and security of the
personnel of international organizations working for the
Afghan people and for peace in the country.
Proceeding from the State of Bahrain’s belief in the
need to settle political crises through dialogue, direct
negotiations and refraining from military force — which
can only increase tensions — my delegation will support
the draft resolution before the Council today, with the
understanding that the interpretation of the last
preambular paragraph and the operative paragraph 14
does not prejudice Islamic shariah.
Mr. Sáenz Biolley (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Spanish): The almost interminable conflict in Afghanistan
is once again a cause of outrage and concern for all of us.
The disillusionment and frustration that resound from time
8
Security Council 3921st meeting(Resumption)
Fifty-third year 28 August 1998
to time in international forums and meetings have taken on
new meaning today. That is why my delegation would like
take this opportunity to state the following.
It is inconceivable that small armed bands have
plunged this country and the vast majority of its population
into an abject state of near-barbarism and that they
persecute the population for ethnic or religious reasons.
It is unacceptable for the intolerance of a faction to
have brought about the suffering of almost 2.5 million
refugees and a similar number of internally displaced
persons.
It is intolerable as well for the Taliban faction to
violate the human rights of the population — in particular
the rights of women and girls — and that they attempt to
justify this with the argument of cultural and traditional
mores.
It is equally unacceptable for the work of international
humanitarian organizations to be thwarted, which condemns
the civilian population to greater suffering.
It is deeply alarming that there are still more than
10,000 undetonated anti-personnel mines, which place the
lives and safety of the majority of the population at great
risk.
It is also unacceptable that international illegal
narcotics trafficking is used and promoted to finance the
armed struggle and to bring suffering to the people, and
that the historical and cultural heritage of the Afghan
people is being destroyed to enrich small groups of
traffickers.
We are alarmed by that groups of extremists have
forced the innocent population to live in degrading
conditions and that, in this context, one fourth of the
children die before the age of five.
It is unforgivable for women and girls to be denied
access to minimal health and education services.
It is intolerable for fundamental principles of
international humanitarian law to be violated, that minimal
protection is not provided to civilians and non-combatants
and that people are forcibly displaced for ethnic or religious
reasons.
Furthermore, it is intolerable under any circumstances
for United Nations officials to be murdered in cold blood
and for the lives and security of United Nations staff and
the diplomatic and consular corps to be endangered.
It is alarming that neighbouring countries and
countries with influence on the parties are contributing to
the conflict rather than seeking a peaceful solution and
that there are clear signs of foreign military intervention
in the country, in conspicuous violation of that country’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
It is unacceptable for the parties to refuse to
negotiate a peaceful resolution of the conflict and to
attempt to create delays or set conditions on these
negotiations. This situation, which is so clearly in
violation of the basic principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, would automatically call for the
application of Article 6 of the Charter if it were brought
about by a recognized Government.
Costa Rica will be fully prepared to consider the
necessary measures to encourage the parties to the Afghan
conflict, in particular the Taliban, to respect the minimum
standards of human rights and humanitarian international
law and to motivate them to find a peaceful resolution of
the conflict, as is set out in the draft resolution before us.
For all of these reasons, my delegation has co-
sponsored the draft resolution we are considering today
and will vote in favour of it. We share the international
community’s justified distress and concern over the
situation prevailing in Afghanistan. We hope that once
and for all the Afghan factions will now be rational and
sensible and will pursue a civilized dialogue to settle the
conflict that is tearing Afghanistan apart.
Mr. Amorim (Brazil): Afghanistan has been
afflicted by the scourge of war for almost 20 years.
During this period the image of peace seemed to appear
on the horizon many times but proved to be just a mirage.
A crossroads of civilizations, Afghanistan has seen
many would-be conquerors. In their long history, the
Afghans have always shown a deep attachment to their
freedom and a profound distaste for foreign interference
in their affairs. Afghanistan is thus key to the peace and
stability of a region of unique strategic importance to the
rest of the world.
In the draft resolution we are about to adopt, the
Security Council reaffirms its commitment to the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
9
Security Council 3921st meeting(Resumption)
Fifty-third year 28 August 1998
national unity of Afghanistan, as well as its respect for its
cultural and historical heritage.
The preservation of the extraordinary diversity which
characterizes Afghanistan, and which is reflected in the
various expressions of Islamic and other faiths and in a
mosaic of ethnic and linguistic communities with close
links with other peoples of South and Central Asia, is a
necessary condition for a durable peace.
The United Nations has had an important role in
helping the Afghan people in this period of conflict. The
Organization has acted in an impartial way in the fulfilment
of its political mandate, promoting the dialogue among the
six neighbours and other interested countries. The United
Nations, in cooperation with other organizations, has been
instrumental in the provision of much-needed humanitarian
assistance.
In order to allow for the return of normalcy to
Afghanistan, it is necessary that the Afghan parties re-
initiate a process of political negotiation. Both the
Government of President Rabbani and the Taliban
authorities have a responsibility to work in that direction.
It is also necessary that human rights be respected,
including the rights of girls and women.
All outside interference in the internal affairs of
Afghanistan should cease immediately, particularly the
presence of foreign military personnel.
The return of the United Nations, in conditions of
security, should facilitate the investigation into the alleged
massacres. This would be an important step in establishing
the facts and bringing justice to that country. Afghanistan
should also join the efforts of the international community
to combat terrorism and drug trafficking.
No political movement, no matter how much territory
it controls, will gain international respectability as long as
it is perceived as harbouring terrorist activities. It is also
necessary that those in a position of authority ensure the
observance of international law, in particular their
obligations under the Vienna Conventions on Diplomatic
and Consular Relations and the Geneva Conventions. The
officers of the Consulate-General of Iran, who are being
held hostage, should be freed immediately.
We should like also to refer in particular to paragraph
6 of the draft resolution, which condemns the attacks on the
United Nations personnel in the Taliban-held territories of
Afghanistan, including the killing of two Afghan staff
members of the World Food Programme and of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in
Jalalabad, and of the Military Adviser to the United
Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan in Kabul.
The draft resolution we have before us, in favour of
which Brazil will vote, represents a call from the
international community to the Afghans to renounce any
form of violence and settle their differences through
negotiation.
Mr. Touray (Gambia): The situation in Afghanistan
is of grave concern to my delegation. The recent re-
emergence of hostilities in the northern region of the
country poses a serious and growing threat to the already
fragile peace and security situation in the region. Those
offensives are further exacerbated by the increasingly
ethnic and sectarian nature of the conflict, resulting in an
increase in refugee flows, the forcible displacement of
persons and wanton destruction, thus exacerbating the
misery and sorrow of an already despondent society.
My delegation was extremely disappointed when we
learnt of the capture of the Consulate-General of the
Islamic Republic of Iran. We vehemently condemn this
act of blatant disregard for international law. We join
others in demanding that all parties to the conflict do
everything possible to ensure the safe and dignified
passage out of Afghanistan of the personnel of the
Consulate-General and other Iranian nationals missing in
Afghanistan.
Another matter of grave concern to my delegation is
the attacks on United Nations personnel. We condemn
those acts and join others in calling on the Taliban to
investigate them and bring those responsible for these
heinous crimes to justice. We also demand that the parties
to the conflict do everything possible to ensure the
security of United Nations personnel and of international
and other humanitarian workers.
The war in Afghanistan is very fluid and for that
reason we believe that there is no military solution to this
extremely complex conflict. The international community
has expended a lot of resources, time and energy to help
the Afghan factions out of this undesirable situation, but
the factions remain stubborn. The belligerents must
realize that the patience of the international community
will soon run out.
In this context, we take this opportunity to call on all
the factions to lay down their arms and return to the
10
Security Council 3921st meeting(Resumption)
Fifty-third year 28 August 1998
negotiating table. We believe that with a firm commitment
among the factions and with the assistance of the United
Nations, a negotiated settlement accommodating the
interests of all the Afghan factions can be reached.
My delegation has studied the draft resolution before
us. We believe that it is a very balanced one. It states in no
uncertain terms the demands and position of the
international community. We are in support of it and will
vote in its favour.
Mr. Minton (United States of America): The United
States emphasizes that no faction in Afghanistan can
impose its will on the entire country through military
action. A lasting settlement can be achieved only by
establishing a representative and broad-based multi-ethnic
Government that can effectively govern and honour
Afghanistan's international obligations. We take this
opportunity to again urge the Afghan factions to work with
the United Nations and Special Representative Brahimi to
reach this goal.
The factions should also facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian aid by the United Nations and non-
governmental organizations to all in need, and work to
protect the human rights of all Afghans. We are particularly
concerned about the women and girls of Afghanistan, who
are subject to systematic discrimination and repression. We
call upon the factions to respect internationally accepted
norms of behaviour in this matter.
As President Clinton has said, terrorism is one of the
greatest dangers we face in this new global era. We once
again urge the Afghan factions to cease all assistance to
terrorists, including providing sanctuary, and to expel them
from Afghanistan.
Afghanistan's neighbours should not interfere in that
country. In particular, they should not take any actions that
could further enlarge or inflame the conflict at this critical
time. The United States supports the territorial integrity of
Afghanistan and of all of its neighbours. We call on all
Afghan parties and all of Afghanistan's neighbours to
respect its borders.
We too deplore the tragic deaths of international
personnel working in Afghanistan. We extend our deepest
condolences to the families of the victims of these crimes
and call for efforts to bring those responsible to speedy
justice.
The United States is also aware of reports that
several Iranians, including diplomatic staff of the Iranian
Consulate in Mazar-e-Sharif, have been missing since the
Taliban captured that city. While we cannot confirm these
reports, we remind the Afghan factions that the holding
of diplomats for any reason and at any time is
unacceptable, given their special protected status under
international law.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Slovenia.
We are gravely concerned about the recent
resumption of large-scale fighting in Afghanistan, which
is again taking a high toll on the country and its people.
However, despite the immense suffering and destruction
caused during all the years of fighting, the parties still
seem determined to pursue the military option and are not
prepared to engage in a serious dialogue to find a
peaceful solution to the conflict.
The situation in Afghanistan has the potential to
escalate, with an alarming destabilizing effect on the
region as a whole. That threat includes both military and
non-military aspects, including drug trafficking and the
harbouring and training of terrorists.
The illusion of a quick military victory on one side
could lead to a protracted military and ethnic conflict. The
only way to resolve the situation in Afghanistan is to stop
the fighting, resume negotiations and work towards the
establishment of a broad-based Government and national
reconciliation.
The role of the international community, and of the
United Nations in particular, is important. In order to
make peacemaking efforts more effective, the United
Nations needs to offer a coherent approach to the
problem. For that to become possible, full cooperation by
the countries with influence in Afghanistan, especially
those neighbouring it, is crucial.
Full cooperation with the United Nations means, first
and foremost, that foreign military interference in
Afghanistan has to cease. Foreign interference in the form
of active political or military support, including foreign
military personnel, is one of the main obstacles to the
efforts for peace in Afghanistan. The appropriate solutions
should be found to curb the flow of arms and other
supplies to the warring factions.
11
Security Council 3921st meeting(Resumption)
Fifty-third year 28 August 1998
Security conditions for United Nations and
humanitarian personnel have been deteriorating for some
time now and have finally resulted in the relocation of the
United Nations international staff from Afghanistan. We
strongly condemn the killing of an Italian national — the
Military Adviser to the United Nations Special Mission in
Kabul — and of the two Afghan staff members of the
World Food Programme and of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in Jalalabad. We
expect that a full investigation into these crimes will be
conducted.
We would like to express our deep concern at the fate
of the personnel of the Iranian Consulate-General in Mazar-
e-Sharif and of the other Iranian nationals who have been
missing since the Taliban captured the city. We call upon
the parties, in particular the Taliban, to respect their
diplomatic status and the provisions of the Vienna
Conventions and to secure their safe passage out of
Afghanistan.
We call upon the parties to respect humanitarian law
and human rights. We are particularly concerned at the
reports of ethnic and religious persecution, impediments to
the work of international humanitarian organizations and the
displacement of innocent civilians. We would like to
reiterate our concern at discrimination against girls and
women and urge the Taliban to recognize and protect their
rights in accordance with international human rights
standards.
We believe that this is an appropriate time for the
Security Council to make a firm pronouncement on the
situation in Afghanistan.
Slovenia co-sponsored the draft resolution submitted
for action today and shall vote in favour of it.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/1998/810) before it. If I hear no objection, I shall put
the draft resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1193 (1998).
There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.
12
