United Nations S/PV.4046
99-85798 (E) This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fifty-fourth Year
4046th Meeting
Thursday, 16 September 1999, 10.30 a.m.
New York
President: Mr. van Walsum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Netherlands)
Members: Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Martínez Ríos
Bahrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Buallay
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fonseca
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fowler
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Chen Xu
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dejammet
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Essonghé
Gambia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Jagne
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Hasmy
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Andjaba
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Türk
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Sir Jeremy Greenstock
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Holbrooke
Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General to the Security Council on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/1999/957)
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 16 September 1999
The meeting was called to order at 11.35 a.m.
Welcome to the Deputy Foreign Minister for
Humanitarian Affairs of Argentina
The President: At the outset, I should like to
acknowledge and welcome the presence of the Deputy
Foreign Minister for Humanitarian Affairs of Argentina,
Her Excellency Ms. Alicia Martínez Ríos.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General to the Security
Council on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/1999/957)
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Botswana, Egypt, Finland, India, Iraq, Japan, Mongolia,
Norway, the Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Slovakia, South
Africa, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Tunisia and Ukraine, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Legwaila
(Botswana), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt), Ms. Korpi
(Finland), Mr. Sharma (India), Mr. Hasan (Iraq),
Mr. Takasu (Japan), Mr. Enkhsaikhan (Mongolia),
Mr. Kolby (Norway), Mr. Lee See-Young (Republic of
Korea), Mr. Mutaboba (Rwanda), Mr. Tomka
(Slovakia), Mr. Kumalo (South Africa), Mr. Calovski
(the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia),
Mr. Hachani (Tunisia) and Mr. Yel’chenko (Ukraine)
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter dated 10 September 1999 from
the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
which has been issued as document S/1999/980, and
which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the Security
Council invite Ambassador Nasser Al-Kidwa,
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations, to participate in the upcoming meetings of
the Security Council, beginning on Thursday,
16 September 1999, regarding civilians in armed
conflict”.
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
the Permanent Observer of Palestine to participate in the
current debate in accordance with the rules of procedure
and the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine), took the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, if I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation to the
Permanent Observer of Switzerland to the United Nations
to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Maurer
(Switzerland), took the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall take
it that the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mrs.
Sylvie Junod, head of the delegation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross to the United Nations.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in
its prior consultations.
2
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 16 September 1999
Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General to the Security Council on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, document
S/1999/957.
I give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: I am pleased to have the
opportunity to present to the Security Council my report on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. This report
takes as a starting-point the worst acts of humankind and
calls for our best efforts to defend civilians where they are
most imperiled.
More than just the victims of crossfire, civilians have
themselves become the targets in today’s conflicts. During
the past decade, many millions have been killed. Over 30
million have been displaced, and countless men, women
and children have been denied access to life-saving food
and medicine. These statistics are made all the more
shocking by the calculated methods used by so many
belligerents. We have observed in each of the five
continents that belligerents are increasingly taking care to
avoid direct confrontation with each other. Instead, their
favourite strategy is to gain ground in the exercise of terror
against defenceless civilians. Their actions, regardless of
any reason that may motivate their struggle, demonstrate a
shocking disregard for human life and human values.
The Emergency Relief Coordinator addressed this
issue in January in a meeting of the Security Council. Eight
months later, it is fair to ask whether the situation has
changed. Has there been any improvement?
Since January, conflicts have erupted or have been
reignited or intensified in Angola, Colombia, Sierra Leone,
Kosovo and East Timor. Each of these situations reminds
us in different ways of the scale of commitment needed to
transform a fragile ceasefire into a secure and stable peace.
Years of careful work in Angola have been undone by the
desire of warring parties to control economic resources. The
Lusaka Protocol has collapsed and the civilian population
is paying dearly for this failure. Many have lost their lives
and hundreds of thousands are again displaced.
In Sierra Leone, too, the quest for power and control
of economic resources has driven belligerents to acts of
depravity. The mutilation of so many people demonstrates
that international law means nothing without effective
measures to back it up.
In East Timor, the international community is faced
with another situation where human rights have become
a casualty of aggression. Militia groups are attempting by
a campaign of terror to overturn the results of a
democratic poll in which they were overwhelmingly
defeated.
None of these countries at present has the
institutions or the democratic political culture necessary
for peace to take hold. They all require sustained and
comprehensive efforts to support those who favour peace
over war, stability over banditry. To ensure that these
crises are brought to an end, the United Nations must be
ready to respond with more than meetings, speeches and
reports. It must take action in the name of the principles
of the Charter and the values of humanity. The essence of
the United Nations work is to establish human security
where it is no longer present, where it is under threat or
where it never existed. This is our humanitarian
imperative.
We are at the end of a century that has seen the
creation and refinement of much of the corpus of
international law. Yet civilians have rarely been so
vulnerable. That the conventions of international
humanitarian and human rights law are being disregarded
so wilfully by combatants and are being enforced only
sporadically by the international community is deeply
disturbing.
Contained in this report are a total of 40 concrete
recommendations which I believe can help to improve the
security of civilians in armed conflict. These
recommendations provide the Council with tools and
strategies which it can use to respond to particular
situations. To make the best use of these tools, the
Council may wish to set up a standing mechanism
through which it can seek expert advice on specific
issues. Such a mechanism would allow the Council to
develop a range of responses to deal with issues of legal
protection, prevention of conflicts and physical protection.
The Council should make use of this expertise not
simply for briefings on humanitarian situations, but as a
source of concrete solutions to the problems being
confronted. For example, recommendation 39 refers to
humanitarian and security zones. In situations where such
options are being considered, expert advice may be sought
from the Secretariat or elsewhere. All the
recommendations but the last could help to prevent future
3
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 16 September 1999
hostilities and assist in the protection of civilians already in
armed conflict.
Tragically, they will not always be enough. If they are
not, the final recommendation on enforcement action will
need to be taken. There must, of course, be objective
criteria to determine the threshold for any form of
intervention, but its use must always be on the table. There
is no doubt that enforcement action is a difficult step to
take. It often goes against political or other interests, but
there are universal principles and values which supersede
such interests and the protection of civilians is one of them.
I have given high priority to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict and am willing to work in close support
of the Security Council. I am prepared to use my good
offices to put in place a system of monitoring progress in
the implementation of the 40 recommendations that we
have made and to report back to the Council on a regular
basis. The Council should then be able to measure its
progress and evaluate the effectiveness of its efforts.
Those who founded the United Nations believed that,
despite a bloodied history, humanity was ultimately
redeemable. Yet we see that civilians are still forced from
their homes; driven to borders which are open one minute
and closed the next; forced into hiding; separated from their
families; made to act as human shields; stripped of their
identities; and callously killed. The plight of civilians is no
longer something which can be neglected or made
secondary because it complicates political negotiations or
interests. It is fundamental to the central mandate of the
Organization.
Failure to address these issues would erode the respect
of the Council’s resolutions and so diminish the authority
of the United Nations as a whole. More importantly, it
would take away the one thing that sustains the many
millions who have lost all in conflict: the hope that
something called “the international community” is willing
to uphold the basic dignity of humankind.
Mr. President, with your permission, I would ask Mrs.
Robinson to make a brief statement.
The President: At the Secretary-General’s request, I
now call on Mrs. Mary Robinson, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.
Mrs. Robinson (High Commissioner for Human
Rights): I warmly welcome this opportunity to address
members of the Security Council. I wish to express my
appreciation to the Council for having commissioned this
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict and
I thank the Secretary-General for an excellent, clear and
concise document.
I am pleased to be here today, as the report raises
issues close to my heart. The report accurately reflects the
innumerable challenges which the United Nations faces in
its work and so many of the human rights issues which
my staff and I address on a daily basis. My Office is
more than willing to play its part in implementing the
report’s constructive recommendations on the effective
implementation of international human rights,
humanitarian and refugee law and on the prevention of
gross violations of human right so crucial to national and
regional stability and thus to international peace and
security.
As High Commissioner for Human Rights, I have
assumed a burden of listening: listening to the pain and
anguish of victims of violations; listening to the anxieties
and fears of human rights defenders. I am glad to share
this burden with the members of the Council today
because they have the power and possibilities to alleviate
the pain and to prevent some of the anxieties being
realized.
If I refer to East Timor first it is because the terrible
events of recent days are so fresh in my mind. The awful
abuses committed in East Timor have shocked the
world — and rightly so, since it would be hard to
conceive of a more blatant assault on the rights of
hundreds of thousands of innocent civilians. The murders,
maimings, rapes and countless other atrocities committed
by the militias, with the involvement of elements of the
security forces, were especially repugnant because they
came in the aftermath of the free expression of the wishes
of the East Timorese people about their political future.
I saw evidence of a well-planned and systematic
policy of killings, displacement, destruction of property
and intimidation. There must be accountability for the
grave violations committed in East Timor. My
recommendation is the establishment of an international
commission of inquiry to gather and analyze evidence of
the events in East Timor.
What happened in East Timor is a graphic example
of the plight of civilians in conflict situations. And East
Timor is just the latest example. In the former Yugoslavia
I met women and girls who had been sexually assaulted,
raped and forced into sexual slavery. In Sierra Leone I
4
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 16 September 1999
met children whose arms or legs had been brutally cut off
during the civil war. I listened to accounts of children being
abducted by rebels and sent to training centres or directly
to the battlefront. Children were forced to attack their own
villages and families and commit the most horrendous
atrocities. Many of these child soldiers have been killed,
while others have been maimed and psychologically scarred
for life. In Colombia and Cambodia human rights defenders
vividly described the climate of violence in which they
were carrying on their activities at great personal risk.
Reports from Angola tell how rebels provoked a mass
movement of displaced persons desperate to reach the
relatively safe haven of provincial capitals.
It had been expected that the collapse of superpower
rivalry would lead to a reduction in conflict, but the decline
in inter-State fighting has been more than made up for in
the growth of vicious internal conflicts, often unpredictable
and volatile. These are conflicts that drag on for years
without settlement or that flare up afresh when peace
seemed to be at hand. The village has become the
battlefield and the civilian population the primary target.
Girls and women are routinely subjected to sexual abuse
and gender-based violence. Children are recruited and
kidnapped to become child soldiers, forced to give violent
expression to the hatreds of adults.
Both the Secretary-General’s report and my own
experiences bring home the reality: civilians are no longer
just victims of war, today they are regarded as instruments
of war. The starving, terrorizing, murdering and raping of
civilians — all are seen as legitimate. Sex is no defence,
nor is age. Indeed, it is women, children and the elderly
who are often at greatest risk. That is a strange, terrible
state of affairs in the year after we commemorated the
fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. It is not sufficient that we be appalled by the
brutality of today’s armed conflicts. We must learn from
the analysis of the plight of civilians in armed conflicts and
seek ways to address the problem effectively.
Conflicts almost always lead to massive human rights
violations, but also erupt because human rights are violated
due to oppression, inequality, discrimination and poverty.
These conditions are exacerbated when the State is too
weak or unable to address them efficiently. Human rights
violations are thus both a consequence of and a contributing
factor to instability and further conflict. And as a result of
globalization and increasing interdependence between
States, conflicts which are essentially internal often have
spillover effects beyond national borders.
As so clearly underscored by the Secretary-General
in his report, there is an intrinsic link between systematic
and widespread violations of the rights of civilians and
the erosion of international peace and security. For
example, in Iraq and the former Yugoslavia the Security
Council has recognized that the repression of the civilian
population has led to consequences that threatened peace
and security in the region. Human security has become
synonymous with international security. Human security
can be guaranteed only through the full respect of all
fundamental rights. This intrinsic link demands the
attention and action of the Security Council in the field of
human rights protection and the prevention of massive
and gross violations.
The first need today is not that we write new laws,
but that we implement what already exists in the field,
close to the victims and where it really matters. To this
end I wish to express my support for those
recommendations in the report which call on States to
ratify all of the international instruments in the areas of
human rights, humanitarian and refugee law, to withdraw
reservations and, most importantly, to comply fully with
their provisions. Could we not also take the concrete step
of raising the minimum age for participation in hostilities
to 18 years?
A serious issue which must be addressed is
accountability. We are increasingly being faced with the
dilemma of having to stop atrocities being committed and
seeking avenues for the peaceful settlement of conflicts
on the one hand, while needing to hold accountable and
punish the perpetrators of human rights violations, on the
other. To grant amnesty to the authors of the most
atrocious crimes for the sake of peace and reconciliation
may be tempting, but it contradicts the purpose and
principles of the United Nations Charter, as well as
internationally observed principles and standards. For
these reasons, the recommendations in the Secretary
General’s report on enforcing accountability for war
crimes and on measures to deter and contain those guilty
of egregious human rights violations are especially
important.
I wish to commend the Security Council for having
established the two ad hoc Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda. I warmly welcome the adoption
of the Statute of the International Criminal Court,
providing jurisdiction over three core crimes of genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes. We must move
forward now and ensure that our collective support for the
establishment of an effective International Criminal Court
5
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 16 September 1999
will, through the speedy ratification of its Statute, be a
significant milestone in the struggle to strengthen respect
for human rights and humanitarian and refugee law.
The best protection for civilians in armed conflict is
prevention. By addressing the root causes of conflict and
seeking to defuse tensions, the atrocities and violations of
fundamental rights committed during armed conflict can be
prevented. The major building blocks for peace-building
and reconciliation are good governance, the rule of law,
respect for human rights, a strong civil society and
institutions which can guarantee an environment conducive
to stability and peace.
The Security Council has a vital role to play, both at
the prevention stage and, should that fail, in the deployment
of peacekeepers to minimize the impact of conflict on
civilians.
After reading the Secretary-General’s report and
hearing his presentation of it today, nobody could any
longer complain that they did not realize how bad the
situation facing civilians in today’s armed conflicts was. It
should be our collective goal to implement the
recommendations of the report and so develop enforceable
mechanisms for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. This is the only way we will deliver on our
promises to guarantee a life of respect, dignity and human
rights for all.
Mr. Fowler (Canada) (spoke in French): I would first
like to express my appreciation, Sir, to your Government,
the Government of the Netherlands, for holding this debate.
In our eight months on the Council, we have repeatedly
witnessed how human rights abuses, attacks on
humanitarian workers, forced displacement and other
civilian suffering can have a devastating impact on
international peace and security, whether in Angola,
Afghanistan, Sierra Leone, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Kosovo or now in East Timor. We, the members of
the Security Council, have expressed our outrage at such
attacks against civilians, but we have often come up short
in ameliorating the plight of those whose lives are being
ruined mercilessly.
I would like to congratulate the Secretary-General and
his colleagues in the Secretariat and on the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee for producing this important report. In
particular I would like to thank the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for their
tremendous contributions. The report clearly reveals the
realities faced by ordinary people caught up in armed
conflict. It builds effectively on previous analyses and
reports presented to the Council and provides concrete,
practical recommendations for enhancing civilian
protection before, at the onset of and during armed
conflict. These recommendations do not put the onus
solely on combatants but rather highlight the
responsibilities of the international community to improve
the plight of war-affected populations. We believe these
ideas must be vigorously pursued both within the Council
and elsewhere.
We are pleased that the report highlights the
discriminatory nature of armed conflict, focusing on how
men and women suffer differently. This aspect has too
often been absent from analyses presented to the Council.
The report also identifies several forms of gender-based
violence, in particular the dramatic increase in female-
headed households in war-torn societies. It also
underscores the fact that women and children comprise
the vast majority of refugees and internally displaced
persons. The Canadian Government would also like to
take this opportunity to applaud the Secretary-General’s
personal commitment to this issue, a commitment evident
in the many actions identified within the report for
follow-up by his office.
Canada raised the protection of civilians in armed
conflict as a subject for discussion during our presidency
last February because of its all-too-clear salience for the
Security Council. Civilians are disproportionately affected
by contemporary armed conflicts. It is often a deliberate
strategy of the combatants to injure and kill civilians and
to force them to flee. Access to humanitarian relief for
civilians is frequently denied, and humanitarian and
peacekeeping personnel seeking to come to their aid and
to mitigate their suffering increasingly find themselves at
risk. The presence of combatants in camps for
internationally and internally displaced persons only adds
to the vulnerability of civilians and often destabilizes
entire regions. The widespread availability of small arms,
light weapons and landmines significantly heightens the
risks to civilians and has devastating implications for
reconstruction.
These concerns are at the heart of our efforts to
enhance human security, and the role of the Security
Council in this regard is paramount. The protection of
civilians must be one of the primary imperatives for
collective international action. The Council has been
increasingly attentive to such concerns — I would note
the recent resolutions on war-affected children and on
6
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 16 September 1999
Sierra Leone as examples. This evolution is critically
important and most welcome, as it clearly shows that the
Council recognizes that the future will not lack for
situations in which civilians are put appallingly at risk. The
Council must meet these challenges directly and creatively.
More vigorous efforts will be required to ensure that the
Security Council has both the tools and the will to grapple
effectively with these threats that afflict people and their
communities, in addition to maintaining its traditional focus
on the security of States.
We believe that the recommendations emerging from
the excellent report before us will help to achieve the goal
of keeping the protection of the most vulnerable at the
forefront of the Council’s agenda and, as the Secretary-
General has suggested, of helping to achieve a “climate of
compliance”.
(spoke in English)
Canada strongly supports the Secretary-General’s
emphasis on prevention. Concerted and comprehensive
efforts aimed at addressing the root causes of instability and
conflict truly are the best way to enhance the protection of
civilians while guaranteeing that they have reasonable
development prospects. Effective prevention, of course,
requires vision, commitment and the willingness to engage.
Above all, this means instilling a culture of timely and
rapid response to developing crises. We support the
Secretary- General’s suggestion that the Council make
greater use of Articles 34, 35 and 36 of the Charter, which,
respectively, allow the Council to investigate any situation,
allow any Member State to bring any dispute to the
Council’s attention, and allow the Council to recommend
procedures for the peaceful settlement of disputes at any
stage. We also welcome the recommendation to strengthen
the relevance of Article 99, which allows the Secretary-
General to bring to the attention of the Security Council
any matter which in his opinion may threaten the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The Council should also contrive to see that it is
provided with accurate information on deteriorating human
rights situations and should become more comfortable with
the concept of preventive peacekeeping operations and/or
monitoring which, regrettably, are ideas that remain elusive
and all too theoretical.
We welcome, as we have many times before, the call
to enhance the United Nations stand-by arrangements,
including the kind of rapidly deployable mission-
headquarters capacity we have been advocating for five
years, and which would have served us so well over the
past few days as we sought to come to grips with the
deteriorating situation in East Timor. Such proactive
efforts by the Council could make a real difference.
We know, of course, that our world is not likely to
become significantly less perilous. We must therefore be
prepared to draw on a wide range of instruments and
initiatives designed to enhance both legal and physical
protection for civilians in situations of armed conflict.
A considerable body of international law exists to
regulate the conduct of conflicts. The challenge
confronting States and citizens is to promote knowledge
of and respect for international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law and standards and to hold
accountable those who violate them. In this regard, I
welcome the Secretary-General’s emphasis on the
importance of training and of the dissemination of
relevant information at the national, regional and
international levels.
We must also bring an end to what have clearly
been cultures of impunity. To do this, Member States
need to adopt and implement national legislation which
would make possible the prosecution of individuals who
commit war crimes or grave breaches of humanitarian
law, and which would provide for the handing over of
such persons for trial by another State with jurisdiction,
or by a duly constituted international tribunal. The
Security Council should make every effort to ensure
compliance with the two existing ad hoc tribunals, and,
pending what we hope will soon be the establishment of
a functioning International Criminal Court, the Council
must stand ready to endorse the creation of further interim
international arrangements to make it possible those
responsible for war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide to be held accountable.
Canada is pleased that the Secretary-General’s report
highlights several gaps in existing international law that
have serious ramifications for war-affected civilians and
humanitarian personnel. In particular, Canada welcomes
the emphasis on raising the age of recruitment and
participation in hostilities, and supports the early adoption
of an optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the situation of children in armed conflict.
Canada is also fully supportive of the Secretary-General’s
focus on addressing the rights and needs of internally
displaced persons in situations of armed conflict, and on
further strengthening the requirements for the safety and
7
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 16 September 1999
security of humanitarian personnel, including locally
engaged staff.
The consistent denouncement by the Council of the
use of child soldiers and of the targeting of relief workers
carries significant weight and can precipitate the
development of new norms. We urge our colleagues on the
Council to focus attention on these matters and to declare
our collective intention to pursue them vigorously both here
and in other forums.
Given the types of contemporary conflicts with which
the Security Council must grapple, there is one matter
which is especially vexing and which requires particular
attention. I am referring to the behaviour of non-State
military entities. Increasingly, civilian casualties and forced
displacements take place within the context of intra-State
armed conflict, where the principal protagonists include
irregular armies with ambiguous chains of command, and
where outside economic interests often try to curry favour
with belligerents out of immediate self-interest and with
little regard for the humanitarian implications of their
actions. How can we induce non-State actors to comply
with international humanitarian and human rights law and
hold them accountable for such violations? How do we
compel their compliance with Security Council decisions?
The non-State military include not only irregular armies and
rebel groups, but also private-sector organizations and
ubiquitous “security firms” whose activities can often
exacerbate civilian suffering during war, as has clearly been
the case for example in Liberia and Sierra Leone. We
would welcome an opportunity to further explore this
question, including the intriguing proposal of the Secretary-
General that means be found to hold combatants financially
liable in instances where civilians have been targeted
deliberately.
While the international community has invested
considerable attention and energy in enhancing legal
protection, the means for strengthening the physical
protection of civilians are less well defined and well
developed. The need for the Security Council to develop
the political, diplomatic, peacekeeping and enforcement
measures required to tackle this aspect of civilian protection
has become increasingly evident. This is true both because
of the increased demand that we “do something” when
gross and systematic violations of human rights and
humanitarian law occur, and also because the new
international security environment makes it more feasible to
do so.
Clearly, we have only just begun to adapt our
international management tools to these new realities, and,
indeed, our mind-sets to the task of strengthening our
capacity to protect masses of vulnerable people
effectively. If we are serious about the need to provide
better protection to civilians in situations of armed
conflict, the Council, and the United Nations more
generally, will have to tackle these components of the
Secretary-General’s report very directly, which will by no
means be easy or always politically popular.
We believe that several important initiatives have
been advanced in this report which merit further analysis.
These include: assessing how and when peacekeeping and
enforcement operations might better address civilian
protection, and ensuring that their mandates are designed
from the outset to facilitate this task; appointing an
ombudsman for peacekeeping operations; ensuring that
gender-specific and child-focused protection and
assistance requirements are addressed in peacekeeping and
peace-building operations; making greater use of targeted
sanctions, including in situations in which humanitarian
access is denied or obstructed, and establishing a
permanent technical review mechanism of United Nations
and regional sanctions regimes; imposing, monitoring and
enforcing effective arms embargoes that will serve to
interdict those categories of weapons which target and
terrorize civilians and protected persons, particularly small
arms and light weapons and their ammunition; examining
the applicability and desirability of establishing
humanitarian zones and safe corridors; and identifying the
means for separating combatants and armed elements
from refugee populations.
These recommendations will benefit greatly from
further consultation among Security Council members,
troop contributing countries, the Secretariat, United
Nations operational programmes and agencies, the Red
Cross and a variety of regional and subregional
organizations.
We strongly support a process of detailed and
thorough follow-up to the key recommendations contained
in the Secretary-General’s report. This is necessary if we
are to flesh out some of the more challenging initiatives,
in particular those which relate to physical protection.
As my delegation noted in February, the plight of
civilians in situations of armed conflict is urgent, growing
and global. We thank the Secretary-General for this
report. It is timely, and it offers a valuable opportunity to
enhance the Council’s role and capacity. These issues
8
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 16 September 1999
must sustain our attention, as we have both the authority
and the mandate to address them within the Security
Council. And while the Council must play the lead role,
other forums and many other experts both within and
outside the United Nations system will also be vital to the
success of this endeavour.
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of Israel
and the Philippines, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gold (Israel)
and Mr. Mabilangan (Philippines) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.
Mr. Türk (Slovenia): Let me begin by expressing our
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s
open debate on the situation of civilians in armed conflict.
Six months have elapsed since the Security Council held its
first open debate on the subject and issued a presidential
statement, under the Canadian presidency. It is timely for
the Council to focus again on the plight of civilians in
armed conflict. We would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his opening remarks today and for the excellent
report which addresses the situation of civilians in armed
conflict in a very comprehensive and effective manner. The
report contains a number of concrete and useful
recommendations to the Security Council, which deserve
our full attention and careful consideration. We are also
grateful to Mrs. Mary Robinson, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, for her remarks, and to
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, for his committed and effective
work.
The recent conflicts around the world have been
devastating for civilians. Deliberate attacks against civilians
have become an abhorrent standard feature of many
contemporary armed conflicts. The fate of children is
particularly appalling. The norms of international
humanitarian and human rights law that set standards for
conduct in conflict situations are flagrantly violated by
belligerent parties. It is therefore of the utmost importance
to promote a “climate of compliance”, to borrow a term
used in the Secretary-General’s report, and to enforce
respect for existing norms of international humanitarian,
human rights and refugee law. Those responsible for
violations of those norms have to be brought to justice. It
is a duty of all States to prevent impunity through their
national systems of justice as well as through an effective
International Criminal Court. The idea of holding
combatants financially liable to their victims, also
advocated by the Secretary-General, could be a helpful
step in the direction of giving practical effect to
substantive norms of humanitarian law.
The problem of civilians in armed conflict has many
aspects. The legal aspect is one of them. However, the
key to human security is to ensure physical rather than
only legal protection. We are convinced that the current
spirit of resolve in the Security Council to make progress
in that direction could lead to real improvement. This is
an important priority of our time.
One of the answers is in the evolution of
peacekeeping. The concept of peacekeeping operations
that recognizes the multidisciplinary nature of such
operations is evolving. These operations are not limited
only to the military component but increasingly include
tasks such as civilian police activities, humanitarian
assistance, disarmament and demobilization measures and
human rights monitoring.
The protection of the civilian population requires
action, taking into account the special needs of women,
children and other vulnerable people. Access by the
humanitarian organizations to the people in need is
critical to ameliorating the situation of civilians in armed
conflict and, indeed, to helping them survive. The work
of the humanitarian organizations on the ground is
indispensable. It is crucial that parties to the conflict
ensure safe and unimpeded access to civilians in need and
that the safety and security of humanitarian personnel is
preserved. The Security Council should play a significant
role in bringing pressure to bear on the parties in that
regard.
It is appropriate for the members of the Security
Council to continue to ask themselves what their proper
role is in dealing with humanitarian problems. The report
of the Secretary-General is a useful reminder of the basic
role of the Security Council in situations which generate
humanitarian problems. According to the United Nations
Charter, the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for international peace and security. In other
9
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 16 September 1999
words, the task of the Council is to prevent military
conflicts and, if they occur, to make a meaningful
contribution towards their resolution. Furthermore, after the
end of military conflicts the Council has a responsibility to
enable transition to post-conflict peace-building.
The primacy of these essentially political purposes of
the Security Council must be always borne in mind. When
addressing humanitarian issues, the Council must avoid the
trap of using humanitarian action as a substitute for the
necessary political or military action.
We are therefore grateful to the Secretary-General for
his ideas expressed in the report and for his bold approach
to the issues of political and military action in cases of
systematic and widespread violations of international law,
especially those ideas expressed in paragraph 67 of his
report. His ideas represent a real help to the Security
Council. They remind us that the Council should address
the difficult issues directly. In many situations hard choices
are necessary and the Security Council should have a
proper policy approach in addressing them. The Secretary-
General has offered a basic outline of such an approach and
the Security Council must study that suggestion carefully.
Today, my delegation does not wish to attempt a
comprehensive elaboration of all the Secretary-General’s
recommendations. Instead, I wish to offer the following
four comments on the question of enforcement action in
cases of systematic violations of humanitarian principles, as
embodied in paragraph 67 of the report before us.
First, the political, conceptual and terminological
clarity needs to be assured. Moreover, it has to be recalled
that enforcement action in cases of systematic and
widespread violations of humanitarian law is permissible
under the contemporary lex lata, the applicable international
law. Let me, by way of illustration, remind the Council of
Article VIII of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of Crime of Genocide, which stipulates:
“Any Contracting Party may call upon the
competent organs of the United Nations to take such
action under the Charter of the United Nations as they
consider appropriate for the prevention and
suppression of acts of genocide or any of the other
acts enumerated in Article III.”
This is an authorization which has been available to the
Security Council for more than four decades.
Suppression of genocide necessarily involves the
option of enforcement action, based upon appropriate and
legitimate decisions of the competent organs of the
international community. One of the problems in this
regard has been the reluctance of States Members of the
United Nations and parties to the Convention to avail
themselves of this mechanism when necessary.
Secondly, the notion of enforcement action
necessarily requires collective action, authorized by a
competent international body, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations. The Security Council, with
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, has a central, albeit not
necessarily exclusive, role in this context.
The Security Council must use its powers wisely and
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
That means that it must not act prematurely or in any way
in contravention of international law. However, on the
other hand, the Council must not shy away from its
responsibilities in the face of an emerging humanitarian
disaster.
Thirdly, the Secretary-General offered five factors
or, perhaps, conditions which need to be considered to
determine the legitimacy of enforcement action. They
range from the assessment of the scope and systematic
character of the violations of international human rights
and humanitarian law to the principle of proportionality
of the use of force. These factors could provide useful
guidance to the Security Council in its decision-making in
future specific situations. The Council should aim at
consistency in its practice and should use objective
criteria in its decision-making. The decision of the
Council and Council members, including the decisions by
the permanent members who may resort to the threat or
use of the veto, should be based on such objective
criteria. While considerations of national interest cannot
be completely excluded from decision-making, they
should be restrained and not used as an impediment for
the Council’s action when action is legitimate and
necessary. The recent experience with the preparation of
resolution 1264 (1999) on the situation in East Timor
demonstrates that decision-making based predominantly
on the principles of international law and the needs of the
international community as a whole is possible.
Fourthly, and finally, the Security Council needs to
be consistent in its practice and to refine its general
policy framework without any unnecessary formalization.
It should be clear that the Council is not seeking to revive
10
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 16 September 1999
the doctrines of humanitarian intervention known from
earlier historical periods. On the other hand, the Council
needs to uphold its responsibility under the Charter in
practice, and this requires occasional resort to enforcement
action.
We believe that on the basis of such an understanding
and with the advantage provided by the Secretary-General’s
recommendations, the Council can take a significant step
forward in developing its policies and practices aiming at
the effective protection of civilians in armed conflicts.
Slovenia also supports the draft resolution which is
before us today and will vote in its favour. We look
forward to the continuation of the discussion within the
Council on the Secretary-General’s recommendations and
on identification of the means for their effective
implementation.
Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): My delegation is grateful to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report and
especially for the clear and encompassing measures he
proposes for tackling the problem of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. I welcome also the presence of
Mr. Vieira de Mello among us. His commitment to
humanitarian causes is always inspiring.
Since the Council held its last debate on this issue,
new conflicts have broken out. The aggravation of conflicts
in Africa and East Timor have taken a heavy toll on the
civilians caught in those situations. We commend the role
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights throughout
the tragic events in East Timor, and we firmly support her
recommendation that the atrocities and violations of human
rights committed in East Timor be investigated and
punished.
According to a study quoted in the June issue of the
Red Cross Review, civilians accounted for 5 per cent of the
victims of the First World War, whereas the estimated toll
for the armed conflicts of the 1990s has reached some 90
per cent. These figures are sufficient to depict the
unspeakable magnitude of the human disasters to which we
bear witness nowadays.
Atrocities are being committed every day in the name
of religious beliefs, ethnic or national origin, and political
loyalty. The humanitarian catastrophes in Kosovo, Angola
and East Timor constitute telltale signs in this regard. It
seems that the whole legacy of human reason has given
way to a moral vacuum in which everything is permissible.
Fortunately, the Security Council’s readiness to deal
with this problem is evidence of the political will to
change the present reality and start weaving a safety net
for civilians affected by armed conflict, especially the
most vulnerable groups, such as children, women and the
elderly.
Since the presidential statement of 12 February 1999
concerning the protection of civilians, the Security
Council has grappled with other related matters,
particularly the question of humanitarian assistance to
refugees in Africa and the plight of children affected by
armed conflict.
The Security Council can and must contribute to the
effort of promoting a climate of compliance, that is, to
halt flagrant and grave violations of universally accepted
international humanitarian and human rights law. The
imperative of ensuring that humanitarian relief is safely
provided as a collective responsibility should not
automatically imply the involvement of the Security
Council in these matters. There are situations of massive
abuses that may pose real threats to international peace
and security. In those cases, the option of enforcement
action should not be ruled out. The contribution made by
Ambassador Türk in his statement towards clarifying a
very difficult problem was extremely relevant and, I
think, should be considered by all of us.
Apart from the goal of alleviating the suffering of
civilians in armed conflicts, we should bear in mind that
lasting peace hinges very much on preventive measures.
I do not refer here to prevention as part of a shortsighted
security approach, but to the construction of solid pillars
for a pacified society through cooperation for
development, poverty eradication, and the strengthening
of the rule of law. As a matter of fact, the fundamental
objective of the United Nations is to prevent conflicts
from breaking out rather than tackling their effects.
With regard to the issues touched upon by the
Secretary-General in his report, I would like to highlight
four aspects that have to do with the work of the Security
Council under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.
First, it is fundamental to maintain the momentum
created by the note by the President of the Security
Council of 29 January 1999 on the work of the sanctions
Committees. Secondly, together with the assessment of
the impact of sanctions regimes, the Security Council
must consider applying humanitarian exemptions, as
appropriate, to measures adopted under Article 41 of the
11
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 16 September 1999
United Nations Charter. Thirdly, priority should be given to
the development of so-called targeted or smart sanctions, so
as to penalize those directly responsible for wrongdoing
rather than aggravating the hardship facing the population
as a whole. Finally, the Security Council must set up
reliable mechanisms with a view to monitoring the flow of
weapons to regions torn by armed conflicts. Those who
violate multilaterally negotiated and Security
Council-mandated arms embargoes should be held
accountable for the use of such weapons.
The 40 recommendations submitted by the Secretary-
General must be borne in mind, but at this stage it would
be useful to focus on those capable of galvanizing
immediate consensus. The aspects I have just stressed could
be a good starting-point.
The success of our efforts depends on integrating the
contribution of the Security Council in a broader framework
in which other branches of the United Nations system and
the States concerned have an equally central role to play.
The complex nature of the challenges before us should
not be cause for despair. The abhorrent images of civilians
targeted in armed conflicts should not dash our hopes for
an era of compliance. Those images remind us that our
differences with others are less important than our shared
capacity to experience pain and suffering. It is that shared
capacity that provides the moral basis for taking joint
measures to protect civilians from the ravaging
consequences of armed conflicts.
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that in view of the weather conditions and their effects,
especially on public transport, it is my intention to continue
this meeting for another hour or so and then suspend it
until tomorrow at 10 a.m.
Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): In the
light of what you have just announced, Mr. President, and
in order to allow the maximum number of speakers today,
I will shorten my statement so that more representatives can
speak, because of the enormous importance of this subject.
In a certain ironic sense, it is a pleasure — or, to be
more precise, at least a privilege — to represent my nation
before this body on this terrible issue. It is fitting that we
discuss it on a day when over 7,000 United Nations
peacekeepers are on their way to East Timor. With the
Security Council’s swift and decisive action, the Council,
this historic body in this historic room, has shown the
important role the United Nations can and must play to help
protect civilians. Unfortunately, East Timor is only the
most recent example, and it certainly will not be the last.
I have personally witnessed the price civilians pay in
conflicts on three continents over my career in
government over the last 37 years. In Viet Nam,
Cambodia, Bosnia, Kosovo and Africa, I have seen the
impact warfare has on innocent civilians. I have seen
bicycles in Cambodia manufactured specifically for
people with only one limb, as well as other unspeakable
consequences of warfare on civilians. The deliberate
terrorizing of civilians — a phenomenon that is not new
in history, but has been perfected in this terrible
century — has added a new and invidious phrase to our
vernacular: ethnic cleansing.
For nearly two centuries, individuals have tried to
design institutions and support principles to temper the
effects of warfare on civilians — from Jean Henri
Dunant, the visionary Genevan who was instrumental in
creating the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) in 1863 after he had seen the horrors of the
Crimean war, to my friend, Fred Cuny, who lost his life
in Chechnya in pursuit of his lifelong goals.
There can be no denying that war is hell. It always
will be hell, but even war has had a code. There is a
terrible sense that, during this terrible century, that code,
such as it was, has almost completely disappeared and
that, to many people today, civilians are no different than
professional combatants. The statistics are dramatic. The
percentage of civilians casualties as a percentage of total
casualties in war has risen from 10 per cent to 90 per cent
from the First World War to today. It is our duty to
confront this reality and do everything we can to prevent
or minimize it.
Increasingly, civilians — including humanitarian
workers — are not just random, incidental victims of
conflict, but targets of it, as we have seen in Chechnya,
in Rwanda, in Bosnia and in Cambodia. The Secretary-
General has noted that women and children are
disproportionately represented among civilians affected by
conflict, and he is so right. We have seen this graphically
in the former Yugoslavia, where rape became a tactic of
war. I have talked to the victims and to their husbands
and wives and sons and fathers. It is terrible to see.
All of us must work together to find ways to halt
these trends. This meeting is an important but wholly
inadequate step towards this goal. We in the United States
support the Council’s desire to respond, in accordance
12
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 16 September 1999
with the United Nations Charter, to these situations. Let me
reaffirm the four principles we believe the Council should
focus on.
First, all States must comply strictly with their
obligations under international law. Secondly, the
international community needs to assist and protect civilian
populations affected by armed conflict. Thirdly, all parties
concerned must ensure the safety of civilians and guarantee
the unimpeded and safe access of United Nations and other
humanitarian personnel to those in need. Fourthly,
individuals, who commit grave offences under international
humanitarian and human rights law should be brought to
justice — a point that I am very pleased the Secretary-
General and Mary Robinson both raised in regard to the
current crisis in East Timor. We should pay very close
attention, as we proceed, to what substance we give to that
very brave and early warning. I congratulate the Secretary-
General for being the first public official, to my knowledge,
to raise this issue.
The Secretary-General has made some wise and
far-ranging recommendations. Let me briefly address them.
We concur that, at the outset of any conflict, the
Council should underscore the importance of humanitarian
assistance to civilian populations. It is imperative for
concerned parties to cooperate fully with the United Nations
humanitarian coordinator in providing access. This must be
done in accordance with the principles of humanity,
neutrality and impartiality. We believe that failure to
comply should result in the imposition of targeted
sanctions.
Secondly, the United States also supports using
sanctions as a possible method to deter and contain those
who commit violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law, as well as those parties to conflicts
which continually defy Security Council resolutions. The
sanctions committees should convene periodic meetings and
the Council should monitor the humanitarian impact of
sanctions on vulnerable groups and make required
adjustments of the exemption mechanisms to facilitate the
delivery of humanitarian assistance.
Thirdly, my Government also supports the
consideration of arms embargoes in situations where
civilians and protected persons are targeted by the parties
to the conflict or where the parties are known to commit
systematic and widespread violations of international law.
Finally, my Government supports the
recommendation that the Council act to strengthen the
United Nations capacity to plan and deploy more rapidly
military and civilian police personnel, as well as to
consider deployment in certain cases of a preventive
peacekeeping operation. This includes steps to improve
the security situation in camps for refugees and internally
displaced persons and to help ensure the demilitarization
and depoliticization of these camps.
I would also like to reiterate the position of my
Government on the following issues addressed by the
Secretary-General. Regarding anti-personnel landmines,
the United States is committed to ending once and for all
the worldwide scourge caused by these terrible devices
and their like. Too many innocent people fall victim to
these indiscriminate killers, which are often left behind
after the wars end and the soldiers go home. My
Government will therefore continue to support worldwide
humanitarian demining efforts and work towards a global
ban on anti-personnel landmines in the Conference on
Disarmament in Geneva. Similarly, we also support the
amended Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the
Use of Mines, Booby-Traps and Other Devices to the
1980 Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the
Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be
Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have
Indiscriminate Effects as an important initiative to provide
humanitarian protection for civilians and protected people.
Regarding the acute tragedy of children in armed
conflict, the United States firmly supports the principles
contained in the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
The International Labour Organization Convention on the
Worst Forms of Child Labour and the recently adopted
Security Council resolution on children and armed
conflict both contain the right standard for addressing the
issue of child soldiers.
Regarding the International Criminal Court, the
United States has supported such a concept. We have
been in the forefront of international efforts to hold
accountable those responsible for war crimes and crimes
against humanity. We have worked hard to strengthen the
international war crimes Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda. I personally have worked closely
with both Richard Goldstone and Louise Arbour on these
issues and have stood firmly, as has Secretary of State
Albright, for maximum support of these specific war
crimes Tribunals in the absence of anything more global.
13
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 16 September 1999
However, My Government believes that the Rome
Treaty contains flaws that require correction. Working
together, we need to correct such flaws and broaden the
effectiveness and acceptance of such a treaty. This would
result in strengthening the Statute and ensuring full support
by all States, including the United States. Again, for the
second time, I wish to draw everyone’s attention to what
the Secretary-General and Mary Robinson have said
regarding East Timor on this subject.
In closing, it is important to recognize all of the hard
work of Canada in focusing the attention of the Security
Council on this issue and to thank the Secretary-General for
his excellent report. I commend our friends in Canada for
their sustained effort on this and so many other issues and
look forward to working closely with Ambassador Fowler
and his colleagues. I hope the Council’s focus will
strengthen international interest in this issue.
Finally, we are deeply grateful to the ICRC for
convening its third Humanitarian Forum last May, a
gathering that focused on this topic. Such efforts are
indispensable in complementing the actions of the Security
Council.
Once again, the United States welcomes the Security
Council’s attention to this topic and is grateful for the
Secretary-General’s hard work on it. As a personal observer
for most of my career of the consequences of the issue we
have talked about, I cannot tell you how strongly I feel
personally on this and, representing my Government on this
subject for the first time, I want to stress how much we
look forward to hearing what all the speakers here think
and working with them to turn rhetoric into reality.
Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): We all recognize that
conflict, wherever it erupts, has a tremendous impact on
civilians, who are nowadays the first and principal targets.
Women and children, the elderly, the sick and refugees are
attacked in large numbers and continue to be methodically
forced from their homes, in search of safety. We condemn
acts of violence against civilians in the strongest terms.
Perpetrators of such crimes must be held accountable. We
support making perpetrators financially liable to victims,
and the establishment of machinery to that end.
We welcome the very important report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and the bold recommendations contained therein.
We believe that the recommendations deserve thorough
consideration by the Security Council. We will thus only
highlight a few salient points and look forward to
participating in the working mechanism that will be
established for this purpose.
Just three and a half weeks ago, on 25 August 1999,
in this very same Chamber, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1261 (1999) on children and armed conflict.
Our position on children and armed conflict was well
reflected at that meeting and I will therefore avoid
unnecessary repetition. Here, I would just reiterate our
call for the minimum age for recruitment and participation
in hostilities to be raised to 18 years.
The continued deliberate targeting of
non-combatants, in violation of international law, remains
an unacceptable phenomenon. We are particularly
concerned about women and girls, who are vulnerable to
gender-based violence and sexual exploitation, including
rape and prostitution. Such violations of international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law cannot be
condoned and should not be allowed to go unpunished.
We cannot over-emphasize the importance of
guaranteeing the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel. Namibia is currently in the process of ratifying
the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel. In addition, parties to conflicts
must allow unhindered access of humanitarian workers to
people affected by conflicts. Failure to allow unhindered
access is a serious violation of humanitarian law and is
completely unacceptable.
Civilians continue to be killed and maimed by the
hundreds of landmines planted in previous and current
conflict zones in many parts of the world. Namibia
remains committed to the implementation of the Ottawa
Convention, and we join the Secretary-General in calling
upon States that have not already done so to sign and
ratify the Ottawa Convention.
In discharging its mandate of maintaining
international peace and security, the Security Council
must bear the responsibility of preventing military
conflicts and contributing to their resolution. The Council
should work to prevent conflicts by placing emphasis on
preventive measures and early-warning systems, which
should include education on human rights and on the
principles of humanitarian law and strict compliance
therewith. The root causes of the conflicts, namely,
poverty and underdevelopment, must be addressed.
We continue to believe that the uncontrolled flow of
small arms and all types of sophisticated arms into areas
14
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 16 September 1999
of conflict needs to be addressed. It is unfortunate that
some arms-producing countries have made Africa their
dumping ground at the expense of Africans. We renew our
call to all arms-producing countries not to transfer anti-
personnel landmines and other arms to regions where armed
conflict is imminent.
The draft resolution that we will adopt at the end of
this debate addresses the wider impact of armed conflict on
civilians. Namibia is in full support of the draft resolution
and hopes that its adoption will ultimately contribute to the
alleviation of the plight of civilians in armed conflict. In
this connection, we commend the delegation of Canada for
this timely initiative.
The Secretary-General has done his part and we are
most grateful to him. It is now up to the Security Council
to make good use of the recommendations contained in his
report and to ensure that appropriate action is effected to
address the plight of civilians in armed conflict.
Mrs. Martínez Ríos (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank the Secretary-General for his words
and for his excellent report on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. We very much appreciate this report and its
recommendations to improve the legal and physical
protection of civilian populations. Those recommendations
rightly deserve to be the subject of a thorough discussion in
the Council. The time has come to channel our worry into
action. To that end, the report of the Secretary-General
provides an excellent point of departure.
The report paints a stark image of the realities that
civilian populations must face in situations of armed
conflict. The violence affecting vulnerable groups in
particular and the attacks on humanitarian and peacekeeping
staff reveal the magnitude of violence that combatants are
prepared to use in conflict zones. The conclusion that the
protective emblems of the Red Cross and the Red Crescent
and of the United Nations flag appear to provide less
protection than ever is particularly alarming. The assault
upon and the looting of the United Nations Mission in East
Timor (UNAMET) complex at Dili is the most recent
unfortunate example of this worrisome trend. The diagnosis
is discouraging and the challenge to be confronted by the
international community in general and the Security Council
in particular is enormous.
In the area of legal protection the international
community has laid down several important instruments to
protect civilians. International humanitarian law has
gradually taken into account the need to emphasize the
protection of civilians. Many of the norms to impose
limits on the carrying out of hostilities and to protect
innocent persons have been couched in universally
recognized principles and norms.
It is clear that despite certain limitations we
generally have an adequate body of norms. This is why
we should focus our efforts on reducing the abysmal gap
that exists between the very high level of development in
legal norms and the very low degree of respect for those
norms. Bridging this gap between the existence of law
and the respect for it calls for action on three levels.
First, States must recognize that under the Geneva
Conventions they have the primary responsibility for
respecting and ensuring respect for international
humanitarian law under all circumstances. We must join
with the International Committee of the Red Cross in its
tireless efforts to promote the dissemination and
understanding of the norms applicable to conflict
situations.
Secondly, it is essential to create adequate national
and international mechanisms to deal with impunity.
Justice is an indispensable component of a stable peace,
as the Security Council has repeatedly recognized in
addressing recent conflicts. In Angola, Kosovo, Sierra
Leone and now East Timor the Council has emphasized
the essential link between peace and justice in
highlighting the need to properly investigate the crimes
that have been committed and to prosecute those
responsible for them.
To deal with impunity, States must have sufficient
domestic law to ensure the investigation of violations and
the prosecution of those responsible for them. When
national systems cannot function properly, however,
appropriate international machinery should be set up. The
Council has created two special criminal tribunals that are
now fully operative and with which States have been
required to fully comply. We must also ensure the speedy
implementation of the International Criminal Court.
Thirdly, we must encourage all States to ratify and
participate in the principal instruments that protect
international law. In this regard we are pleased to
announce that on 14 September our country ratified the
Ottawa Convention on anti-personnel landmines.
In addition we must emphasize the importance of the
1994 Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel. In these days when we are learning
15
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 16 September 1999
that the United Nations flag affords less and less protection,
this Convention becomes increasingly important. Its rapid
ratification must be urged so that we can ensure universal
participation. We must particularly urge participation by
those countries in which multinational forces are stationed.
The mention of this Convention leads us to note
several important legal shortcomings to which the report of
the Secretary-General calls attention.
On various occasions our delegation has noted that the
1994 Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel does not apply to all the people and
organizations present in conflict zones, and therefore it is
necessary to expand the applicability of this instrument. We
note with satisfaction that the Secretary-General echoes this
concern, calling on the General Assembly to urgently
undertake the drafting of a protocol to the 1994
Convention.
Children are the most vulnerable group in civilian
populations. This was recognized by the Security Council
in the adoption of a resolution on this problem less than a
month ago. We support in particular the initiative contained
in the Secretary-General’s report of raising — by means of
an additional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child — the minimum age for recruitment and for
participation in conflicts to 18 years.
With regard to physical protection of civilian
populations, the Secretary-General’s report proposes a wide-
ranging set of measures that affect various Security Council
areas of action, including sanctions regimes; confidence-
building measures; rapid-deployment of peacekeeping
operations; disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of ex-combatants; embargoes on and destruction of
weapons, particularly small arms and light weapons;
humanitarian access; and special measures for women and
children. This is perhaps not the moment to refer to each
one of these measures, but we reiterate that these proposals
should be thoroughly studied.
We agree entirely with the premise underlying many
of these measures: that in the twenty-first century the
United Nations should increasingly become a source of
preventive measures.
Prevention of conflict calls for urgent and decisive
measures in the initial phases. Responsibility for
implementing many of these measures is the exclusive
purview of this Council. Other measures, such as those that
involve aid for development and humanitarian assistance,
require coordinated action with other bodies, both within
and outside the United Nations system. Cooperation and
consultation among all bodies and agencies is essential,
but visible and dynamic leadership on the part of the
Council is indispensable.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I shall
give the short version of my speech and would ask
delegations to report the distributed version.
I warmly welcome this debate, inspired by our
Canadian friends, and the Secretary-General’s excellent
and thought-provoking report. They could hardly be more
timely. I cannot imagine a more accurate account of a
typical situation the Council is called upon to deal with
than the following passage in paragraph 8 of the
Secretary-General’s report:
“civilian casualties and the destruction of civilian
infrastructure are not simply byproducts of war, but
the consequence of the deliberate targeting of
non-combatants. The violence is frequently
perpetrated by non-state actors, including irregular
forces and privately financed militias. In many
conflicts, belligerents target civilians in order to
expel or eradicate segments of the population, or for
the purpose of hastening military surrender.”
The Security Council Mission to East Timor can say a
thing or two about the pertinence of that description.
The United Kingdom will participate actively and
imaginatively in follow-up work to the Secretary-
General’s report. Our support for the draft resolution
before us today is only the beginning of that process.
The Secretary-General is right to focus on efforts to
increase observance and awareness of international
humanitarian and human rights law. Better
implementation of the legal framework that exists is
critical, not more law. Better and more effective ways to
address impunity are also a crucial part of this effort. The
United Kingdom will continue to support all efforts to
ensure that war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide are punished. This means not only support for
ad hoc international tribunals and for the future work of
the International Criminal Court, but action to deal with
States that do not cooperate with them.
Turning to the Secretary-General’s practical
suggestions for improving protection of civilians caught
16
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 16 September 1999
up in armed conflict, I would like to highlight three areas
with direct relevance for Security Council action.
The first area is the ready availability of small arms,
particularly to non-state actors. Member States have a key
role in controlling this flow, but the Council can act too. It
must continue to be ready to impose arms embargoes where
appropriate, and it should, as the Secretary-General
proposes, ensure that all United Nations peacekeeping
deployments include effective weapons-collection and
destruction programmes.
Secondly, as regards the mandates the Council gives
its operations, the Council should not shy away — as
perhaps we have done in the past — from more robust
mandates if a force needs to act in enforcement mode, for
example to protect civilians. There are risks inherent in the
deployment of operations on the ground in hostile and
unstable situations, and we should be ready to face them.
We cannot expect to make a difference on the ground
otherwise. Remember “safe areas”.
The third area is the capacity of the United Nations for
rapid peacekeeping deployment. The United Nations has no
troops of its own. The Department of Peacekeeping
Operations cannot be expected to mount a United Nations
operation within a matter of days even when civilians are
under the gravest threat. That is why this week we have
used the option of a multinational force. But United Nations
rapid reaction and planning capabilities have to be
improved. The United Kingdom and France together signed
a memorandum of understanding in June on the forces we
were ready to commit to the United Nations at short notice.
We urge others to do the same.
Timely action is also preventive action. The more the
Security Council is seen to act swiftly, boldly and
decisively when civilians are under armed attack, when
humanitarian access is deliberately denied and when basic
human rights are violated, the more effectively we shall
prevent such abuses from taking place in the future.
It has thus been heartening to see the Council exercise
a variety of its powers in a timely, proportionate and
effective response to events in East Timor. From its initial
statements stressing the concern of the international
community, to a high-profile mission to Jakarta and Dili
and now a Chapter-VII resolution authorizing a
multinational force, the Council has demonstrated an ability
to respond swiftly where international peace and security
are threatened and where the rights of civilians are
subjected to massive abuse. Our task is not over: we must
continue our work with the Indonesians to ensure the
safety of returning civilian refugees and access for
humanitarian aid in East and West Timor.
The United Kingdom warmly welcomes the focus in
the Secretary-General’s report on the issue of enforcement
action in the face of massive and ongoing abuses of
human rights or of international humanitarian law. The
nature of modern conflict — chaotic, internecine and
brutal — challenges the Council to reinterpret its mandate
to maintain international peace and security in terms of
the threat to the security and survival of populations as
much as of States. In his report, the Secretary-General
rightly stresses that when we are faced by massive human
rights abuses, enforcement action must become an option
for consideration. We believe that there is now a need to
build up consensus within the Council and across the
wider United Nations membership on when and how we
should respond to such affronts to our shared values. The
factors which the Secretary-General has proposed that the
Security Council should take into account in considering
enforcement action are an important contribution to the
debate. We welcome them as a basis for early further
discussions in the Council.
Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): I wish
at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for including
this item on our agenda and for convening this open
debate on the welcome initiative of Canada. I wish also
to thank the Secretary-General and Mrs. Mary Robinson
for their presence here today and for their statements,
which attest to the timeliness of our concerns.
The item before us is now at the very heart of the
mandate of the Security Council. It is necessary only to
recall our recent debate on Timor to evoke the violence
against civilian populations perpetrated in East Timor. But
we must also recall, this time with satisfaction, the
Council’s speedy and unanimous reaction in deciding, in
order to address the protection of the civilian population,
to authorize a multinational force to restore peace and
security and to put an end to the violence.
We also recall other, no less serious, conflicts
elsewhere in the world, such as those in Afghanistan,
Angola and the Great Lakes region of Africa, where
civilians are also the principal victims. One example is
provided by the team from the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) that
visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which
stated yesterday that the conflict there had uprooted
nearly a million individuals, who have become refugees
17
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 16 September 1999
or displaced persons. Here again, the Council must act and
must shoulder its responsibilities.
There is no need to repeat what others have said about
the changing nature of armed conflict and about the fact
that a majority of its victims are now civilians. Combatants,
of course, fight one another, but not only one another: they
also attack defenceless populations in violation of
international law and the fundamental principles of
humanitarian law. This is a strategy of terror that spares no
person and no area, a strategy of all-out war. And all-out
war requires a global response, as rightly proposed by the
Secretary-General in his welcome report to the Council.
We must thoroughly consider all the ways and means
available to us to respond to these threats, beginning with
prevention. This can mean the rapid deployment of
preventive peacekeeping operations with a view to
preventing the deterioration of a situation by which the
civilian population could quickly be affected.
I note with interest the Secretary-General’s proposal
that Security Council working groups relating to volatile
situations be established, making use of all the analytical
resources of the United Nations, and especially of the
human rights information and analysis emanating from
independent experts.
Prevention involves scrupulous respect for human
rights and democratic norms. The international community
must also disseminate information about the principles of
international law with a view to creating a climate of
respect for those norms that will protect the rights of
civilian populations.
Prevention, then, must come first, but later, when we
see a threat to the civilian population, we must punish the
perpetrators. We must therefore give high priority to the
fight against impunity. Here, we note a welcome
development in the sphere of international law: the
establishment of two international criminal tribunals. The
Security Council has certain legal means at its disposal —
when the political will exists. It also has all the tools of the
Charter to pursue the guilty and to cause them to change
their behaviour, through the use of sanctions — which,
however, must be carefully targeted and proportionate, so
that they will not harm civilian populations.
This year, the Security Council has already taken up
the question of the protection of humanitarian personnel,
and has reaffirmed its collective responsibility to guarantee
the safety and security of such personnel. In this respect,
too, principles and declarations exist. But they can be
translated into fact only though our unrelenting vigilance.
I am thinking about the action that the Secretariat takes
when it must respond quickly to problems in certain crisis
areas when the security or freedom of movement of
humanitarian personnel is at stake. We can all recall the
action that the Secretariat had to take in crisis regions in
Europe, as well as in Afghanistan.
As the Secretary-General has recommended, we
must therefore forge a global and coordinated approach.
When the deployment of a peacekeeping operation is
envisaged, all aspects that can help protect the civilian
population must be considered: the establishment of a
civilian police force, humanitarian assistance,
disarmament, demobilization and measures to provide
work for people who have been demobilized. As the
report of the Secretary-General recommends, it is
essential to have a multidisciplinary and integrated
approach to these problems.
The Security Council has already adopted a
resolution on the protection of children in armed conflict
which contains a number of commitments that we must
constantly ensure are properly implemented. A draft
resolution on the protection of civilian populations is
before us today, and we fully support it. However, France
is willing to continue to give full consideration to the
recommendations that the Secretary-General has put to us
with a view to finding effective ways to ensure such
protection for civilian populations.
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): I should like to extend my
delegation’s sincere appreciation to the Netherlands and
to you, Sir, for organizing this open meeting of the
Security Council on the question of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, which is a useful follow-up to
the Canadian initiative in February this year. My
delegation also wishes to extend its deep appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his presentation this morning
and welcomes his comprehensive report of 8 September
1999, including the excellent recommendations contained
therein. I would also like to thank Mrs. Mary Robinson,
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, for her comprehensive, passionate and
enlightening statement.
Internal armed conflicts constitute most of the
conflicts which now come before the Security Council. In
many, if not all, of these conflicts, civilians are the first
and principal target. Women, children, the elderly, the
sick, refugees and internally displaced persons have been
18
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 16 September 1999
attacked in large numbers and driven from their homes. The
protection of civilians has become more difficult because
the dividing line between non-combatants and combatants,
and between peacekeepers and humanitarian personnel, is
often blurred. The sufferings inflicted upon civilians can be
particularly great when the perpetrators of the attacks act
without much control because of weak chains of command,
or when their actions are driven by ethnic factors and are
designed to eliminate the target ethnic group. The problem
is further exacerbated by the eventual collapse of the rule
of law in a number of conflict situations.
Today’s meeting reaffirms the imperative of strict
compliance with international humanitarian law on the part
of those involved in violent conflicts. My delegation
condemns in the strongest terms these acts of violence
against civilians. The deliberate attacks and acts of violence
perpetrated by combatants against hapless civilian
populations are a clear and blatant violation of the
principles of international law, including humanitarian and
human rights law. The perpetrators of these heinous crimes
must not be allowed to get away with impunity. Without
doubt, States have the primary responsibility in prosecuting
the perpetrators through their national justice system or,
whenever and wherever appropriate, the relevant
international criminal tribunals. Until a global enforcement
mechanism is in place to address these crimes, ad hoc
tribunals may be required as and whenever necessary.
There has been a disturbing increase in the number
and scale of direct and calculated attacks against
humanitarian and United Nations personnel in the field. We
condemn in the strongest terms these attacks on
humanitarian workers. The security and safety of
humanitarian missions is of paramount importance,
especially in highly volatile and extremely dangerous
conflict areas. The Council has an obligation ensure that
they are able to carry out their missions in responding to
the needs of civilians in armed conflict who should have
unimpeded access to humanitarian assistance. While proper
training about the real situation and risks on the ground
would better equip humanitarian personnel to handle risky
situations in their mission areas, this does not absolve the
combatants of their own obligations and responsibilities
with regard to humanitarian workers who perform their
noble tasks in the name of humanity. My delegation stated
on an earlier occasion that it would be fitting for the United
Nations to pay tribute to the courage and sacrifices of these
humanitarian workers as it honours the Blue Helmets.
My delegation agrees with the Secretary-General that
the widespread availability and use of small arms, light
weapons and anti-personnel landmines have had a
significant impact on the scope and level of the violence
that affects civilian populations in armed conflict. Small
arms have been and continue to be the primary tools of
violence in most of the recent armed conflicts around the
world. Since they are easily available and cheap, require
little maintenance and little training to use, small arms
can be used for long periods and thus affect the duration
of conflict. Small arms encourage a violent rather than
peaceful resolution of differences.
We must redouble our efforts to curb illicit
trafficking in weapons and support the global efforts
towards the implementation of the Ottawa Convention on
anti-personnel landmines. Anti-personnel landmines kill
and maim not only combatants but, more often, innocent
civilians years after the combatants have left the scene of
conflict. They continue to pose a serious threat to the
safety of civilian populations. My delegation therefore
supports the imposition of arms embargoes in situations
where civilians and protected persons are deliberately
targeted by the parties to the conflict.
The issue of children in armed conflict, which was
highlighted in an open Council meeting under the
presidency of Namibia last month, deserves the serious
attention of the international community in its own right.
This was reflected in the Council’s resolution last month.
We cannot ignore the issue of children who become
victims of armed conflict, either as instruments of war or
because they are caught up in the traumas and upheavals
of conflict. As a signatory to the 1989 Convention on the
Rights of the Child, Malaysia calls upon the remaining
few countries that have not signed or ratified the
Convention to do so.
We strongly support the Optional Protocol to the
Convention, which calls for a minimum age of 18 for
recruitment and participation in hostilities. However, my
delegation recognizes the additional complication derived
from the fact that the involvement of most child soldiers
in armed conflict takes place within the ranks of
non-State armed groups, where the line of command and
responsibility is often opaque. Bearing this in mind,
Malaysia strongly advocates that specific measures for the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants, with special attention given to child
soldiers, be included in peace agreements and, where
appropriate, in the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping missions. The elements of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration must be a top priority in
19
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 16 September 1999
any United Nations peacekeeping and peace-building
operation.
When the Security Council takes decisions to resort to
the use of sanctions and, ultimately, military force for the
protection of civilian populations, there is a need to give
careful thought to their effectiveness and their negative
consequences on the civilian population — the very
population it is setting out to protect. The imposition of
Article 41 of the Charter and the use of coercive action
under Chapter VII should be adopted as a mechanism of
last resort.
Given the nature and scope of the matter, there is a
general recognition of the need for a comprehensive and
integrated approach to handling crises, bringing together
political, humanitarian, development and human rights
actors within an agreed framework of action. Malaysia is
favourably disposed towards strengthening the Council’s
cooperation and coordination with the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and other relevant United
Nations organs. The Organization would also greatly benefit
from closer cooperation and coordination beyond the United
Nations system with regional organizations, bilateral actors,
Government and non-State actors as well as civil society,
including internationally recognized non-governmental
organizations and the private sector.
My delegation supports the draft resolution on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict that is before the
Council. We believe the draft resolution contains all of the
necessary elements to address the issue. We strongly
support the immediate establishment of an appropriate
mechanism to review further the recommendations
contained in the report and to consider appropriate steps in
the near future.
Mr. Jagne (Gambia): My delegation would like to pay
tribute to you, Mr. President, for according such a high
priority to the subject under consideration by the Security
Council today. In recent times, the Council has devoted a
considerable amount of time to the question of civilians in
armed conflict and other related issues. My delegation is
also grateful to the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report on the matter.
Over the years, the number of civilians affected by
conflicts has been increasing dramatically. The statistics
available to us are really frightening. Furthermore, it is now
well-known that civilians are increasingly becoming the
deliberate targets of combatants, and children, women and
other vulnerable groups bear the brunt of this growing
insanity. In a nutshell, they are the victims of all sorts of
atrocities, ranging from rape to mutilation and massacre.
Notwithstanding the plethora of international legal
instruments designed to protect civilians in situations of
armed conflict, it would appear that civilians caught in
such situations are more vulnerable today than ever
before. Clearly, therefore, these important international
legal instruments are more honoured in their breach than
in their observance, thus the pressing need to urge
Member States and non-State actors alike to redouble
their efforts in order to reverse the trend. It goes without
saying that the implementation of said instruments is the
key to success in our efforts to improve the situation. Life
would be much easier for Member States if only they
would make the best use of the technical services offered
by the United Nations and, indeed, other relevant
organizations.
There is no need to attempt to belabour all the points
raised in the Secretary-General’s report on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. He has covered them very
well, including the attendant problems, and has made
recommendations. We agree with him that it would be
important to establish an agreed mechanism and timetable
for follow-up and review. That is the way forward.
Having said that, my delegation is of the view that,
while efforts are being made to improve the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, the issue of impunity should
be given added importance. The international community
must ensure that perpetrators of war crimes and violators
of international humanitarian and human rights law are
held accountable. In this connection, we reiterate our
support for the establishment of international ad hoc
tribunals, as and when necessary, to prosecute war
criminals.
In this context, we commend the excellent job being
done by both the Rwanda and former Yugoslavia
Tribunals. These two institutions constitute beacons of
hope in the crusade against the culture of impunity.
There is no doubt that there is adequate legal
protection for civilians in armed conflict. Attention should
therefore be directed to physical protection. The Security
Council should therefore devote its energies in this
direction.
In an earlier statement, we made reference to the old
saying that prevention is better than cure. That is why we
believe that greater attention should be given to conflict
20
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 16 September 1999
prevention by addressing, first and foremost, the root causes
of conflict in an integrated and comprehensive manner.
Otherwise we fear very much that the vicious circle of the
recurrence of conflicts will continue for a very long time
and that in the process innocent civilians will continue
correspondingly to pay a heavy price.
The Secretary-General has done his part, for which we
are grateful. The recommendations contained in his report
require extensive and careful consideration. He has
identified important mechanisms and measures which can
help us in our efforts. The ball is now in our court. Since
this is what the draft resolution under consideration
attempts to do, my delegation will vote in its favour.
Mr. Chen Xu (China): The Chinese delegation
welcomes the report submitted to the Security Council by
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and thanks the Secretary-General for his
presentation just now. We would also like to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation to you, Mr.
President, and to the delegation of the Netherlands for
arranging this open debate.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict has
always been of concern to Governments around the world
and to the relevant bodies of the United Nations. In too
many places around the world, armed conflicts are still
raging that not only endanger world peace and security and
undermine regional development and stability, but also
inflict terrible suffering on the civilians caught up in them.
Vulnerable groups, including women and children, suffer
the most in armed conflicts.
We have noted with satisfaction that the report by the
Secretary-General draws a detailed picture of the misery of
civilians in armed conflict, the grave dangers they face and
the potential impact on regional security and stability. The
report also contains an incisive analysis on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict from many different
perspectives — political, legal, humanitarian, disarmament
and peacekeeping — and puts forward a number of bold,
creative and enlightening recommendations. We are of the
view that these recommendations deserve a careful study
and in-depth discussion in the Council. We are in favour of
implementing some of those recommendations, where
feasible.
The fundamental way to protect civilians in armed
conflict is to effectively prevent and do away with conflict.
This bears on the survival and development of civilians in
armed conflict as well as on regional and international
peace and stability. It is an important and pressing task
facing the international community, especially the United
Nations. The Security Council, which bears primary
responsibility for international peace and stability, has an
unshirkable duty in this area. We strongly oppose military
actions in circumvention of the Security Council that may
result in conflict on an even larger scale. We believe that
the Council should continue its active efforts to put an
early end to conflicts and defusing crises, for that is the
contribution it should make to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict.
China believes at the same time that the international
community should take further steps to eradicate the root
cause of armed conflicts by helping countries concerned
in poverty eradication, economic development, national
reconciliation and the maintenance of national stability. In
this sense, the issue of protecting civilians in armed
conflict cuts across the political, humanitarian,
development and assistance fields and would thus be
more appropriately and more thoroughly deliberated in the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.
We are in favour of strengthening cooperation and
coordination between the Security Council and other
United Nations bodies, but we also believe that the
various bodies of the United Nations system should have
a distinct division of work and operate accordingly. If the
Security Council were to become overly involved in
issues, such as human rights, which fall under the
purview of other United Nations bodies, its attention to
peace and security issues would be diverted and the work
of those other United Nations bodies unduly affected.
While the issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts is under discussion, another issue that
naturally comes to mind is that of humanitarian
assistance. We are of the view that no matter when and
where armed conflict breaks out, the international
community should urge the parties concerned to put an
early end to the conflict through peaceful means; strictly
abide by international law, including international
humanitarian and human rights law; make every possible
effort to protect and assist civilians in armed conflict; and
prevent and prohibit acts of violence against civilians in
armed conflict or the blockage of humanitarian assistance
to civilians.
We call on the international community to discard
double standards in the humanitarian sphere and to give
equal attention to acts of violence against civilians in
armed conflicts around the world, rather than take a
selective approach.
21
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 16 September 1999
In recent years, destabilizing factors have refused to
abate in Africa. Regional conflicts and turbulence
continually emerge. The crises in some countries even show
signs of getting worse. The African people have gone
through unimaginable sufferings. It is high time for the
international community to take the necessary measures to
support the efforts of African countries and regional
organizations to resolve the conflicts and to provide
concrete and meaningful assistance to get African civilians
out of harm’s way in armed conflicts.
The Chinese Government has always paid great
attention to the issue of protecting civilians in armed
conflict. China has always been actively involved in the
deliberations of this issue in the General Assembly and
other United Nations bodies concerned. We support the
adoption of a council resolution based on the presidential
statement issued by the Council in February this year and
will vote in favour of the draft resolution before us.
The President: I thank the representative of China for
the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
The question of protecting civilians in armed conflict has
become increasingly relevant. Despite the international
community’s efforts, such conflicts continue to bring death
and suffering to thousands of people, primarily civilians. A
significant number of these are children, women, the elderly
and refugees — in other words, particularly vulnerable
groups. Personnel providing humanitarian assistance
through the United Nations, the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC) and other organizations are also
falling victim. Of course, the main responsibility for
protecting civilians in all circumstances is born by the
States and parties to an armed conflict. This must not
detract, however, from the importance of international
efforts in this area. There is a contribution to be made, in
the context of its task of maintaining international peace
and security, by the Security Council of the United Nations.
The 12 August marked a half-century since the
adoption of the Geneva Conventions on the protection of
victims of war. These marked a true milestone in the
development of international humanitarian law, the
foundation of which was laid 100 years ago by the first
Peace Conference at The Hague, convened on the initiative
of Russia.
Despite the fact that most States are parties to the
Geneva Conventions, the gulf between the provisions
contained therein and their implementation in times of
armed conflict remains, unfortunately, too wide.
Paramount is the need to strengthen the monitoring of
compliance with the norms of international humanitarian
law. An important role could be played here by the ICRC.
In our view, we should also study the question of
expanding the functions of the International Fact-Finding
Commission, as well as the question of convening, in the
framework of the Geneva Conventions, a committee to
review countries’ implementation of their commitments.
This would allow us to mobilize the additional potential
of political and international legal resources to protect the
victims of armed conflict and to narrow the scope of
permissibility in the conduct of warfare. The world
community must not tolerate the practice of fomenting
armed conflict or the actions of those who deliberately
ignore international legal prescriptions to protect civilians
and who use violence and terror against civilians and
humanitarian personnel.
Russia, in the United Nations and at the regional
level — inter alia, in the context of the Commonwealth
of Independent States and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe — has frequently made
important humanitarian proposals. One such proposal was
on the need to establish a monitoring system whereby the
international community would evaluate and react quickly
to any violations of the norms of international
humanitarian law. We support efforts to further protect
identifiable groups of people, primarily children, during
armed conflict.
It is very important to ensure national and
international criminal prosecution of persons responsible
for war crimes and crimes against humanity. Ensuring
certain punishment for such crimes, on the basis of
fairness and without double standards, is the task of the
International Criminal Court. Last summer, Russia
supported the adoption of the Court’s Statute.
The problem of protecting civilians in armed conflict
requires a comprehensive approach. That is precisely the
thrust of the Secretary-General’s recommendations in his
report on this issue. Many of those recommendations are
consonant with Russian initiatives, including on the
establishment of humanitarian corridors and on taking
humanitarian constraints into consideration in the
imposition of sanctions. Also noteworthy is the idea that
the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel should be supplemented by a
protocol to extend the scope of legal protection to all
related personnel. A positive role could be played by
including a mass-media component in peacekeeping
22
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 16 September 1999
operations to prepare and disseminate information on
international humanitarian law and human rights. The other
recommendations of the Secretary-General also deserve
serious study.
Today’s broad discussion and the decision which the
Security Council will take afterwards should lend additional
impetus to international efforts to protect civilians from
armed conflicts.
Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to express my thanks and appreciation to
you, Sir, and to the delegation of the Netherlands for
convening this meeting. This meeting undoubtedly will be
an effective contribution to making the work of the Security
Council more transparent. My delegation highly appreciates
the Secretary-General’s statement, in addition to his
valuable report on the subject under discussion, namely, the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
It is indeed regrettable to see that civilians in cases of
armed conflict face acts of terrorization and brutal
treatment, torture, killing and maiming, as well as genocide
or ethnic cleansing, in addition to acts of disappearance
because of the rebels or the combatants, whether from
opposition or Government forces in the areas of armed
conflict. All of these acts take place in total disregard of all
the conventions of international humanitarian law and the
law of human rights, notably the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949.
The cause of our major concern is that loss of life
among civilians, or losses resulting from the destruction of
civilian infrastructure, are no longer simply the legacy of
war. Indeed, they are a deliberate targeting of non-
combatants in order to expel or ethnically cleanse groups of
the population or to accelerate total military surrender. By
way of example, we can refer to the events that took place
recently in Angola, where, in order to achieve military
gains, UNITA attempted to expel the civilian population
from the towns under its control to the towns under the
control of the Angolan Government.
This problem assumes increasing importance in view
of the growing number of civilians involved. The number
of internally displaced persons has reached 30 million.
Women and children have become the primary targeted
victims of armed conflict because of their inability to
defend themselves.
Another negative aspect which must be taken into
account is that combatants try to restrict the acquisition by
civilians of food and other forms of assistance for
survival and attempt to starve them to death deliberately.
In addition, they target humanitarian workers and those
who work in peacekeeping operations. The suffering
meted out to civilians in armed conflict in our time makes
it incumbent upon us to look seriously into the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The Security Council must shoulder its
responsibilities vis-à-vis these civilians, through taking
actions that would increase the Organization’s ability to
deploy rapidly forces and to establish a permanent
mechanism to monitor the sanctions regimes, whether
imposed by the United Nations or by regional
organizations, and to ascertain the possible effects of
sanctions on civilians.
Of special importance is the recommendation that
the Council, should it receive information on an imminent
conflict targeting civilians and protected persons, should
then impose an embargo on arms supplies. In certain
cases the Council should consider the deployment of a
preventive peacekeeping operation or provide for another
form of presence for preventive monitoring.
The Council should adopt further targeted sanctions
to put an end to the violations of international
humanitarian law. It should also deploy international
monitors to follow closely the situations in refugee camps
and camps of internally displaced persons, especially
when there is a suspicion that there are armed combatants
or armed elements inside those camps.
We would like to reaffirm anew the importance of
taking into account the recommendations of the Secretary-
General on the alleviation of the plight of civilians at the
time when armed conflicts break out and target them
specifically. The Council, in its resolutions on the
outbreak of any armed conflict, must reaffirm that there
is a need for unimpeded access to extend humanitarian
assistance to the civilian population.
Finally, I would like to express our support for the
draft resolution before us at this meeting. It is our hope
that the draft resolution will contribute in a genuine
manner to the protection of civilians during armed
conflict. I mention in particular the establishment of a
working group to consider and study the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
report.
23
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 16 September 1999
Mr. Essonghe (Gabon)(spoke in French): Like others
who spoke before me, I would like to express my
appreciation and thanks to the Secretary-General for the
very relevant recommendations contained in his report now
before us dealing with this issue of great importance, the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
I welcome here the presence of the Secretary-General,
and I am grateful also to you, Sir, for the excellent
initiative in bringing this item to the agenda of the Security
Council.
During the many discussions which the Security
Council has held on matters relating to humanitarian
protection and respect for human rights, my delegation has
stressed the need for all States Members of the United
Nations to sign and ratify the main instruments of
humanitarian law, law on refugees and all other human
rights laws. I can never overemphasize this point — and
this is a point also made by the Secretary-General in his
recommendations — that there is a need for everybody to
implement the provisions of the relevant conventions on the
protection and respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law.
In this area, everybody has to cooperate, particularly
in refusing to take in those responsible for violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law and in
surrendering such persons to the international legal bodies
established for that purpose, namely, the International
Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, and soon
the International Criminal Court in Rome.
My delegation agrees with all the measures proposed
by the Secretary-General regarding preventing conflicts
which are the source of such unspeakable suffering and
give rise to such serious violations of human rights.
We also agree that the emphasis must be placed on
establishing early warning systems or mechanisms. Not
only States would be involved in this, but humanitarian and
human rights organizations and study groups should also
contribute, so that any early indications of possible
situations of armed conflict could be identified. It is our
firm belief that preventing conflicts would mean people
could be spared useless suffering and would assist in
making available considerable resources which could be
used for development.
It is our view that the United Nations, while
developing its early warning system, should also help in the
establishment and strengthening of similar mechanisms at
the regional and subregional levels, as indicated in
Security Council resolution 1197 (1998), adopted pursuant
to the work of the working group set up in resolution
1170 (1998).
We are in favour of negotiating humanitarian
corridors with the parties to a conflict in order to enable
humanitarian organizations to reach and assist populations
in need in combat areas. In this connection, we stress the
non-discriminatory and neutral character of humanitarian
assistance, the necessity of cooperation by all involved,
including States neighbouring conflict zones, and the fact
that no party should consider the actions of humanitarian
organizations as a hostile or partisan act.
Sanctions do make sense as a deterrent against those
who violate human rights and international humanitarian
law. But they must be judiciously targeted and respected.
In this regard, my delegation welcomes the existence of
Security Council sanctions committees, whose goals are
to insure respect for sanctions.
In this connection, we support the initiative taken by
the Chairman of the Sanctions Committee on the situation
in Angola to investigate violations of sanctions imposed
on UNITA, given the length of time that the conflict has
been taking place in that country and the fact that it has
already produced numerous victims and has caused a
grave humanitarian catastrophe to drag on.
My delegation also supports the pressing need for
arms embargoes against armed rebel movements and
groups, given the impact of small-calibre arms on the
security of populations and therefore of States. But the
effectiveness of these measures has to be strengthened.
This was a matter dealt with by the group of experts
established pursuant to resolution 1170 (1998), which
prepared a draft resolution which the Council adopted as
resolution 1196 (1998). We must ensure the
implementation of that resolution — and, indeed, of all
others — if we truly want to protect the rights of civilians
and ensure security and neutrality in refugee camps.
This leads me to speak of recommendations on
integrating human rights and humanitarian concerns with
peacekeeping activities. We agree with the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations that operations
should be multidisciplinary so as to include activities
related to civilian police, humanitarian assistance,
disarmament and demobilization, combating illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons and, of
course, human rights. This need to take a comprehensive
24
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 16 September 1999
approach to peacekeeping presupposes a clear and
unambiguous definition of the tasks set forth in the mandate
for any peacekeeping operation, in order that it can ensure
the protection of civilians and support humanitarian
organizations in their assistance and aid work.
Finally, the populations that have suffered horribly
from armed conflicts will judge the commitment of the
Security Council and of the international community to
their plight by the ability of the Council and the
international community to settle and, especially, prevent
conflict, mobilize resources for actual operations on the
ground and implement their own measures. We also
believe that unless there is a realistic policy to reduce the
causes of conflict, any action, even assistance, will remain
only a superficial measure. We therefore call for equitable
treatment by the United Nations of all conflict situations
throughout the world.
In conclusion, let me say that my delegation has no
objection to supporting the draft resolution before us.
The President: I should like to draw the attention of
the Council to document S/1999/981, which contains the
text of a draft resolution prepared in the course of the
Council’s prior consultations and which is now before the
Council.
There is still a large number of speakers remaining
on my list for this meeting. But, in view of the adverse
weather conditions, I shall now suspend the meeting until
10 a.m. tomorrow, Friday, 17 September 1999.
The meeting was suspended at 2.05 p.m.
25
United Nations S/PV.4046 (Resumption 1)
99-85805 (E) This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fifty-fourth Year
4046th Meeting
Friday, 17 September 1999, 10 a.m.
New York
President: Mr. van Walsum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Netherlands)
Members: Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Martínez Ríos
Bahrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Buallay
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fonseca
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fowler
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Chen Xu
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dejammet
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Essonghé
Gambia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Jagne
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Hasmy
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Andjaba
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Türk
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Sir Jeremy Greenstock
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Holbrooke
Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General to the Security Council on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/1999/957)
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
The meeting was suspended at 2.05 p.m. on
16 September 1999 and resumed at 10.25 a.m. on
17 September 1999.
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Pakistan in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Haque
(Pakistan) took the seat reserved for him at the side of
the Council Chamber.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of South Africa. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for holding this meeting. We were here to
testify not too long ago. This is becoming very nice, and I
am getting used to it.
After listening to what was said yesterday at yet
another important meeting of the Security Council, one is
hard-pressed to recall that 50 years have passed since the
Geneva Conventions, especially the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, were adopted. It would have been far
preferable to participate in a meeting that was called to
celebrate the laudable ideas and intentions that the framers
of those Conventions cherished way back in 1949. The sad
reality, however, is that the international community has
always fallen short of living up to the standards set for all
nations in times of conflict.
It is perhaps with some cruel irony that I recall that,
since February 1999, when the Security Council requested
the Secretary-General to present this report, the world has
watched with fear, fury and foreboding the effects of
tragedy on civilians caught in more than 30 conflicts around
the world. These include the conflicts in Kosovo and East
Timor, which we feel as if we have witnessed with our own
eyes because television broadcast them in living colour
right into our living rooms.
Although many people did not know, or may even
have chosen not to know, where Kosovo or East Timor
were located on the world map, television and newspapers
forced us to watch and read about the anguish of the
civilian victims in these places, albeit with utter
helplessness. Of course, it is and has always been
different when it comes to atrocities that continue to be
perpetrated on civilians in Africa. Places such as Angola,
Sierra Leone and the Congos seldom get mentioned in the
national newscasts. The television cameras have long left
African conflict areas. Even the few objective and brave
reporters have closed their notebooks and long since
stopped writing. The so-called media that is left are hacks
who are nothing but peddlers of hate and propaganda
aimed at whipping up the fury of angry mobs who resort
to nationalistic and ethnocentric bloody campaigns against
innocent civilians.
In the end, the killings that are taking place in Africa
are carried out by those who erroneously believe that they
have been left to do as they please because the world no
longer cares about those who die in Africa. But the
Secretary-General’s report before the Council proves
otherwise. In the introduction, the Secretary-General
writes that
“hardly a day goes by where we are not presented
with evidence of the intimidation, brutalization,
torture and killing of helpless civilians in situations
of armed conflict”. (S/1999/957, para. 2)
It is for this and other reasons that my delegation wished
to commend the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
and challenging report to the Security Council on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
At the Twelfth Conference of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM) held in Durban, South Africa, last
September, the heads of State or Government urged
members of the international community present to
reaffirm their determination and commitment to preserve
the fundamental values centred on respect for human
beings, as entrenched in the relevant international
instruments. Convinced that the observance and
application of international humanitarian law address the
erosion of the underlying respect for human beings and
could lead to a reduction in the numbers of victims in
conflicts, the heads of State or Government at the Non-
Aligned Movement Conference urged all members of the
international community to adhere to, promote,
disseminate and assist in the adherence to and promotion
and dissemination of international humanitarian law and
2
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
human rights conventions. They believed that knowledge of,
respect for and observance of the international instruments
would help relieve the suffering of all victims, provide
them with effective protection and create an atmosphere
conducive to dialogue and the restoration of peace.
Moreover, the heads of State or Government of NAM
underlined the importance of promoting respect for
universally recognized humanitarian principles and for
international humanitarian law, particularly those of the four
Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their 1977 Protocols
Additional. They invited those States which have not yet
done so to ratify or accede to the two Protocols Additional
to the Geneva Conventions of 1949. Common article I of
the Geneva Conventions, now ratified by 188 States, which
dictates that the High Contracting Parties to the
Conventions “undertake to respect and ensure respect for
the present Convention in all circumstances”, constitutes the
collective responsibility of the United Nations.
In his report, the Secretary-General also makes the
point that respect for the international humanitarian and
human rights laws is essential for the protection of civilians
in armed conflicts. He states that such an international
framework created by these Conventions would serve a
function that is both preventive and remedial. It is
preventive because it constitutes a declaration of intent by
Member States that have acceded to the Conventions, and
it is remedial because it provides punitive measures against
the transgressors. My delegation welcomes the adoption of
the Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
hopes that the establishment of the ICC will constitute a
major step towards providing punitive sanction measures
against transgressors, while serving as a deterrent to
potential and future transgressors.
It is important that the Security Council put extra
emphasis on the strengthening of conflict prevention
measures in order to effectively avert the threat to civilians
in armed conflicts. These preventive measures include the
setting up of early warning systems which will alert the
Security Council to pending conflicts while there is still
time to do something about them. South Africa is already
making a direct contribution in this area. My Government
has, amongst other things, given moral and financial
support to the United Nations Integrated Regional
Information Network which functions as an early warning
mechanism in central and southern Africa.
An issue of critical importance to my Government is
the securing of humanitarian assistance, access to persons
in need and the speedy delivery of basic supplies by
humanitarian workers. In this connection, the safety and
security of international workers are another crucial
element. It is of utmost importance that the safety of
United Nations personnel and the safe passage of relief
supplies for the populations caught in armed conflict be
guaranteed.
In Africa, especially in my region of southern
Africa, the scourge of landmines continues to maim and
kill innocent civilians. The Security Council should
consider including demining in the mandates of
peacekeeping missions. The expedited accession by
Member States to the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-
personnel Mines and on Their Destruction and the rapid
implementation of its provisions will go a long way
towards protecting civilians against these silent killers.
The illicit trafficking in powerful, yet small weapons that
are easy to conceal continues to be a growing problem.
The lucrative trade in and the easy transportation of such
weapons makes them easily and readily transferred and
used in different conflicts in a short period of time.
South Africa believes that future peacekeeping
operations should include, where appropriate, the
collection, disposal and destruction of weapons, including
small arms. Otherwise, a demobilized and still armed
former combatant remains a threat to civilians.
Over the past year, we have devoted considerable
time and energy to resolving conflicts in Africa. We have
joined with other Governments in the region in a
concerted effort to address humanitarian tragedies
resulting from conflict situations. Aside from diplomatic
interaction, our commitment has taken the form of
financial and material contributions to international
humanitarian organizations active on our continent. We
have been particularly concerned about the scourge of
landmines and the plight of refugees and internally
displaced people, especially women and children.
Allow me to conclude by mentioning two issues that
continue to be of concern to the Security Council. One
issue is the plight of internally displaced persons, who are
simply civilians in armed conflict by another name. Many
of them are children and women who are often sexually
abused and/or starved to death as they try to flee from
one conflict area to another, seeking food and shelter for
themselves and their babies. The other issue is that
children caught up in these situations are forced to
become child soldiers long before they even reach
puberty. If, through some hard negotiation, peace is
3
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
restored in these places, the child soldiers of yesterday are
somehow expected to transform themselves into the
students of tomorrow.
At the 1990 Organization of African Unity conference
on refugees, returnees and internally displaced persons, held
at Khartoum, an appeal was made to the international
community to alleviate the heavy burden on countries
hosting refugees and countries with significant communities
of returnees and internally displaced persons. The Khartoum
Declaration encourages the development of capacity-
building initiatives for member States, and regional and
subregional institutions. An appeal was also made to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and to the International Committee of the Red
Cross to expand their training programmes in international
and regional refugee and humanitarian law.
My delegation knows that the answers to these and
other international questions before the Security Council are
hard to come by. Nonetheless, it is the hope of my
delegation that the Council will find that the report of the
Secretary-General is an important beginning in compiling
information about options the international community may
choose to consider. It is for this reason that we urge the
Council to support the draft resolution on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We welcome the decision to
establish a mechanism to review the Secretary-General’s
recommendations and to consider appropriate steps by April
2000.
I wish to end by paraphrasing an old saying: the
international community is better for knowing where it
comes from on the issues of civilians caught in armed
conflict, because that is the only way we will all know
where we wish to go.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of Japan. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Yamazaki (Japan): As recent examples in
Kosovo and East Timor have shown, the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict is extremely
important, not only for humanitarian reasons per se, but
also because it has a major bearing on how to reach
conflict resolution and how to realize sustainable peace and
reconciliation.
First of all, Japan would like to join others in urging
that all harm to civilians in armed conflict should stop now.
In this connection, Japan joins others in commending the
present and former Presidents of this Council for taking
the initiative in putting this subject on the agenda this
year. We also appreciate the report that the Secretary-
General submitted in response to the Council’s request for
specific recommendations on measures it should take to
legally and physically protect civilians in armed conflict.
Let me remind the Council that Japan has actively
participated in a number of international initiatives for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and is determined
to continue playing its part in the endeavours of the
international community to meet this challenge. For
example, Japan is a party to all of the six major human
rights instruments and strongly adheres to the underlying
spirit of those instruments. We have been playing an
active part in collaborative efforts to restrict the use of
small arms and to establish the International Criminal
Court.
As for the protection of humanitarian personnel,
Japan was the second party to ratify the Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel
which came into force in January of this year, and has
extended funding to the trust fund for security training,
which supports security and stress-management training
for field security officers. In this connection, I am happy
to note that the first training project funded by Japan, a
workshop in Nairobi, will take place in November.
At the same time, ways should be explored to
further strengthen the protection of those who take part in
humanitarian activities, with due consideration to the
specific situation of the conflict.
The report of the Secretary-General contains several
concrete recommendations as to how the United Nations
and this Council might be more effective in protecting
civilians in armed conflict, and it deserves due attention.
My remarks today are of a preliminary nature, owing to
the need for more time to study the recommendations in
depth.
First, the recommendation to facilitate the rapid
deployment of a greater number of civilian police,
administration experts and humanitarian personnel is
worth further study in enhancing United Nations presence
in protecting civilians in a conflict situation.
Secondly, as regards sanctions, Japan strongly
believes that innocent civilians should not be punished.
Rather, sanctions should be imposed in such a manner
that they will attain their specific objectives as effectively
4
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
as possible. Although careful consideration should be
required before establishing any permanent review
mechanism, the development of standards and rules for
minimizing any detrimental humanitarian impact should be
explored.
Thirdly, Japan fully supports the recommendation that
arms embargoes should be imposed in situations where
civilians are targeted by parties to the conflict, and I should
like to take this opportunity to echo that message to arms-
exporting States.
Fourthly, the notion of preventive peacekeeping
operations offers wide-ranging possibilities. Throughout the
previous decades, we, Member countries, have assembled
our wisdom to foster and evolve peacekeeping operations
by applying the spirit of the United Nations Charter in such
a way as to cope with reality. As circumstances in the
region and the nature of the conflict itself vary, the
modality and timing of deploying an international presence
of a preventive nature should be flexible. In this connection,
I draw attention to a comment made by Mr. Olara Otunnu
at a previous meeting of the Council. He said that
violations of humanitarian norms can be discouraged by
making them known to the rest of the world; in this vein,
a preventive monitoring presence, when feasible, would be
desirable.
Fifthly, it is important to disarm armed elements in
refugee and internally displaced person camps. However, it
is not easy to accurately assess the degree of armed
elements in these camps, or to judge whether a host
Government has the ability to fulfil the responsibility of
disarming them. The recommendation to deploy
international military observers to monitor the situation in
these camps warrants consultation with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), as suggested in the report.
Needless to say, a major difficulty in putting into
practice most of the above recommendations seems to lie
in the fact that non-State belligerent actors tend neither to
be in a position to obey international law nor to be
susceptible to international pressure. This is an aspect that
imposes a major constraint upon this whole issue of
protecting civilians in armed conflict, and it deserves our
full attention.
Today’s agenda item is relevant to all stages of a
conflict. Japan firmly believes that durable peace can and
must be attained, however difficult the task. As we have
seen in cases such as Bosnia, an international presence can
gradually move peace forward from a fragile to a more
stable level. Let me cite two recent examples of Japan’s
involvement in the cause of peace. The first is the pledge
of $220 million for humanitarian and reconstruction
assistance for Kosovo and neighbouring countries; and the
second is a pledge announced yesterday in Tokyo for a
preliminary $2 million to meet immediate humanitarian
needs for East Timor, to be followed by further assistance
in response to any future appeal, as well as substantial
financial contributions to the United Nations trust fund to
support the multinational force established by the Security
Council resolution.
We are of the view that in the follow-up process of
this report by the Secretary-General, non-members of the
Council should also be involved, given the scope and
depth of the issue. We are willing to play a constructive
part in any follow-up that may take place to cope with
this important issue.
The President: In accordance with the decision
taken earlier in the meeting, I invite the Permanent
Observer for Switzerland to take a seat at the Council
table and make his statement.
Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, and the other
members of the Security Council, for giving me this
opportunity to address the issue of the protection of
civilians affected by armed conflict.
Since the debate held on this question in the Security
Council last February, new crises and further attacks on
the lives and rights of civilian populations have reminded
us of the urgency and gravity of the subject under
consideration. The fine report of the Secretary-General
before the Council emphasizes the magnitude of the
challenge confronting the international community. It
recommends precise and practical measures to counter the
threats and to put an end to the violence and abuses
against civilians in times of armed conflict. Those
recommendations deserve our support.
Practically no major event can take place anywhere
today without societies and States being witness to it,
including, in this case, violence against civilians in armed
conflict. Civil societies and Governments become
involved in such situations through remarkable and
necessary actions of solidarity, or they intervene
decisively. Nevertheless, on other occasions such events
take place as if a culture of indifference to human
suffering had become the norm in international relations
5
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
and as if the ideals that are the foundation of the
cooperation symbolized by the United Nations had been
lost. It is therefore necessary to examine the mechanisms
that help to make public opinion, parliaments and
Governments decide what is intolerable and what is not. It
is also urgent for us to consider the relationship between
mass media and political decision-making. In fact, the
United Nations and States must pay attention when solemn
declarations and recognized principles on respect for
humanitarian law do not succeed in arousing action exactly
at the time when such action is needed. The credibility of
our commitment is at stake.
The recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General prompt me to make the following
comments. First, my delegation supports the Secretary-
General’s appeal to all States to ratify the major
instruments of international humanitarian law. States
involved in conflicts of which the Security Council is
seized are not all parties to the Geneva Conventions. Many
States have not yet ratified the Protocols Additional to the
Conventions. Too many States Parties violate their duty to
respect and enforce the provisions of the Conventions as
they are committed to do under common article 1 of all the
Conventions. We must emphasize the need for all warring
parties to respect the emblems and premises of the Red
Cross and the Red Crescent, which have recently been
subjected to intolerable attacks.
Switzerland invites States to recognize the competence
of the humanitarian International Fact-Finding Commission
by making the declaration contained in article 90 of
Protocol Additional I to the Geneva Conventions.
We are in favour of continued consideration of how to
bring about better respect for humanitarian law. Switzerland
will be co-chairing a workshop on this subject within the
framework of the twenty-seventh International Conference
of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, which will be held in
Geneva from 31 October to 6 November 1999. As
depositary of the Conventions, we hope that this
Conference will help the international community to further
mobilize to promote compliance with international
humanitarian law and that the appeal signed last 12 August
on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the
Conventions will be heeded and furthered through concrete
actions.
Lastly, Switzerland wishes to welcome the entry into
force on the very day of that appeal of the Secretary-
General’s bulletin on respect for international humanitarian
law by United Nations forces.
Given the nature of current conflicts, in which
attacks on civilian populations are often committed by
non-State armed groups, it is important to promote respect
for humanitarian law by those non-State entities, and to
confirm the fundamental nature of the rules enshrined in
common article 3 of the Geneva Conventions. Let us
repeat here that non-compliance with the provisions that
protect vulnerable groups can often be ascribed to all the
parties to a conflict, whether they are States or not. The
Security Council must take this into account and act
accordingly.
The suppression of acts of violence that deliberately
target civilian populations must be effective and
vigourous in order to avoid the establishment of a culture
of impunity. My country supports the work of the
International Criminal Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and for Rwanda and is in favour of the rapid
entry into force of the International Criminal Court.
Switzerland is also among the States to have adopted
legislation to allow it to cooperate closely with the two ad
hoc Tribunals. Swiss military law officials have been
involved in bringing to trial nationals of Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia accused of having participated in
crimes committed during the conflicts that recently
affected their countries.
With respect to the maintenance of peace, the
comprehensive and integrated approach to crisis solving
advocated by the Secretary-General is a necessity.
Switzerland is convinced of the crucial nature of a
concerted commitment on the part of all actors to assure
the protection of civilians during and after conflicts. We
favour strengthening the Organization’s capacities in the
area of rapid deployment and planning, as regards both
civilian and police elements. Consideration of this subject
is also under way in other organizations such as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. It
would be useful for the various initiatives to be
complementary and consistent.
My delegation supports the many proposals made in
the report in the areas of light weapons, arms embargoes
and anti-mine activities. Our priority task for in the next
few years is to give concrete shape to the commitments
that have been undertaken and to make a reality of
established principles and norms. It is only in this way
that our action will lead to more effective protection for
civilians in armed conflicts. In the area of light weapons,
my delegation believes it is urgent to establish closer
control over their transfer and their presence in society.
This should be done by preventive and by regulatory
6
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
actions. The marking of weapons, measures to control trade,
the development of codes of conduct and arms-reduction
measures must be on the agenda in this field. Switzerland
hopes that a forceful plan of action can be developed and
adopted in the context of the conference being planned for
2001. My country has offered to host this conference in
Geneva.
The protection of children affected by armed conflicts
was the subject of a recent Council debate. My delegation
participated in that debate, and therefore I will confine
myself to repeating here that my country is convinced of
the importance of raising to 18 years the minimum age for
recruitment — be it voluntary or mandatory, by regular
armed forces or armed opposition groups — and for direct
or indirect participation in armed conflicts.
Finally, my delegation supports the Secretary-
General’s recommendations regarding sanctions. For some
time now my country has been supporting efforts for a
maximum reduction of the humanitarian impact of sanctions
and to introduce appropriate mechanisms for humanitarian
exemptions. In the framework of the Interlaken “smart
sanctions” process, the Swiss Government has also
facilitated reflection on the subject of targeted financial
sanctions.
Taken individually, each of the recommendations of
the Secretary-General represents progress in efforts to
ensure the protection of civilian populations in armed
conflicts. These days, however, attacks on the rights of
these populations represent such a grave problem that only
systematic implementation of these measures can lead to
real breakthrough in the fight against these violations. Even
in the case of such a coordinated implementation, intense
efforts will remain indispensable. The outcome is uncertain,
but the fight must be waged.
The President:The next speaker is the representative
of Finland. I invite her to take a seat at the Council table
and to make her statement.
Ms. Korpi (Finland): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union. The Central and Eastern
European countries associated with the European Union —
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania and Slovakia — and the
associated countries Cyprus and Malta, as well as the
European Free Trade Association countries members of the
European Economic Area — Iceland and Liechtenstein —
align themselves with this statement.
The European Union wishes to thank the Secretary-
General for his thoughtful report on the ways in which
the Security Council, acting within its sphere of
responsibility, can improve the physical and legal
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Its action-
oriented recommendations can contribute to reinvigorating
international efforts to protect civilians in armed conflict.
The Security Council has a special responsibility in this
context. Large-scale human suffering, as was noted in a
statement by the President of the Security Council issued
this past February, is a consequence of and sometimes a
contributing factor to instability and further conflict.
Massive and systematic breaches of human rights and
international humanitarian law can constitute threats to
international peace and security, and therefore demand the
attention and action of the Security Council. The
European Union welcomes the Security Council’s concern
regarding threats to human security, as demonstrated by
a series of resolutions it has adopted in recent years —
including those that established international ad hoc
criminal tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and for
Rwanda. We have seen in recent days how much the
world looks to the Security Council for action.
The question of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict deserves to figure higher on the international
political agenda. Looking at the present global situation
one can only feel a profound concern about the widening
gap between existing international norms and respect for
them. In today’s conflicts the important distinctions
between combatants and civilians have often become
blurred, and the safety of humanitarian workers is not
respected. Women, children, the elderly, the sick, refugees
and internally displaced persons suffer greatly and have
been specifically targeted and used as shields. In some
cases aggressors have used ethnic cleansing and forced
population movements — often across international
borders — not only as a weapon, but also as a strategic
objective. International humanitarian law, human rights
law and refugee law are often unknown to parties to
conflicts, or they are ignored or wilfully disrespected. The
European Union deplores the persistent violations of
international humanitarian law.
The recommendations proposed by the Secretary-
General to address the failure to comply on the one hand,
and the lack of effective enforcement measures on the
other, head in the right direction. Our objective should be
to ensure respect for and full implementation of
international human rights and humanitarian law. The
primary responsibility to ensure application and
enforcement of these fundamental norms rests with States.
7
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
However, the Security Council can in various ways draw
the attention of States to the importance of ratifying the
major instruments, ensuring their implementation in practice
and heightening awareness and acceptance of humanitarian
law among all sectors of society. In this respect, the
European Union welcomes innovative approaches to
strengthening the respect for international humanitarian law
by developing codes of conduct, ground rules and clear
principles of engagement, as well as by building on relevant
legal norms. The measures proposed by the Secretary-
General include promoting adherence to international law
as well as, in certain well thought-out cases, enforcement
measures under Chapter VII of the Charter.
Irregular forces are increasingly a feature of today’s
conflicts and often bear significant responsibility for
disrespect, grave breaches and serious violations of
international humanitarian law as well as for serious human
rights violations. We therefore call upon non-State actors
that are parties to conflicts to strictly observe and respect
international humanitarian and human rights law.
It is also essential that violations of the international
instruments pertaining to protection of civilians are
addressed through appropriate judicial processes, either
nationally or through the efforts of the international
community. The International Criminal Tribunals for the
former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda were important steps in
establishing individual accountability for atrocities. The
European Union is of the view that the Security Council
should consider all measures to induce compliance with
orders and requests of the two ad hoc tribunals. The
European Union would also like to stress the importance of
the early establishment of the International Criminal Court
and its important future role both in deterring grave
breaches and serious violations of international
humanitarian law and serious human rights violations, and
in ensuring that those responsible for atrocities are brought
to justice. In this context it is to be noted that the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court also foresees a
major role for the Security Council in referring situations
to the Court where they involve most serious crimes of
concern to the international community and are deemed to
constitute threats to international peace and security.
It is increasingly difficult for the international
community to provide protection and assistance to those
living in the midst of a conflict. Denial of access to
civilians in need of humanitarian assistance has in many
instances become a tool of warfare. Humanitarian and
peacekeeping personnel are deliberately targeted, since they
are seen by many armed groups as a threat to their
objectives. In this context, the European Union wishes to
stress that under the Statute of the International Criminal
Court, attacks against humanitarian or peacekeeping
personnel are war crimes. The proposal to extend the
scope of the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel to cover other
categories of United Nations and associated personnel,
including locally recruited staff, merits serious
consideration.
The report rightly highlights the plight of internally
displaced persons in many parts of the world. The
European Union agrees with the report’s emphasis on the
work of the United Nations system to assist internally
displaced persons, while noting that the primary
responsibility for the protection of and assistance to
internally displaced persons lies with the Government and
the country concerned. The European Union supports the
wider use of the Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement in the work of the United Nations at the
country level.
The European Union supports the Secretary-
General’s continuing efforts to place increased emphasis
on the prevention of conflicts. The promotion of
economic and social development, establishment and
consolidation of democracy, good governance and the rule
of law as well as the full implementation of human rights
are of great importance in conflict prevention.
With regard to confidence-building, effective public
information is vital. The United Nations must enhance its
public information capability at mission level. In this
respect, it is also crucially important to prevent the media
from being used as a tool of conflict. Serious
consideration should be given to the Secretary-General’s
recommendation relating to hate media.
Better use should be made of existing mechanisms,
such as the International Fact-Finding Commission under
article 90 of the first Protocol Additional to the 1949
Geneva Conventions. The services of this existing body
can be called upon whenever violations of international
humanitarian law occur in armed conflict. It can conduct
enquiries into the alleged breaches of the Geneva
Conventions or their Protocol I and facilitate, through its
good offices, the restoration of an attitude of respect for
international humanitarian law.
Peacekeeping itself has to be seen as part of a
continuum, stretching from prevention to conflict
resolution and peace-building. In the area of conflict
8
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
prevention, the European Union fully agrees with the
recommendation to consider wider use of preventive
peacekeeping operations or other preventive monitoring
presence. The United Nations Preventive Deployment Force
in The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia was the
first ever United Nations preventive deployment mission. It
serves as a positive and encouraging experience from which
many lessons can be drawn for the future.
The European Union strongly agrees with the
recommendation to strengthen the Organization’s capacity
to plan and deploy rapidly. Quick action may often limit or
even prevent conflict and breaches of human rights and
international humanitarian law. In this respect, the European
Union welcomes the steps taken to establish a rapidly
deployable mission headquarters within the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and looks forward to its early and
full operation. The European Union stresses the importance
of providing adequate resources to that headquarters.
Deployment of international military or civilian police
observers to monitor the situation in camps for refugees or
internally displaced persons is also a measure that must be
seriously considered.
The European Union agrees with the recommendation
to make greater use of targeted sanctions so as to improve
the effectiveness of sanctions while minimizing their
humanitarian impact. Targeted sanctions, aimed at specific
individuals and entities of the targeted country, have
already been adopted by the Security Council on certain
occasions. We also agree that the proposals made by the
President of the Council to the sanctions Committees in
January 1999 form a good basis for further efforts to
develop standards and rules aimed at minimizing the
humanitarian impact of sanctions.
The protection of civilians is fundamental to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations. The
international community must not stand by, helpless, in the
face of humanitarian catastrophes. The tragic events taking
place in East Timor before the eyes of the world are the
most recent unfortunate example of why the United Nations
must act. We all have fresh in our minds the violent attacks
unleashed on the civilian population of East Timor
following the popular consultation of 30 August this year,
with the complicity of elements of the Indonesian armed
forces and police. In the case of East Timor, the Security
Council has demonstrated its capacity to react swiftly,
effectively and in line with the recommendations of the
Secretary-General. In this light, the European Union
welcomes the adoption of resolution 1264 (1999)
authorizing a multinational force to assist in restoring law
and order in East Timor.
The Security Council has a special responsibility and
special powers to authorize coercive action when
international peace and security are threatened as a result
of systematic and widespread violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, ranging from the
imposition of arms embargoes or sanctions to intervention
— when all other measures prove ineffective — to protect
the civilian population from immediate threats to their
lives and to ensure the safe passage of humanitarian
convoys. The European Union believes that the factors
presented by the Secretary-General to be considered in
extreme cases when contemplating an intervention are
relevant in that context and may help the Security Council
to further develop an active policy aimed at preventing or
alleviating profound human suffering wherever it occurs.
In conclusion, the European Union would like to
express its appreciation for the present report, which is
very action-oriented and provides a good basis for further
active engagement by the Security Council to ensure
improved protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Mongolia. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Enkhsaikhan (Mongolia): It is a great honour
for me to have the opportunity to participate in an open
debate in the Council on the question of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. At the outset, I would like to
express my delegation’s appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for pursuing the timely initiative to hold
another open debate in the Council on this important issue
with the participation of United Nations Member States
and to have the Council adopt a bold resolution.
My delegation’s thanks and appreciation also go to
the Secretary-General for his report to the Council
prepared in response to the Council’s previous open
debate held on this item last February and to the alarming
general situation to which, yesterday in the debate, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
once again drew the attention of the Council and, indeed,
the international community. My delegation shares the
general assessment of the situation and supports the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report on how the Council and Member States should act
in order to improve the protection of civilians in
situations of armed conflict, in which innocent civilian
9
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
populations, in particular women and children, suffer in
great numbers.
This century has been the bloodiest one that
humankind has ever known. The next century should be
different. We all know the appalling statistics of human
suffering as a direct result of armed conflict, or indirectly,
as a consequence of violence against innocent civilians,
refugees or displaced persons. Today more than 90 per cent
of armed conflicts take place within, rather than among,
States. That means that in most cases it is the civilian
population that is targeted. As a result, the world is
witnessing various kinds of violence, including intimidation,
brutalization, torture, killing, mutilation, genocide, “ethnic
cleansing” — all used against helpless civilians in different
parts of the world. Therefore, it is my delegation’s strong
belief that the subject of today’s debate is crucially
important and that the Council should search for more
efficient and comprehensive ways to address this issue. It
would be accurate to say that the question of the physical,
moral, economic and other terrible sufferings of civilians in
situations of armed conflict arises in almost every meeting
of this Council and in other important United Nations
meetings on the issue of international peace and security.
This fact alone testifies to the serious and critical nature of
the issue.
In this context, my delegation would like to note with
satisfaction that the Council, which bears primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security, has always paid attention to the question of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. However, the
question has always been addressed in the context of a
particular emergency situation or a particular case.
Addressing this question specifically should result in an
action-oriented resolution or decision of the Council
addressed to the entire membership of the United Nations,
the United Nations family and civil society.
No conflict or crisis is the same. Therefore, we believe
that a serious and constructive approach towards emergency
situations could be workable and thus productive. The
international community has a fresh example of such a
constructive yet firm approach in the case of East Timor.
In this regard, my delegation duly appreciates the steps
taken by the Council in addressing the emergency situation
in East Timor by sending its mission to Jakarta and Dili,
holding an open debate in the Council and adopting, three
days ago, resolution 1264 (1999), authorizing, as a priority
measure, the establishment of a multinational force to
restore peace and security in East Timor, to protect and
support the United Nations Mission in East Timor
(UNAMET) and to facilitate humanitarian assistance
operations there. My delegation fully supports the
Council’s action aimed at halting and reversing, as soon
as possible, the unfolding humanitarian catastrophe in
East Timor. My delegation welcomes such a style of
work and expresses the hope that it will be, where
appropriate, pursued by the Council in the future.
In the meantime, we welcome the cooperative
approach displayed by the Government of Indonesia
towards the establishment of a multinational force, as was
suggested by the Secretary-General and supported by the
majority of the international community, to restore peace
and security, protect the people, and honour and
implement the results of the popular consultation as
painlessly as possible. We express the hope that the
multinational force will be established and dispatched as
soon as possible.
Allow me, in this light, to express my delegation’s
strong belief that international involvement in this case
will be in the interest not only of the Indonesian and East
Timorese peoples, but also in the interest of stability,
peace and security in the region.
The reason I mention here the case of East Timor is
not because that it is the most recent one, but because
such a swift international reaction to unfolding tragedy
represents the kind of response by the Council that is
expected of it in such emergency situations.
I should like, therefore, to repeat my delegation’s
belief that the most efficient means of protecting civilians
would be to prevent conflict situations and tackle their
root causes, as they result in untold suffering for such
vulnerable segments of the population as children,
women, the elderly and so on. This is the central theme
of the introduction of this year’s report of the Secretary-
General on the work of the Organization. Many
instructive and constructive ideas are reflected in this
report that the Council may find useful when preparing
the draft resolution on this issue.
On the other hand, the international community must
be concerned with the disrespect for, and even violations
of, international humanitarian and human rights principles
and norms in many, if not most, of the affected areas.
This was rightly pointed out in the Secretary-General’s
report as the gap between law and reality. Therefore it is
my delegation’s belief that the international community
should do more to strengthen international legal
10
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
enforcement mechanisms, under which the parties to the
relevant international Conventions on international
humanitarian and human rights law would strictly comply
with their obligations. In this connection, we believe that
the speediest creation of an International Criminal Court, as
a global legal mechanism to address impunity and serve
justice, would be instrumental in punishing the perpetrators
of such grave crimes as well as in serving to deter the
commission of such crimes in future.
Though the Preparatory Committee for the
establishment of the International Criminal Court has made
some progress in drafting the rules of procedure and
evidence, and the elements of crime, for application by the
Court in future, much more remains to be done if the
deadline of 30 June 2000 set by the Rome Conference is to
be met. Bearing in mind this year’s tragic developments in
many parts of the world, my delegation expects the third
session of the Preparatory Committee, to be held later this
year, to be fruitful in moving the international community
closer to establishing an independent, competent and viable
Court. In order to achieve that goal, genuine political will
by States is crucial.
Many of the previous speakers have referred to
another important aspect of human security: the physical
protection of persons. Since this issue has been extensively
covered in the Secretary-General’s report, I would like only
to inform the Council that my country, Mongolia, will sign
in 10 days, here in New York, a Memorandum of
Understanding with the United Nations concerning its
contributions to United Nations standby arrangements,
whereby it would be contributing staff officers, military
observers, doctors and other medical officers. Mongolia will
also soon be acceding to the 1994 Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate once again my
delegation’s support for the Secretary-General’s
recommendations to the Council on this item as well as for
the United Nations efforts to protect civilians in armed
conflict. We hope that, as a result of today’s debate, a
weighty and viable resolution will be adopted to adequately
deal with this important issue. Thus the Council should not
only strongly condemn the deliberate targeting of civilians
in situations of armed conflict; it should also call upon the
international community to take practical measures, such as
acting forcefully in situations where civilians are targeted;
including in the mandates of peacekeeping, peacemaking
and peace-building operations special protection and
assistance provisions for groups requiring such protection;
making use of targeted sanctions; raising the minimum age
for recruitment and participation in hostilities to 18; and
so on. The draft resolution that is being discussed among
the members of the Council contains concrete measures
that need to be taken. We believe, therefore, that these
could serve as a good basis for such a resolution.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine): Allow me, Sir, to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council and to express appreciation to your
predecessor, Ambassador Andjaba of Namibia.
The protection of civilian persons in armed conflict
is a matter of great importance to the international
community. We believe that the concerted interest shown
recently by the Security Council in this matter is
appropriate and necessary and we hope that it will
continue until sufficient and serious protection of civilians
in armed conflict is ensured in all cases.
In this regard, we appreciate the report on this
matter presented by the Secretary-General to the Security
Council at the request of the latter. The report makes a
useful analysis of the threats and violence against
civilians in armed conflict and the role of the Security
Council in this regard, and it details recommended
measures to strengthen both legal and physical protection.
We agree with many of the recommendations made in the
report, especially in the field of accountability. The key
remains for the Council to take actions to promote a
climate of compliance. Ensuring compliance is a condition
for achieving credibility and avoiding the emergence of a
double standard and the application of different sets of
values.
We were perplexed, however, by the fact that the
report fails to mention the incessant Israeli occupation of
Palestinian land along with the examples it gives on
violations of international humanitarian law. The report
even fails to mention the occupied territories and Lebanon
among the places where peacekeeping personnel have
been harassed or have lost their lives. The Secretary-
General’s report on Qana is still fresh in our memories.
Today, Palestine refugees number more than 3.5
million people, representing the oldest and biggest refugee
problem on the agenda of the international community.
Israel refuses to implement General Assembly resolution
11
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
194 (III) of 1949 on the Palestine refugees and Security
Council resolution 237 (1967) on displaced persons. For the
past 32 years, Israel, the occupying Power, has continued
to occupy the West Bank, including Jerusalem, and the
Gaza Strip. It has continuously committed grave breaches
of the Fourth Geneva Convention, Additional Protocol I and
the Hague Regulations. It has effectively created a situation
of colonization and annexation of parts of the occupied
territories, including Jerusalem — a unique case at the end
of the twentieth century.
The Security Council has responded by adopting 24
resolutions which reaffirm the applicability of the Fourth
Geneva Convention to the territories occupied by Israel
since 1967, including Jerusalem. Many of the Council’s
resolutions called upon Israel, the occupying Power, to
comply with the provisions of the Convention and to accept
its de jure applicability. In several cases, the Council also
called for measures to ensure the safety and protection of
Palestinian civilians living under Israeli occupation. The
Council also called upon the High Contracting Parties to the
Convention to ensure respect by Israel for its obligations
under the Convention in accordance with common article I.
However, Israel, the occupying Power, has not complied
with or even accepted any of the aforementioned
resolutions.
Over the years, the General Assembly has adopted
even stronger positions. In April 1997, the General
Assembly held the tenth emergency special session to
consider illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem
and the rest of the occupied Palestinian territory. The
session reconvened four times, during which it
recommended that the High Contracting Parties to the
Fourth Geneva Convention convene a conference on
measures to enforce the Convention in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, and to ensure its
respect in accordance with common article I.
On 15 July 1999, for the first time in the history of
the four Conventions, a conference to consider a specific
situation was convened in accordance with the
recommendations of the tenth emergency special session.
We believe that this was an extremely important step, not
only with regard to the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including Jerusalem, but also with regard to
international humanitarian law and the efforts to ensure
respect for and compliance with its instruments.
We emphasize our situation, while at the same time
we are aware of the many examples strongly requiring
serious efforts by the international community to bring an
end to the suffering of civilians, especially women and
children. It is unfortunate that today, as we celebrate the
fiftieth anniversary of the four Geneva Conventions, we
cannot also take pride in and celebrate their full respect
and applicability. In Palestine and everywhere, we have
to make progress to create a different and safer situation
than that faced today by civilians in armed conflict. The
draft resolution, which we hope the Council will adopt,
will be an important move in that direction.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Norway. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Leiro (Norway): We would like to thank you,
Sir, for organizing this meeting of the Council on this
important topic. Let me also join other speakers in
congratulating the Secretary-General on a timely and
highly useful report to the Security Council on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, as well as the
High Commissioner for Human Rights for her inspiring
statement yesterday. We appreciate this opportunity to
take part in an open debate on this report.
The issues before us are vital to many people around
the world and the realities faced by civilians in armed
conflict present major challenges to the international
community. As the report clearly states:
“The protection of civilians in armed conflict would
be largely assured if combatants respected the
provisions of international humanitarian and human
rights law.” (S/1999/957, para. 35)
These provisions must be complied with by all. We
urge Member States to ratify the major instruments of
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law
and to take the necessary steps in order to fully
implement them. In this context, early entry into force of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court is of
high importance so as to ensure that the perpetrators are
held accountable. Moreover, States are not the only actors
in armed conflicts. Rebel groups and opposition fighters
continue to target civilians. A call to respect the norms
contained in international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law must therefore also be addressed to them.
Women and children are often the most vulnerable
civilians in armed conflict. Not only do they become
victims when war leads to the breakdown of the social
fabric and the disintegration of families; women and
children are also, in some cases, deliberately targeted by
12
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
combatants for gender-based violence and sexual and other
exploitation. Children are recruited, trained and used as so-
called efficient soldiers.
The particularly disturbing situation of children in
armed conflict was highlighted in the Security Council
meeting held on 25 August and in the resolution adopted at
that meeting. Arms small and simple enough for children to
carry and use are unfortunately highly available on the
international market. Their availability contributes to
destabilization and makes post-conflict rehabilitation more
difficult. The people who enter conflict zones in order to
alleviate the suffering of civilians have themselves become
targets of violence. The picture painted in the report by the
Secretary-General on the situation faced by civilians in
armed conflict is complex and ugly, but unfortunately real.
The Security Council has consistently reaffirmed its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, and on several occasions has recognized
that massive and systematic breaches of international
humanitarian and human rights law represent a threat to
international peace and security.
The concrete recommendations put before the Security
Council in the Secretary-General’s report are therefore
timely and welcome. They merit close consideration and
discussion. Further work is required to ensure proper
consideration of the recommendations and of how they can
effectively be implemented. Norway therefore urges the
Security Council to establish an effective mechanism to
ensure that the recommendations of the Secretary-General
are acted upon.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Cˇ alovski (The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia): Allow me first to express my great satisfaction
at seeing my old friend, the representative of the
Netherlands, a country with which the Republic of
Macedonia enjoys excellent relations, presiding over this
session of the Security Council on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. You will, of course, have the
full support of my delegation, Sir, in your endeavour to see
this debate end successfully and with important results.
The views of my delegation coincide with those
expressed by the representative of Finland, who spoke on
behalf of the European Union.
The decision of the Security Council to convene an
open meeting on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, including the subject of international
humanitarian law, should be seen as an important positive
development and an important change by the Security
Council and by the Organization as a whole, on the
implementation of international humanitarian law. This
includes the Geneva Conventions of 1949 — whose
fiftieth anniversary was recently observed by many
organizations, including by the International Committee of
the Red Cross, the International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies, and the International Institute
of Humanitarian Law of San Remo — and the concept of
human rights in armed conflict, as adopted in 1968 by the
International Conference on Human Rights in its
Proclamation of Teheran.
That decision means that the Security Council will
start to be involved in the protection of civilians in armed
conflict as an implementation mechanism of the
international community to enforce international
humanitarian law and the Geneva Conventions, which
until now, as stressed by previous speakers, have often
been ignored, unsatisfactorily implemented, seriously
violated and abused; their violators have not really been
brought to justice. It is also of paramount importance that
the permanent members of the Security Council have
agreed with this course of action, which means — and
this is very important — that they will be guided by
Article 24, paragraph 1, of the United Nations Charter.
In the twenty-first century, there will be no
important distinction between international and internal
armed conflicts. The present distinction will simply
disappear, and it would be wise for the international
community, primarily the Security Council, to be prepared
for this coming situation. The Secretary-General’s
decision to request the observance of international
humanitarian law by United Nations peacekeepers is a
good start in this respect. What happened and what is
happening in Kosovo and Metohija, Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, in East Timor and, before that, in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in Rwanda, in Sierra Leone and so on, are
good illustrations of the new reality, and, in that regard,
of the new obligations of the Security Council.
One of the questions to be asked at present is why
the United Nations has not so far been involved in the
implementation of the Geneva Conventions of 1949 on
international humanitarian law. Why was that important
task of the maintenance of international peace and
security left to individual States parties to the
13
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
Conventions, to the ICRC and the International Federation
of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies and other non-
governmental organizations? In our view, the answer is
known: it was because the implementation of international
humanitarian law requires a correct observance of the
principles of the sovereignty of States and of non-
interference in the internal affairs of other States. Our view,
which I think is shared by many delegations, is that the
situation has changed since the end of the cold war. The
violation of human rights in armed conflicts, the rights of
refugees and other human rights can no longer be the
subject of selective concern. The violation of human rights
is everybody’s concern. The same should hold for the duty
to observe all human rights — of course, in particular when
we are faced with mass violations, such as those in armed
conflict.
It is therefore the duty of United Nations Member
States and of the main organ of the United Nations, the
Security Council, which is responsible for the maintenance
of international peace and security, to act fast and
effectively. We were pleased to see the Council in action
on East Timor recently.
The Security Council should request without delay or
hesitation that the Secretary-General prepare the necessary
reports in close cooperation with the ICRC, the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies and the Offices of the United Nations High
Commissioners for Human Rights and for Refugees for
deliberation and action by the Council. The Council should
ask for reports and documentation. In that endeavour, the
prime concern of the Secretary-General and the Security
Council should be the enforcement of the observance of
human rights, and the well-being and dignity of civilians in
danger, not so much, as I said earlier, a preoccupation with
the observance of the principles of the sovereignty of States
and of non-interference in internal affairs — which, of
course, should not be ignored.
Another question to be dealt with is what the Security
Council should do to prevent the spread of the non-
observance of international humanitarian law. The best
thing would be for the Security Council to take immediate
action to freeze or to stop a conflict and undertake
measures aimed at finding solutions. The initiative for this
could come from the Secretary-General, from competent
regional organizations or from Member States. The Security
Council should be resolute, inventive and innovative and
should act under Article 24, paragraph 2, of the Charter. I
would like to stress that the permanent members of the
Council should avoid acting under Article 27, paragraph 3,
of the Charter. Under Article 24, paragraph 1, the
Security Council is requested to act on behalf of Member
States. That means that the members of the Security
Council should not act on their own behalf. If they are
not in a position to act on behalf of Member States, it
should be possible for the Secretary-General to request
the urgent convening of the General Assembly. That
would be a rational and democratic thing to do and would
strengthen the role of our Organization altogether and
prevent its marginalization. It is impossible to understand
or accept that the Security Council cannot act fast and
resolutely in the implementation and enforcement of
international humanitarian law.
As the Security Council has begun to deal with the
implementation of international humanitarian law, it is
important to see what should be done with existing
international humanitarian law and with refugee law, both
of which are regulated by numerous instruments that were
adopted long ago, in 1994 and 1951, during different
times and for different purposes, but which are
nevertheless in force at present. In this regard, we are
faced with several problems: the relationship among the
three bodies of human rights law; the laws themselves;
and their implementation. In our view, the Security
Council at present is not really well prepared to handle
this situation and it should start preparing.
The competent body for dealing with international
humanitarian law is the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC); the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, for refugee law; and the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, for human rights.
The fact is that these bodies of laws are so highly
regulated that one needs to be a real expert in order to
know them. And that simple situation is a source of
serious difficulties in the implementation of these laws in
the field. At present, as we all know, there is a huge gap
between the laws contained in the instruments and their
implementation in the field. You have a situation in which
militaries are engaged in armed conflict, but in which the
victims are civilians.
This problem should be addressed. In our view, we
have two alternatives. The first one is to strengthen
existing international humanitarian and refugee law by
adopting new protocols or by adopting amendments to the
Geneva Conventions. The second alternative is to start a
process of “deregulation” and adopt new instruments —
new Geneva Conventions — on international
humanitarian law and on refugees. The second alternative,
14
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
of course, is more difficult but, in my view, more
promising.
We believe that the time has come to discuss and
agree on a mechanism for enforcement of the
implementation of human and refugee rights in armed
conflicts. This will probably be discussed at length at the
forthcoming International Conference of the Red Cross and
Red Crescent that will be held in November in Geneva, as
we were informed by the Observer of Switzerland. In the
future we will have the International Criminal Court, which
will be part of the implementation mechanism. But that will
not be enough. The important role of the ICRC and the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies should continue. The action of competent regional
organizations such as the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), the OSCE and the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) will continue to be important. But in
our view, the time has come to decide that the Security
Council should act as a central mechanism for the
enforcement — and I emphasize enforcement — of
international humanitarian law.
The concern of the international community for the
victims of violations of the Geneva Conventions should not
be interpreted as support for those who seek to achieve
political goals by the use of force. The Council should take
into account that the development of international law has
left the period of coexistence that began 10 years ago after
the end of the cold war and has entered a period of
cooperation. The forces of globalization will influence the
Security Council to act against the violation of human
rights, in particular against violations in armed conflicts.
Accountability must prevail and justice must be done.
Speaking generally, it is of particular importance to
promote all efforts to deal not only with the consequences
but also with the sources of armed conflicts, which, as
members know, are not only political, but also social and
economic.
The Security Council should abide strictly by the
principles of the inviolability of international borders and of
the integrity of each Member State. But, as I have stressed,
as in the next century there will — I hope — in fact be no
international conflicts and most of conflicts will be internal,
the only way the Security Council will be able to help
civilian victims will be to act to enforce international
humanitarian law. The Charter of our Organization demands
from the Security Council not only that it help to maintain
international peace and security, but also that it contribute
to the respect of human dignity.
Let me express my great appreciation for the
contribution made by the Secretary-General in his report
contained in document S/1999/957 of 8 September 1999.
In conclusion, I would like to say something as a
footnote to my statement. In my view, it may perhaps be
advisable for the Security Council to organize its open
meetings differently, not as they are organized at present.
In my view, the Security Council should first listen to
what States non-members of the Security Council would
like to say on the item on the agenda. After that,
members of the Security Council could make their
statements. In this way, they would be able first to hear
the positions of the broader membership, which is so
important at present when we are investing so much
energy and time in democratizing our Organization and in
making the work of the Security Council more transparent
and, of course, more relevant. The absence of so many of
the Permanent Representatives of States members of the
Security Council prompted me to add this footnote, and
I hope it will be understood properly.
The President: I thank the representative of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia for the kind
words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of the
Republic of Korea. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Lee See-young (Republic of Korea): Allow me
at the outset to extend my delegation’s appreciation to
you, Sir, for taking the initiative of organizing this open
debate on the very important issue of protecting civilians
in armed conflict. We recognize highly the effort of the
Netherlands to build on the previous Council debate on
this subject — a debate initiated by Canada in February
of this year — and also to promote the transparency of
the work of the Council. My delegation equally
appreciates Secretary-General Kofi Annan’s
comprehensive and action-oriented report on this issue
and his inspiring statement yesterday morning. My
appreciation goes also to Mrs. Mary Robinson for her
valuable contribution yesterday and to Mr. de Mello in
particular for his important role in the process of
preparing this important report.
Across the planet, the plight of innocent civilians, in
particular those of vulnerable groups, has been continuing
with alarming frequency and intensity, as those in war
zones have increasingly become the deliberate targets of
warring parties. It is all the more frustrating to note this
15
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
unfortunate trend when just last August we celebrated the
fiftieth anniversary of the entry into force of the Geneva
Conventions.
To deal with this daunting challenge with a sense of
urgency, the Republic of Korea, during its presidency of the
Security Council in the month of May 1997, took the
initiative of organizing an open debate, the first of its kind,
on the subject of protecting humanitarian assistance to
refugees and others in conflict situations. My delegation is
pleased to see that our initiative has been continuously
followed up and further expanded by other like-minded
member States. In this regard, my delegation welcomes
wholeheartedly the Secretary-General’s report contained in
document S/1999/957 as a comprehensive blueprint for
future action by the Security Council and other relevant
organs, bodies and agencies of the United Nations to
improve both the legal and the physical protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
My delegation therefore supports the draft resolution
before the Council, which endorses a number of practical
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report. My delegation hopes that the adoption of this draft
resolution will mark another step forward for the
international community in its fight against the culture of
impunity and to foster a climate of compliance.
Having said that, I would like to highlight the
following points to which my delegation attaches particular
importance.
My first point concerns the issue of how to strengthen
the legal framework so as to better protect civilians in
conflicts. We are encouraged by the recent developments
aimed at enabling the international community to
collectively combat the culture of impunity. In particular,
we are encouraged by the adoption in Rome last year of the
Statute of International Criminal Court. The Security
Council has set examples by establishing the two ad hoc
Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda. In
this context, we agree with the Secretary-General’s view
that there is a need to consider using enforcement measures
to facilitate the arrest and surrender of those persons
accused by the ad hoc Tribunals, and to devise judicial and
investigative mechanisms, with national and international
components, pending the establishment of the International
Criminal Court.
In view of the urgency of better ensuring the safety of
United Nations and humanitarian personnel, we join the
Secretary-General’s call for early ratification of the 1994
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel. My delegation also favours the
exploration of an appropriate mechanism to extend the
scope of legal protection to cover all personnel. As
suggested in the report before the Council, the
development of a protocol to the 1994 Convention could
be a useful idea.
Now I would like to turn to the issue of how to
improve the physical protection of civilians in conflicts.
My delegation believes that the Security Council should
continue to take a proactive role in this field as the
international community increasingly considers serious
humanitarian problems to be a threat to international
peace and security. The first issue I would like to raise in
this regard is the need to strengthen the United Nations
capability for conflict prevention and rapid response to
crises. My delegation concurs with the Secretary-
General’s recommendation on the proactive use of a
preventive monitoring presence in areas of potential
conflict and on the deployment of preventive
peacekeeping missions. We believe that the positive
contribution made by the United Nations Preventive
Deployment Force can be further built upon.
In view of the multifaceted nature of recent
conflicts, there is an urgent need to strengthen the rapid-
reaction capability of the United Nations to cover not
only the traditional mandates of peacekeeping but also a
number of other functions of peace-building, in particular
protection of humanitarian assistance to of innocent
civilians and of their human rights. In this context, we
would like to join the appeal to all Member States to
participate more actively in the United Nations Stand-by
Arrangements System, with increased inclusion of
specialized civil and humanitarian units. We also support
the Secretary-General’s recommendation to make use of
relevant human rights information and analysis as
indicators for potential preventive action by the United
Nations.
Secondly, I would like to touch upon the issue of
sanctions and arms embargoes. The Security Council has
made consistent efforts to refine the use of sanctions.
While we recognize the difficulty of achieving “smart
sanctions” in the real world, we also believe that there is
a continuing need to minimize collateral, unintended
humanitarian suffering through the imposition of more
specifically targeted sanctions and mechanisms for
periodic substantive reviews.
16
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
Arms embargoes should be imposed in all situations
where parties to the conflict target civilians. With cross-
border arms flows in full swing, country-specific arms
embargoes may not suffice to staunch the illicit flow of
arms, and therefore the regional approach warrants serious
examination. The Security Council should also devise a
more reliable mechanism to better implement the arms
embargoes which have already been imposed by the
Council in some conflict areas but which have been deemed
ineffective. This problem ought to be urgently addressed in
the interest of both the credibility of Council action and the
practical need to stop an activity responsible for prolonging
civilian suffering.
Thirdly, in his report the Secretary-General encourages
Member States to give political and financial support and
assistance to other States to facilitate compliance with the
Ottawa Convention on Landmines. Removing landmines
has now become a global agenda item, requiring global
action. In both conflict and post-conflict situations, mine
clearance is an urgent precondition for securing the
minimum safety of civilians. As a donor of the Mine
Action Support Group, the Republic of Korea has, since
1996, actively participated in demining activities in
Cambodia, Tajikistan and Ethiopia. We will continue to
make such contributions in the future.
Fourthly, we would like to echo the primary
importance of maintaining the civilian and humanitarian
character of refugee camps. We have witnessed the
ramifications of the failure to do so in some conflict
situations, most notably in the Great Lakes region of
Africa. We fully support a number of practical suggestions
made by the Secretary-General, in particular the deployment
of international military observers and the relocation of
camps to a safe area away from war zones. My delegation
also appreciates the ongoing efforts made by Mrs. Ogata
and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, to deal with this problem through the
elaboration of three tiered options, namely, soft,
intermediate and hard.
Last but not least, we share the view of the Secretary-
General that it is important to establish an agreed
mechanism and timetable for follow-up and review of the
report. The primary responsibility of the Security Council
resides in promoting the political settlement of regional
conflicts in such a way as not to unjustly prolong civilian
suffering. My delegation hopes that following the Council’s
adoption of the draft resolution today, the implementation
of concrete recommendations will be tenaciously pursued,
closely monitored and periodically reviewed in close
collaboration with other United Nations organs and
agencies and, of course, with the full support of the entire
United Nations membership.
Let me conclude by reiterating my delegation’s hope
that the Security Council will continue to expand its
involvement in the area of protection of civilians and all
displaced persons in conflict situations in the months to
come. For its part, the Republic of Korea will continue to
be actively involved in and to make contributions to this
process.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Ukraine. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Yel’chenko (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to join previous speakers in thanking the Secretary-
General for submitting a very informative and substantive
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict and
for making a statement on this extremely important
subject.
We also appreciate your role, Mr. President, and the
role of the delegation of Canada, in convening the current
open debate. The growing number of open debates in the
Security Council apparently demonstrates a positive
tendency towards an increase in transparency in the work
of the Council, which my country has always advocated.
Ukraine’s position and views on the agenda item
now before the Security Council again have been stated
several times on recent occasions and have not undergone
any changes of principle. Therefore, welcoming this new
opportunity to address the multifaceted problem of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, I would rather
limit myself to making a few remarks on the basis of the
Secretary-General’s report.
The importance of the problem under consideration
is well-known. We fully share the concern of the Council,
referred to in paragraph 1 of the Secretary-General’s
report in document S/1999/957, that
“civilians continued to be targeted in instances of
armed conflict, in flagrant violation of international
humanitarian and human rights law”.
It is truly regrettable that, despite quite a number of
basic instruments in international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law which provide for the essential
legal protection of civilians in armed conflict, the gross
17
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
violations of their rights around the world have not yet
ceased. The tragic facts alluded to in the Secretary-
General’s report on the situation of civilians in ongoing
conflicts vividly demonstrate this.
In this regard, the Secretary-General’s report has, in
our view, rightly placed the accent on the growing
perception within the international community of the urgent
need to turn to the effective implementation of international
humanitarian law. At the same time, I believe that
promotion of the rule of law in all aspects related to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict is the tenet which
helps us to deliberate on today’s subject in a more holistic
manner. Moreover, this understanding becomes more
topical in view of the fact that this year marks the
centenary of the Hague Convention and the fiftieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions. More than a year
has passed since the Statute of the International Criminal
Court was adopted at the Rome Conference.
In this context, Ukraine generally supports the
measures recommended by the Secretary-General to
strengthen legal protection for civilians in armed conflict,
and stands ready to consider their implementation.
It is also worth mentioning that this year has been
marked by yet one more truly important and remarkable
event: the entry into force on 15 January of the Convention
on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel.
We believe that this document started a new phase of
conducting United Nations peacekeeping operations under
conditions of increased protection for the personnel
involved, both military and civilian. Furthermore, the
Convention provides the Security Council and the General
Assembly with an additional mechanism to encourage all
Member States and the parties to a conflict, including non-
State actors, to fully respect the status of United Nations
and associated personnel, as well as the personnel of
international humanitarian organizations.
Ukraine is proud to be among those 25 Member States
which, last June at the second Summit on the Security and
Independence of the International Civil Service, were
presented with a memorable award in appreciation of their
ratification of that Convention — a ratification that enabled
its early entry into force.
The delegation of Ukraine considers that the
recommendation of the Secretary-General, paragraph 43 of
his report, to extend the scope of legal protection to all
United Nations and associated personnel, including locally
recruited staff, through the development of a protocol to the
1994 Convention, deserves further discussion. As the
initiator of the very idea and a sponsor of the initial draft
of the 1994 Convention, Ukraine looks forward to the
possible deliberations on this idea at the current session
of the General Assembly.
The delegation of Ukraine also took careful note of
the Secretary-General’s conclusion on the humanitarian
impact of sanctions in general and on the targeted
sanctions issue in particular. It seems to us that the
Security Council should examine practical ways of how
to avoid, or at least greatly minimize, a negative impact
on the civilian population. In addition, we feel that further
thinking must be done in the area of the impact of
sanctions on third States.
For this purpose, the Security Council should, in our
opinion, give careful consideration to the potential social,
economic and humanitarian impact of sanctions on the
population of the target State and those of third countries
prior to the imposition of sanctions. Following the
imposition of sanctions, the possible options should be
envisaged so that appropriate adjustments can be promptly
introduced to sanctions regimes in order to mitigate their
adverse collateral effects.
Undoubtedly, there is no single remedy to resolve
the problem of civilians in armed conflict. On the one
hand, the roots of conflicts are deep and complex. On the
other hand, there is a lack of effective mechanisms for the
implementation of existing major instruments of
international law.
At the same time, as has been stated by many
speakers during this open debate as well as during
previous ones on this topic, it is undeniable that the best
way to prevent the suffering of the civilian population in
armed conflict is to eliminate conflicts themselves or,
rather, to prevent their emergence. In that sense, the role
of the Security Council in this matter remains primary.
Recognizing the critical role played by many other
United Nations and non-United Nations bodies and
humanitarian agencies in protecting civilians in armed
conflict and in providing them with humanitarian
assistance and all necessary relief, we stand by our
position that the Security Council should be the guiding
and coordinating organ in these international efforts.
Therefore, we believe that the great number of
concrete ideas emanating from the detailed analysis of the
situations of ongoing conflict presented in the Secretary-
18
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
General’s report, as well as in many of the statements made
yesterday and this morning, should receive an appropriate
response by the Security Council.
My delegation is very satisfied that most of those
ideas are duly reflected in the draft resolution that is before
the Council today. In the same vein, we hope that the
provisions of the draft to be adopted will not remain only
on paper but will be fully respected and implemented, thus
effectively contributing to resolving the problem of civilians
in armed conflict.
In conclusion, I would like to assure the Council that
Ukraine is committed to seeking ways to further enhance
the protection of civilians in armed conflict and to fully
support the Security Council’s decisions to that end.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
important meeting. Our thanks go as well to the Secretary-
General for his timely report.
The issue discussed in the report is among the most
important ones facing the international community. It is
taking on increased significance because of the nature of
the problems to which it gives rise, and therefore it should
be given careful study.
Though we have been receiving reports on this issue
from the Secretary-General for more than seven months, we
are now being urged to discuss this question only a week
after the publication of this latest report. This subject
should have been dealt with in a timely manner, either by
the Security Council itself or by all Members of the
Organization or the international community.
We support the measures taken by the Security
Council in the framework of the Charter and within the
prerogatives of the Council under the Charter, and we
approve its readiness to act in situations where civilians are
targeted and where humanitarian assistance is wilfully
prevented from reaching its intended recipients. We
welcome the statements made by Council members,
including the permanent members, on 21 January, 12
February and 22 February 1999 on that subject — that is,
that the Council should act within its prerogatives and in
accordance with the Charter, intervening only if there is a
threat to international peace and security.
We also join the call to move away from double
standards in the field of human rights, and we believe that
the same attention should be devoted to those situations,
wherever they may arise, that involve a loss of civilian
life in armed conflict or which are a source of untold
suffering, without allowing the political considerations of
Council members, and especially of the permanent ones,
to prevail over the collective considerations of the
Council and of the United Nations as a whole.
The protection of human beings and their right to
live in peace and security should always be the sacred
objective of societies. This idea has evolved throughout
the development of civilization to this very day and has
been marked by the idea of the State as the protector of
its citizens. Today we are witnessing unprecedented
interest in the protection of the human individual, and we
strongly support this new idea. However, and in just as
balanced a manner, we believe that we should not focus
only on one criterion that has been studied in depth. We
believe that the right of society, within the framework of
a State, to protect itself and its future should also be
preserved.
Therefore, any international action to protect
civilians should not involve only the entity responsible for
the protection of citizens — the State, with all of its
incumbent duties — but we sincerely believe that the
international community must respond to any attempt to
harm civilians in situations of armed conflict, be it during
an international conflict or in an internal situation where
a State may have lost control of its territory. We also
support the idea that transgressors should be brought to
justice under international legislation and the relevant
machinery.
The report was submitted at the request of the
Security Council, which asked that the Secretary-General
put forward specific proposals in order to enable the
Security Council, within the scope of its responsibilities,
enhance the physical and legal protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
To this end, before I go into the thinking behind the
report of the Secretary-General and his proposals, let me
say that we believe that we first should deal with the
question of the mandate and responsibilities of the
Council, including the future of the Charter.
Article 24 of the Charter defines the role of the
Council. It is responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security. In carrying out this task,
19
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
it is duty-bound to respect the purposes and principles of
the Charter. The mandate of the Council is to decide
whether the continuation of a conflict might threaten
international peace and security and to submit a report in
this connection containing recommendations on ways to
resolve the conflict pursuant to Chapter VI.
The Council may also act pursuant to the Charter
within the framework of Chapter VII if it feels that peace
is threatened or violated or if it believes that incidents
constitute aggression pursuant to Article 39 of the Charter.
The legal framework for Council action is defined by
respect for the purposes and principles of the Charter, that
is, the non-use of force except in the implementation of
Council resolutions adopted pursuant to Chapter VII. This
means that a conflict must threaten or violate international
peace or be deemed aggressive. The Council should not
intervene in the internal affairs of States pursuant to
paragraph 7 of Article 2 of the Charter.
The Council’s role is thus to act in a practical manner
to ensure peace, whereas the role of the General Assembly
is legislative. The Assembly has its own purview: to
consider all issues pertaining to peace and the general
principles of cooperation to alleviate human suffering,
including the protection of civilians in armed conflict. In
brief, this distinction means that the Council is responsible
for the maintenance of international peace and security in
the strictest sense, whereas the Assembly is responsible for
the follow-up assessment of international situations and the
human right to live in peace and stability.
On this basis, we would hope that the Security
Council is able to address this subject within the framework
defined by the United Nations Charter, while respecting the
delicate checks and balances between the various United
Nations bodies, especially the General Assembly, as well as
United Nations and other agencies, governmental and non-
governmental, responsible for the protection of civilians.
I shall now address the logic behind the Secretary-
General’s report and recommendations. From the outset, the
Secretary-General has quite rightly stressed the major
problem involved in international law: the lack of
machinery to ensure its implementation. Though this is a
genuine problem, we must understand that it arises from the
facts that international law is based on States’ being on an
equal footing and that the United Nations is not a
supranational Organization. A careful consideration of the
report will reveal that this situation both raises the Security
Council above member States and places the prerogatives
of the United Nations, its various bodies and other
international organizations into the Council’s hands. This
anomaly needs to be closely analyzed, especially in the
light of the current international situation.
We do not approve of the report’s tendency to
favour practical considerations over respect for law and
the principles of the Charter. To be sure, compatibility
must exist between the implementation of international
humanitarian law and the provisions of the Charter. We
cannot, however, forget the importance of consulting
States and of reaching prior agreement with them,
because we cannot conceive that the need to implement
international humanitarian law or practical considerations
for humanitarian protection could compel us to flout the
Charter. That is inconceivable to us. If we seek to plug
the gaps in the edifice constructed by the Charter, this
should be done legally and through measures advocated
by the Charter. A great deal can be accomplished thereby
towards ensuring the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.
A great deal of the report is devoted to humanitarian
action. We find this preponderance reflected neither in
law nor in the common endeavours of States embodied in
the agreements and resolutions of international
organizations. This is in fact one of the most controversial
topics addressed here at the United Nations and beyond.
Attempts to implement intervention through the actions of
the Council do not bestow the legitimacy which the
Council lacks. If, as we see it, the logic of the report is to
give the Security Council a role beyond that currently
mandated by the Charter, we cannot but question such
logic. We shall therefore comment on certain ideas set
forth in the report.
First, the report disregards the principle of obtaining
the agreement of States to preventive measures that might
violate their sovereignty or reduce or affect their political
unity or territorial integrity. This flouts the sacrosanct
Charter principle of the sovereignty of States.
Secondly, some recommendations made in the report
would have the affect of allowing the Council, by taking
legal measures, to act counter to instruments of
international law and human rights, whereas States may
choose other means of legal and political recourse. The
recommendations may sometimes run counter to the
provisions of accords by which the parties agree to settle
their disputes.
20
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
Thirdly, we are cautious with regard to the request
made of the Council in the report to play a monitoring role
in the implementation of international agreements, whereby
the Council would compel States to sign and ratify
agreements, withdrawing their reservations, and States
would advise the Council on steps which they may have
taken in this regard. This role is well beyond the Council’s
prerogatives and competence.
There are many other points which we might raise in
this framework. However, I would like to say in conclusion
that it is a good, even desirable, idea for this item to be
included on the agenda of the General Assembly and of the
Economic and Social Council for further study and more
detailed examination as an extension of this welcome
initiative taken by the Security Council. The responsibilities
and prerogatives of the Council are based on the Charter.
Implementing the ambitious plan of the Secretary-General,
as we would wish, requires coordination between the
United Nations and organizations which provide
humanitarian protection, something which is currently
beyond the capacity of the United Nations or the Security
Council.
The President: Before giving the floor to the next
speaker, I would like to inform the Council that it will not
be possible to wind up our meeting without breaking for
lunch. It is, however, my intention to keep the lunch break
to what I would like to describe as a civilized minimum
and, accordingly, I intend to suspend our meeting from
about 1.15 p.m. to 2:30 p.m.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Slovakia. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Tomka (Slovakia): I wish to express the
appreciation of my delegation at the convening of this
second open Security Council debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. The fact that the Council is
about to adopt a draft resolution on this occasion attests to
the importance of the topic. Slovakia has aligned itself with
the statement of the representative of Finland delivered on
behalf of the European Union. Nevertheless, allow me to
make some additional comments.
Only three weeks ago, the Security Council held an
open debate on children and armed conflict, an issue of
equal importance and actually of the same nature. The
delegation of Slovakia participated in that debate,
underlining the necessity of a comprehensive approach to
an issue which has humanitarian, as well as ethical,
political, legal, military and socio-economic aspects.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(document S/1999/957) submitted to the Security Council
in response to its presidential statement (document
S/PRST/1999/6) of 12 February 1999. My delegation
appreciates the comprehensive and integrated way in
which the Secretariat has been dealing with the issue, as
well as the 40 recommendations by the Secretary-General
on how the Security Council could act to improve both
the physical and the legal protection of civilians in
situations of armed conflict. We are confident that these
recommendations deserve the full attention of the Security
Council in its further deliberations.
The plight of civilians in armed conflict is of great
concern to the international community. While in the
Second World War civilians accounted for 48 per cent of
the casualties, today up to 90 per cent of conflict
casualties around the world are civilians, and increasingly
large numbers of these are children and women. Those
figures are shocking, and we simply cannot ignore them.
As I pointed out in my statement on 25 August, the
situation is much more complicated due to a profound
shift in the pattern of today’s conflicts. Many of them
have taken the form of intra-State factional violence, civil
strife and ethnic clashes, often marked by the collapse of
State institutions and a breakdown of law and order. Most
of today’s conflicts are fought not only by regular armies
but also by irregular armed groups, militias, foreign
mercenaries, criminals and other disparate groups that
have little knowledge of or respect for the rules of
international law. The deliberate obstruction of
humanitarian assistance to civilians and refugees by the
combatants, using civilians as living shields and
employing organized violence against humanitarian and
peacekeeping personnel is, in many cases, a major
element of their military strategy. According to estimates,
civilians are suffering from the effects of conflict and its
aftermath in approximately 50 countries around the world.
In recent years, United Nations staff and other
humanitarian workers have lost their lives or have been
abducted in 19 countries.
The Security Council has primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security. Most
important — and this is to be welcomed — it has
recognized in its resolutions adopted in recent years that
repression of the civilian population, ethnic cleansing,
genocide, large-scale forced displacement and relocation
21
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
of civilians and other flagrant violations of international
humanitarian law constitute a threat to international peace
and security.
A major problem has been the failure of States to
bring to justice those who violate international humanitarian
law and human rights. There are a number of relevant
international treaties in this respect, such as the Fourth
Geneva Convention and the two Protocols Additional, the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime
of Genocide and the Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel, just to mention a few.
The setting up of ad hoc Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and for Rwanda, and last year’s decision to
establish a permanent International Criminal Court have
been other major steps in combating the culture of
impunity.
However, the mere existence of these legal instruments
without an effective enforcement mechanism does not
automatically ensure their implementation. Furthermore, not
all States have ratified or acceded to the Protocols
Additional to the Geneva Conventions or to basic
international human rights instruments and conventions
concerning refugees. Only four States have ratified the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court so far.
Slovakia is a party to all major instruments of
international humanitarian law, human rights law and
refugee law. We were among the first to ratify the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel, and we signed the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court last year; we are determined to
complete the ratification process next year. We support the
work of the working group of the Commission on Human
Rights on a draft protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, regarding the involvement of children in
armed conflict, as well as the extension of the scope of the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel to all categories of United Nations and associated
personnel, including locally recruited staff.
In order to push forward a culture of compliance, the
Security Council should urge Member States to ratify
relevant international treaties, as well as to incorporate them
into national law and, in particular, to ensure their full
implementation. There should also be a concerted effort to
coerce non-State actors into compliance with international
law, mainly through the principle of individual criminal
responsibility.
The Security Council should more actively
concentrate on preventing conflicts at an early stage. An
early warning system should be further enhanced, and
preventive diplomacy should play a more active role in
potential conflict situations. The violation of human rights
has almost always been the prelude to a conflict which
eventually brings about disastrous humanitarian
consequences. We fully concur with the Secretary-General
that the Security Council should make use of human
rights information and analysis originating from experts
and mechanisms of the Commission on Human Rights as
an indicator for potential preventive action by the United
Nations.
As recent experience has shown, the effort of
combatants to push away the international presence,
including humanitarian personnel, from the area of
conflict is another ominous sign of impending
humanitarian catastrophe. The reason is simple: to avoid
or eliminate any potential witnesses of intended or
committed atrocities or acts of genocide. Within the
context of early warning, the Security Council should be
able to react promptly and ensure a preventive monitoring
presence in the area or, if necessary, to authorize the
deployment of a preventive peacekeeping force.
Situations of total war have exposed the most
vulnerable sectors of civilian populations, women and
children, to horrendous violence. The disintegration of
families and the breakdown of the social structure during
times of armed conflict leave women and girls especially
vulnerable to gender-based violence and sexual
exploitation. Women also constitute the majority of
refugees and internally displaced persons. Since contact
between United Nations peacekeeping personnel and local
populations during peacekeeping operations has been
increasingly close and direct, it is important that
participants in peacekeeping operations be given specific
training prior to deployment that addresses local cultural
sensitivities, as well as gender-sensitivity issues. The
Secretariat and Member States should be further
encouraged to provide United Nations peacekeeping
missions with more women personnel, including women
military and civilian police officers, who could play a
very useful role in tackling gender-sensitivity aspects of
humanitarian emergencies.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Rwanda. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
22
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
Mr. Mutaboba (Rwanda): May I, first of all, join
other speakers in congratulating you, Mr. President, for
leading this Council through its fruitful deliberations. I
would also like to extend my congratulations to your
predecessor, the representative of Namibia.
Thank you for giving us the floor to address the
Council for a second time this year on a topic of great
importance to us. As much as we were worried about child
soldiers or children in armed conflicts at the time of the last
open debate, civilians as a whole should be given even
greater attention in armed conflicts so as to minimize
social, physical and psychological casualties.
Rwanda is yet another example of a place where
innocent civilians were victims of armed conflict in
different forms from the early 1960s until very recently.
Civilians were targeted by politicians and their soldiers or
militias on the basis of who they were and where they were
born. They were used by Government forces and authorities
as human shields during the liberation war as far back as
1990 and until 1994.
When our troops stopped the genocide in July 1994,
the same evil forces crossed into the former Zaire and into
Tanzania. Members will remember how heavily armed they
were and remain. My delegation would like to remind the
world that efforts to reconcile the interdependent but often
quarrelsome imperatives of assistance and protection to
refugees and displaced people offer a vivid example of the
need to retain neutrality, apply principles, respect local
views, and devise new policy formulas to deal with
unprecedented challenges.
The classic contemporary example of this dilemma
was observed in the Rwandan refugee camps in what was
then eastern Zaire and is now the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
faced the historic problem of separating combatants from
bona fide refugees. The Security Council and the then
Mobutu Government, which was host country to the
Rwandan refugees and militias, denied the UNHCR that
option. As a result, the key architects of the 1994 Rwandan
genocide kept control of the bulk of the Rwandan refugees
and were relied upon by humanitarian agencies for the
distribution of humanitarian assistance to the civilians who
were really in need. The ever-free militia resorted openly to
intimidation and force to stop refugees willing to return
home. They and former Rwandese Government forces
possessed arms, and this marked the beginning of many
cross-border attacks by militia members who were
unlawfully enjoying refugee status and humanitarian
assistance.
Civilians were threatened, attacked and killed for
expressing the wish to return to Rwanda. The militia
carried out summary executions and other acts of physical
violence in broad daylight. Most of the administrative
leaders of the former Rwandan genocidal regime had fled
with their administrative apparatus to Zaire and Tanzania,
where they could easily control the camps. Tanzanian
authorities, with our many thanks, did their best to disarm
those who were armed, but the authorities of the former
Zaire and the humanitarian bodies — including,
unfortunately, United Nations bodies — failed to do so,
thus leaving innocent civilians to their own fate. This has
to be avoided in the future.
However, the Rwandan Government at that time
warned on many occasions that unless the broader
international community was able to regain political and
military control over the camps, it would be helping the
Rwandan genocidal forces to come and finish the job they
had started in 1994. In the following two years, United
Nations agencies and international non-governmental
organizations continued to feed and support the so-called
refugee camps that were the military bases from which
those who had perpetrated genocide pursued a murderous
terrorist campaign, targeting survivors of the 1994
genocide and those in the local population who refused to
collaborate with them. The attackers were armed and the
victims were civilians.
Faced with no alternatives and noticing the lack of
political will by the international community to dismantle
the camps that had, against the Council’s resolutions,
become the biggest depots of sophisticated weapons
supplied by some of those who had failed to stop the
genocide and who chose to close one eye and watch with
the other, the Rwandan people had once again been left
to their own fate. However, this time such complicity and
idleness could not be tolerated and left to be nurtured.
The Rwandan Government, its army and its people
collectively refused to be victimized by another genocide
and decided to do the job themselves. We rescued our
people, civilians and soldiers alike, from the grip of the
architects of the 1994 genocide, some of whom are still
active in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is the
Council’s responsibility to deal with those criminals.
As a result, in late December 1996, it took less than
one week for Rwanda to cease being depicted by the
world community as a refugee-producing factory. Over
23
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
800,000 Rwandans had been successfully repatriated after
the Rwandese Patriotic Army dismantled the Rwandan
refugee camps. Had the same cameras and humanitarian
assistance facilities followed the returnees home, the world
would not feel ashamed of truly learning a lesson from the
Rwanda experience. This lesson does not seem to have
been learned by many, unfortunately, and we deplore that.
Nevertheless, it is never too late.
The Rwandan experience has proven that with political
will and commitment, the task of separating combatants
from bona fide refugees can be done — even by the so-
called weakest cockroaches on Earth. The major lesson to
be learned is that this is even more feasible when serious
screening to distinguish between those who really merit
refugee status and those who do not is done early enough.
We cannot allow innocent civilians to be left to themselves
due to our lack of consistent policies and timid, unclear
positions.
Before I conclude, my delegation wishes to strongly
welcome the Secretary General’s report and this Council’s
presidential statement of 12 February this year. We hope
the world can be offered better chances of enjoying life
through appropriate and timely decisions.
The refugee crisis in the Great Lakes region and the
ongoing crisis in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
stemmed from bad leadership, but also from lack of action
to address the culture of impunity. I would like to remind
the Council yet again of the existence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo of active, armed renegade forces,
though the Lusaka ceasefire agreement urged their
dismantling, disarming, repatriation and rehabilitation.
Unless this Council takes appropriate action to disarm these
genocidal forces, there is a risk that the fragile peace will
be jeopardized by these unpunished forces, at the expense
of civilians who it is our duty to protect. If this cycle of
impunity is tackled by all of us, and if it is broken by
addressing the real root causes of the rampant problems in
the region, then we may see a better future for civilians and
soldiers alike. But we have to work hard to make sure that
no one and nothing holds us back.
The President: I thank the representative of Rwanda
for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of India. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Sharma (India): The report of the Secretary-
General which forms the basis of our discussions today is
so far-reaching in its implications that I think most of us
would have welcomed the chance to study it in greater
depth than we have been able to so far. Nevertheless, we
thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to speak to the
Council again on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.
I listened with great attention yesterday to the
Secretary-General’s eloquent presentation of his report
and to the very moving statement made by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. We share
completely their concern for the plight of civilians in
armed conflict and admire their passionate advocacy. The
problem is an extremely complex one. It is natural and
understandable to be moved by emotion. Indeed, it is this
that leads to a sense of deep concern and engagement.
But the solutions we propose must be pragmatic and
dispassionate; above all, measures to counter illegalities
must themselves enjoy complete legality.
When I spoke to the Council in February, I spelled
out some of the complexities involved, because some of
the experts in the field who spoke to the Council before
me had conveyed a general impression that this was both
a relatively simple matter and a recent problem which
could be addressed by vigorous action from the Council.
Reading the first few sections of the Secretary-General’s
report, I note that it acknowledges the validity of several
of the points that we and others had made.
However, the recommendations that the report goes
on to make are far-reaching but require much deeper
consideration. Though it frequently deplores the fact that
legal instruments have been ignored by those who have
accepted their provisions, the report seems to have
followed suit. Like the bishop who recently confessed that
he could not recall more than 5 of the 10 commandments
at any one point of time, the report seems to be selective
about the contents of the Charter, nowhere more so than
in the provisions that relate to the Security Council.
To refresh our memory, Article 24 sets out the
functions and powers of the Security Council, and Article
24, paragraph 2, notes that the specific powers granted to
it are laid down in Chapters VI to VIII and Chapter XII.
In each chapter, the Council’s powers are narrowly
defined by the Charter. Where it is given a role in an area
not within its specified competence, as in Chapter XII, the
Charter specifies the limits of the Council’s authority. For
instance, Article 83, paragraph 3, spells out that the
24
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
Security Council should work through the Trusteeship
Council
“to perform those functions of the United Nations
under the trusteeship system relating to political,
economic, social and educational matters in the
strategic areas”.
In other words, apart from the strategic and military aspects
of security, the Council has no direct role in any of the
other areas listed in Article 83, paragraph 3. This is a
principle that applies generally to the Security Council’s
place in the United Nations system. This being the case, we
find it odd that the bulk of the recommendations in this
report invite the Security Council to take actions in areas
not within its competence.
Recommendation 1 would have the Security Council
urge Member States to ratify major instruments of
international humanitarian law, human rights treaties and
refugee law and, even further, to withdraw reservations they
might have entered. First, this clubbing of three different
sets of law creates a continuing confusion. The report has
tended to forget the distinction between human rights and
the provisions of humanitarian law, and the very different
contexts in which they are applied. Secondly, if it is
proposed that the Council do this, acting under Chapter VII,
to make its decisions binding on Member States, that would
make nonsense of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties, which emphasizes the sovereign right of nations
to decide which international instruments they will accept
and to what extent they will be bound by them. If that is
not the intention, then the Council’s call is both
meaningless and redundant.
Recommendation 2 attempts to draw the Council’s
attention to the non-state actors who, as we said in
February, commit the most violations of humanitarian law,
are party to no treaties and have no intention of abiding by
international law. But this recommendation leaves
unaddressed the further question we had posed: how does
the Council propose to impose its will on non-state actors?
Will representatives of the Council fly out to Angola, for
instance, to distribute copies of this report, or of any
decision the Security Council may take on it, to UNITA
cadres, threatening a further debate here if they do not
comply?
These fundamental objections apply equally to
recommendations 3 to 6. In particular, recommendation 3
stretches the Security Council’s competence under Chapter
VII well beyond anything authorized by the Charter. The ad
hoc tribunals, set up by the Council to uphold law, are
themselves of dubious legitimacy, since the Charter does
not give the Council this right or any role in the
administration of justice. Nevertheless, these tribunals
exist. However, if, for instance, a fugitive from one
country were to take refuge in another, it could hardly be
argued that, if the authorities declined to surrender the
fugitive to an ad hoc tribunal, a threat to peace had taken
place or that there had been a breach of peace, or that the
authorities in the one country had carried out an act of
aggression against the other. We are concerned, therefore,
that the report is recommending that the Council use
enforcement measures to induce compliance with the
orders and requests of the tribunals.
On recommendation 7, the Guiding Principles on
Internal Displacement have been presented to the
Commission on Human Rights, but have no further
intergovernmental approval. The first point, therefore, is
that these principles do not as yet enjoy wide international
acceptability, even though we may not cavil at them. This
being so, simply as a matter of formal procedure, it is
improper to encourage the Security Council to encourage
States to follow these principles, particularly because
internal displacements are problems that are the
responsibility of the States concerned, and matters
primarily within their sovereign jurisdiction.
On recommendation 8, there is no universal
acceptance as yet that the minimum age of recruitment to
the armed forces of States should be 18. Since, in any
case, the maintenance of international peace and security
does not depend on the age at which young men and
women can be drafted into armed forces, there is no role
for the Council here. Nor indeed does the Council have
either the competence or the right to ask Member States
to expedite their negotiations on an optional protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child. This is
completely outside the Council’s mandate, and a matter
exclusively for the States parties to decide.
We can sympathize with the intent of
recommendation 9 but, again, it has not been thought
through. How, for instance, is anyone to determine
whether combatants recruited by non-State actors are
below the age of 18? Insurgents and terrorists have not
been known in the past to insist on birth certificates being
produced before they recruit to their ranks. If the
language here implies that the Council would
automatically act under Chapter VII, very careful thought
needs to be given to the implications of this
recommendation. The imposition of sanctions under
25
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
Article 41 follows on the determination by the Council
under Article 39 that there is a threat to the peace or breach
of the peace, or that an act of aggression has taken place.
It would be extremely difficult to argue that the use in
armed conflict of children below the age of 18, however
undesirable, and however unsavoury the non-State actors
who employ them, can fall within the ambit of Article 39.
On recommendation 10, we make the same point as on
earlier recommendations: it is not within the remit of the
Council to ask Member States to ratify an international
instrument. That is the function of the General Assembly.
On recommendation 11, apart from the general
objection that it exceeds the scope of the Council’s powers,
there is a further consideration that it is not the Council’s
business to concern itself with the protection of all United
Nations and associated personnel. That is a matter that
comes squarely within the remit of the General Assembly;
an invitation from the Security Council is redundant.
Recommendation 12 is completely vague. What is
meant by “deployment in certain cases”? Can certain
symptoms be identified for which preventive peacekeeping
is the cure? If so, these should have been spelt out. We
suspect there are none, and therefore the Council will
continue to take decisions in an ad hoc manner on
situations as they arise. Almost by definition, there can be
no general prescription.
Recommendation 13 implies in part that the Council
has been remiss in doing what it is expected to do under
Chapter VI, and also makes a recommendation that has
little content. What are the “appropriate procedures” that
the Council is expected to recommend? Unless Member
States, including in the Security Council, have a clear idea
of what these should be, they can hardly make an informed
decision on whether these would be appropriate.
On recommendation 14, Security Council working
groups are unlikely either to improve the Council’s
understanding of issues or, more importantly, to prevent the
outbreak of violence. For instance, even if such a working
group had been in existence before the massacres took
place in Rwanda, it would have made no material
difference, as the international community did nothing not
because it had not studied the problem in depth, but
because the Security Council lacked the political will to act.
Also, in several volatile situations, permanent members
could have a direct interest or be implicated; by definition,
a Council working group will get nowhere on them. The
only issues on which a working group might be able to
have a broad, academic and dispassionate debate would
be those where the interests of permanent members were
not engaged. The utility of having working groups is
therefore very limited.
Recommendation 15 will damage the integrity of an
extremely important component of the human rights
machinery in the United Nations system. The treaty body
experts and the mechanisms of the Commission on
Human Rights are independent institutions; they are also
supposed to be completely apolitical. The moment their
recommendations start to be used by a body as politicized
as the Security Council, the chances are that these
mechanisms will fall into disrepute, Member States will
be less willing to cooperate with them and, without
adding an iota to the efficiency of the Council, the
functioning of the human rights system will be severely
impaired.
Recommendation 16 makes a perfectly valid point
about the control or closing down of media assets that
foment hate. However, it is completely silent on the
vastly more powerful role that sections of the
international media play in promoting tendentious points
of view, or simply through a concentration on the
dramatic, forcing precipitate, and sometimes ill-judged,
international action. The demonization of target groups by
sections of the international media is a case in point. A
further point, since Council action is being urged, is what
is meant by “appropriate measures”? Does this include,
for instance, the use of military action?
Recommendation 18 would have the Council
demand access, which is not automatic under international
law. As we reminded the Council in February, there is no
automatic right of access under the Geneva Conventions.
Also, in August, the Subcommission on the Promotion
and Protection of Human Rights adopted a resolution
emphasizing that the so-called duty and right of
humanitarian intervention is juridically totally unfounded
under current international law. The second half of this
recommendation, again threatening the use of sanctions,
violates Charter provisions for the same reasons as
recommendation 9.
Recommendation 19 would mean that the right of
humanitarian access — which itself, as I have just said,
is not one sanctioned by international law — would
extend not just to a particular State, but also to
neighbouring States through which assistance would be
delivered. Therefore, the sovereignty of a multiplicity of
States would be automatically diluted to establish a right
26
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
of humanitarian intervention which does not exist in
international law. The even more extraordinary aspect of
this recommendation is that the Security Council is asked
to urge the States neighbouring a particular country to bring
to the Council’s notice, as a matter affecting peace and
security, any issue that might threaten the right of civilians
to assistance. This means that even if there is no threat to
peace and security, such a threat could be manufactured in
the complaint, or that the complaint in itself would be
considered proof that such a threat exists. This would
automatically sow dissension between neighbours, and
undermine regional peace. As a matter of procedure, it
would call into question the sovereign right of nation-States
to make decisions on matters which they consider to be a
threat to peace and security in their region, by laying down
parameters which are arbitrary and ill-defined.
On sanctions, the subject of recommendations 22 to
25, our views have been stated before. We believe that
sanctions are by definition a blunt instrument; whether they
are used indiscriminately, or on particularly painful parts of
the anatomy, the effect is largely the same. Nevertheless,
we entirely support the need for the Council to be much
more selective and cautious in the use of sanctions, for the
Council to take a close look at the effects that sanctions
have had on the civilian populations of the countries where
these have been in effect for some time, and to have it put
in place automatic mechanisms for relief to third countries
affected by sanctions.
On recommendations 28 and 29, there should be an
awareness by now that the Council mandates peacekeeping
operations, but does not have the responsibility under the
Charter to strengthen the Organization’s capacity to do
anything. That is squarely a matter for the General
Assembly, and these requirements of the Secretariat should
be put to the General Assembly through the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
Recommendations 31 and 32 need further
consideration. It is true that there have been instances
where certain national contingents have not behaved well as
part of United Nations peacekeeping operations. However,
it is another matter to make a general recommendation that
an ombudsman or an ad hoc fact-finding mission should
necessarily be put in place for all peacekeeping operations.
Apart from anything else, when every peacekeeping
operation is strapped for cash, it would be difficult, on
financial grounds alone, to justify these extra institutions.
In recommendation 34, the Council is urged to
confirm that regional organizations have the capacity to
operate according to “international norms and standards”.
What are these norms and standards? And how would the
Council set about confirming this, unless deficiencies are
established in practice, or unless the Council does an
elaborate vetting of an organization’s capabilities, for
which it has neither the expertise nor the mandate?
Instead, what we would like to see affirmed is the
principle that the role of regional organizations must
strictly conform to Article 53 of the Charter.
Recommendation 35 is again far too sweeping. There
is no indication here that the consent of a Member State
is required before international military observers can be
deployed. The alternative would be the implication that,
wherever internally displaced persons or refugees are to
be found, the Council would automatically act under
Chapter VII and order the deployment of international
military observers, even over the objections of a Member
State. Since observers would need protection, an
international military presence must necessarily be set up
at the same time. The implications of this do not have to
be spelt out.
The import of recommendation 36 is difficult to
understand. How is it the Council’s business to mobilize
international support for national security forces? Apart
from anything else, what, in practical terms, does the
Secretariat wish the Council to do?
The same question arises from recommendation 37.
The location or relocation of camps is primarily the
business of the country concerned, and among
international organizations, that of the High Commissioner
for Refugees. How, in practical terms, is the Security
Council to mobilize international support for the
relocation of camps?
Before I end, I will draw attention to only two of
several lacunae in the analysis of the problem in the
report. The basic point has not been made that civilians
are at threat in armed conflict, and have been throughout
this century, because of the concepts of total war
introduced during the First and Second World Wars, and
which continue to form part of the strategic doctrines of
the most powerful military States. Unless that basic
problem is addressed, civilians will continue to be at
threat in armed conflict. We had also made the point in
our earlier intervention, and I will simply recall it here
without belabouring it, that, as long as the principal
nuclear-weapon States continue to predicate their security
on the use of nuclear weapons, even against non-nuclear
threats, the safety of civilians cannot be secure.
27
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
I have spoken at length, but, apart from the
recommendations, not on the other sections of the report.
We have given our responses to each recommendation and
not merely generalized comments, for the sake of clarity,
believing this to be the more practical approach and not in
a spirit of critique. We respect and share the sense of
concern and the motivation to alleviate suffering and
wrong which motivates the report. The subject of the
report is indeed a very grave challenge before the world
community. I have concentrated on the recommendations
because these are the elements on which the Council is
invited to act. These require much deeper thought and
consideration, including in the General Assembly and
other forums, and we would strongly urge the Council to
regard them as a contribution to further reflection, rather
than as a basis for action.
The President: There are a number of speakers
remaining on my list. However, in accordance with my
earlier announcement, I now intend, with the concurrence
of the members of the Council, to suspend the meeting
until 2.30 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.25 p.m.
28
United Nations S/PV.4046 (Resumption 2)
99-85811 (E) This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fifty-fourth Year
4046th Meeting
Friday, 17 September 1999, 2.30 p.m.
New York
President: Mr. van Walsum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Netherlands)
Members: Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Martínez Ríos
Bahrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Buallay
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fonseca
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fowler
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Chen Xu
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dejammet
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Essonghé
Gambia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Jagne
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Hasmy
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Andjaba
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Türk
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Sir Jeremy Greenstock
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Holbrooke
Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General to the Security Council on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/1999/957)
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
The meeting resumed at 2.45 p.m.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of Botswana. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): Let me thank you, Sir, for
organizing this important debate; in the same breath, I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his insightful
report (S/1999/957) on this very important issue.
The question of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict is not new. From traditional society to our modern
world with its elaborate written laws, it has always been
understood that persons who are not involved in combat
during an armed conflict should not be subject to attack.
The Geneva Conventions of 1949 and other international
instruments of humanitarian and human rights law prohibit
the targeting or endangering of civilians during times of
hostilities.
However, as we are all aware, civilians, particularly
children and women, have become habitual targets of war
at a time when we should be considering ourselves more
civilized than our ancestors. Children are habitually
abducted and turned into killers, couriers and the sexual
slaves of armed thugs. Women are raped in order to shame
the enemy or destroy its morale. Whole groups of civilians,
by virtue of their ethnicity or religion, are with wanton
regularity decimated, “cleansed” and threatened with
extinction. In short, today’s wars, particularly those that go
by the misnomer of civil wars, are nothing more than
glorified acts of terrorism in which the laws of war are
totally ignored.
All of these atrocities are being perpetrated while we
have in place institutions and instruments created to avert
them and punish the perpetrators. We therefore need to ask
ourselves how we can endeavour to become more effective
at utilizing these institutions and instruments. It was with
this in mind that we found the report of the Secretary-
General of paramount importance and relevance. While all
its contents and recommendations may not curry favour
with everybody in this Organization, we dare say that we
find most of them to be quite appealing. They reinforce
what we have always thought should be done in situations
of armed conflict and in endeavours to prevent the eruption
of conflict.
Our central vocation as the United Nations is to
discourage recourse to the use of force, to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. We fully share the
Secretary-General’s view on nipping potential conflict
situations in the bud, so to speak. The United Nations
should utilize this capacity early, when signs of a
potentially explosive situation are there. The experiences
of Rwanda, and recently of East Timor, should teach us
a lesson. Timely use of the Secretary-General’s good
offices and cooperation with regional organizations in
preventive diplomacy should be exploited to the full.
There can be no doubt that, whenever the situation
so demands, no effort should be spared to attempt some
preventive deployment of peacekeepers, negotiators or
mediators. We fully subscribe to the Secretary-General’s
observation that this form of deployment had an
immeasurable impact in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia. Where the situation has gone beyond
preventive action, the Security Council should at least
develop the habit of instantly informing the parties to a
conflict about their obligations towards civilians and the
consequences of violating international humanitarian and
human rights law. It should be made clear that children in
particular should not be used as soldiers or otherwise
targeted. The Security Council should not just threaten,
but should make good on its threat. There should be no
hesitation over imposing an arms embargo or other
targeted sanctions where evidence exists that a party or
parties to an armed conflict are deliberately targeting
civilians.
Humanitarian assistance to civilians is essential
during an armed conflict. Parties to a conflict should
therefore allow unimpeded access and provide security
guarantees to humanitarian agencies and their personnel
in the discharge of their duties. Anyone who fails to do
so, in our view, should be held to account under
international humanitarian law. It is becoming quite clear
that denial of access to humanitarian assistance by a party
or parties to an armed conflict has become a valuable
weapon of war.
It is indeed disturbing that even though the majority
of Member States of the United Nations are party to the
international instruments on humanitarian and human
rights law, such instruments continue to be violated with
impunity. My delegation finds merit in the
recommendation by the Secretary-General that where war
crimes and crimes against humanity have been committed,
the Security Council should act without fear or favour.
The Council should not only put in place a mechanism
for ensuring that the suspects are apprehended and
punished, but must also do all in its power to enforce the
warrants of arrest.
2
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
My delegation also supports the recommendation that
as Member States of the United Nations, we should strive
for the early ratification of the Statute of the International
Criminal Court. If this can be achieved sooner rather than
later, it will go a long way in enabling us to enforce respect
for humanitarian and human rights law.
We are also of the view that the minimum age for
recruitment and participation in hostilities should be raised
to 18. This is quite consistent with our own policy and
practice as a country. Furthermore, we are supportive of the
call for accelerating the process of negotiating an optional
protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on
children in armed conflict.
In conclusion, we fully agree that peacekeeping and
peace-making missions should be structured in such a way
that the special protection of assistance requirements for
children and women and the elderly will always be
paramount.
The President: The next speaker is the representative
of Israel. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and
to make his statement.
Mr. Gold (Israel): I would like to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of your important post. Let me also
commend your predecessor on the outstanding manner in
which he conducted his duties previously.
The State of Israel has a deep and historical interest in
the growth, integrity and respect of international
humanitarian law in general and the Geneva Conventions,
in particular. As a nation that lost one third of its
population in the nazi occupation of Europe in the most
heinous case of genocide in human history, Israel’s own
birthright in engraved with a particular responsibility to
prevent this crime from occurring again against the Jewish
people, and a universalist commitment to combat genocide,
crimes against humanities and war crimes wherever they
may occur.
In this context, Israel is concerned with what is
transpiring today regarding those international instruments
designed to protect civilians in armed conflict, including the
Geneva Conventions. The world community is facing at
least 20 ongoing armed conflicts across the globe that have
led to acute starvation, ethnic cleaning and the physical
eradication of entire communities. A basic paradox
confronts the international community in this regard, for
while the Geneva Conventions in particular have received
nearly universal support by the accession of 188 countries,
it remains a challenge to ensure that the provisions
regarding civilians in armed conflict are upheld on the
ground and accorded the respect they deserve. That
respect can be widened and advanced if our discourse on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict reflects
historical truths and not politicized distortions.
For the facts in the case of Israel and the West Bank
are that Israeli forces entered these territories during the
1967 Six Day War only after neighbouring States massed
their armies along its borders and Israeli cities came
under fire from artillery positions in Samaria and in the
environs of Jerusalem. History is important, for we are
finding the international community is being forced to
deal almost exclusively with the results of a war of self-
defence from 30 years ago, while ignoring many times
wars of clear-cut aggression. The best proof of this trend
was the decision to convene the High Contracting Parties
to the Fourth Geneva Convention with respect to the West
Bank and Gaza and not with respect to any single conflict
since 1949. Regardless of these circumstances, Israel has
been ready to negotiate a peaceful settlement of the Arab-
Israel conflict through Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), which were passed in this
Chamber in 1967 and 1973, respectively.
In signing the Oslo accords in September 1993,
Israel demonstrated that while it is determined to achieve
secure and recognized borders as a result of final status
talks, it is also determined not to rule over another
people. Today, in fact, more than 97 per cent of the
Palestinians in the West Bank are not under Israeli
occupation, but rather under the administration of the
Palestinian Authority. The Oslo accords are a testament
to the desire of the people of Israel to take into account
the needs of civilians in armed conflict even before that
conflict is fully resolved. Now it is the hope of Israel to
complete the permanent status negotiations with respect
to these territories. Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) are the only agreed basis for
resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
This process has not been without risks for, while
implementing its agreements with the PLO, Israeli
civilians have been directly targeted by terrorist
organizations that have operated out of Palestinian-
controlled areas. It is our hope and expectation that, with
the parties re-engaged in the peace process after the
signing of the Sharm El Sheikh Accord, the Palestinian
Authority will finally dismantle the operational
infrastructure of these terrorist organizations and prevent
attacks against Israeli civilians.
3
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
In war civilians are in some cases the mistaken
casualties because of their proximity to a theatre of
operations. In terrorist attacks civilians are the intended
target. In war military planners seek to degrade the military
capacity of their adversary by striking other military
formations, airfields or command and control systems. In
terrorist attacks marketplaces, city bus lines or apartment
buildings are deliberately targeted. The most direct means
for protecting civilians in armed conflict is by combatting
the entire phenomenon of terrorism and rejecting any
political excuses intended to provide it with support.
The concern of the international community with the
protection of civilians in armed conflict should be
supported. The protection of civilians goes to the heart of
the common values that underpin the United Nations as a
whole. Through determined action, and fair as well as
balanced implementation of international conventions and
instruments, the Member States of the United Nations can
assure that the protection of civilians in the twenty-first
century can be fundamentally different than the
unprecedented atrocities we faced in this century that is
about to come to a close.
The President: I thank the representative of Israel for
the kind words he addressed to me and my predecessor.
The next speaker is the representative of Pakistan. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Haque (Pakistan): I would like to begin by
expressing our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. I am confident that today’s debate will
create greater awareness among Member States of the
United Nations about the gravity and complexity of the
problem and the need to address it on a priority basis.
It is matter of grave concern for Pakistan and for the
international community as a whole that violence against
civilians in situations of armed conflict has reached
dangerous proportions. In most cases this violence is
directed against women, children and other vulnerable
groups, including internally displaced persons. The statistics
contained in the report of the Secretary-General are indeed
staggering. The fact that civilian casualties account for
almost 80 per cent of the total number of victims of armed
conflict and that more than one million people die each
year in various conflict areas around the world are
extremely disturbing. It is also a painful reality that there
are more than 30 million refugees in the world. Pakistan
itself has carried the burden of millions of Afghan
refugees on its soil for more than two decades and is only
too keenly aware of the plight of people who are forced
to leave their countries. We therefore condemn
unequivocally the targeting of civilians in armed conflicts.
Unfortunately, civilians are subjected to violence
despite the existence of a substantial body of international
law that has evolved over the years to protect civilians,
refugees and humanitarian personnel. It is therefore our
collective responsibility to ensure effective adherence to
these international legal instruments.
Violence against civilians is an unfortunate and
unacceptable by-product of wars and armed conflicts.
While recognizing the urgent need to address this issue,
my delegation is of the view that it is necessary for the
Security Council to address the causes of conflict,
including the denial of the right to self-determination of
people who are under foreign occupation and suffering
oppression and massive violations of their human rights.
The Council must work to redress these problems so that
conflicts and the grievous consequences that flow from
them may disappear.
The Secretary-General has proposed a set of specific
recommendations to pave the way for ensuring protection
for civilians in armed conflict. These include, to name
only a few, proposals for the deployment of preventive
peacekeeping operations; the need to establish working
groups of the Security Council to address specific volatile
situations; the establishment of a permanent technical
review mechanism of the United Nations; and the
imposition of verifiable arms embargoes to limit the
ability of warring parties to wage war against one another
and against civilians. These and the other
recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-
General will be studied carefully by my Government. I
would merely like to note here that at times one needs to
stretch one’s imagination considerably to find the tenuous
linkage between some of the recommendations and the
mandate of the Security Council.
The Secretary-General has encouraged the Council
to take decisive action to address this critical issue and to
promote a climate of compliance. In this context I would
like to recall that during the last debate on this subject in
the Security Council, in February 1999, a large number of
countries pointed out that the report of the Secretary-
General should not merely focus on the role of the
Security Council, but should be comprehensive in nature,
identifying the role of all concerned bodies and agencies.
4
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
We believe that Member States should have the
opportunity to thoroughly study and discuss this
comprehensive and far-reaching report and its
recommendations. We also feel that it is not possible for
non-members of the Security Council to engage in an
in-depth and interactive discussion of these
recommendations in the Council itself. Thus there is a need
for a forum, comprising the entire membership of the
United Nations, where all Member States can fully
participate in such discussions. The Security Council may,
therefore, consider requesting the General Assembly to
undertake the task of inviting the views of Member States
on the report itself and its recommendations, to conduct a
comprehensive exchange of views on the issue, and, if
necessary, to work towards the elucidation of a legal and
internationally binding instrument regarding the protection
of civilians in armed conflicts. Pending that, the Council
may call for the scrupulous application of the considerable
body of existing international law to protect civilians in
armed conflict.
The President: The next speaker is Mrs. Sylvie
Junod, head of the delegation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross to the United Nations, to
whom the Council has extended an invitation under rule 39
of its provisional rules of procedure. I invite her to take a
seat at the Council table and to make her statement.
Mrs. Junod (International Committee of the Red
Cross) (spoke in French): First of all I would like to thank
you, Sir, along with the other members of the Council, for
making it possible for the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) to speak here regarding the protection of
civilian populations in armed conflicts. The ICRC warmly
welcomes the Council’s initiative to undertake an open
debate, on the basis of concrete proposals, on a subject of
such fundamental importance. But we cannot fail to express
our disappointment over the fact that this essential debate
is taking place at the very time when we must deplore the
powerless of the international community to assure the
protection of civilians in various parts of the world. To
illustrate this point I will only cite two situations in which
our organization has been working for 25 odd years:
Angola and East Timor. We hope that in the latter case the
imminent deployment of an international force will help to
limit the terrible sufferings of a population that remains in
danger.
To avoid such situations, the ICRC would like
political and humanitarian actors in due course to join
forces and unite their efforts in accordance with their
respective responsibilities. It seems to us that in calling
upon the Security Council to give increased attention to
the prevention of conflicts by attacking the root causes of
crises and, to that end, establishing a more systematic and
specific framework for action, the recommendations of
the Secretary-General are on the right track.
In extreme cases, when all initiatives to ensure
respect for basic human rights and humanitarian law have
failed and when such principles have been rejected
outright, humanitarian action as such is disputed, and
States must find new remedies. Rapid action must be
decided upon and, if necessary, imposed. Such measures
should create new conditions enabling humanitarian
players to act. But they should not necessarily be included
in political decision-making on possible enforcement
action.
The ICRC is particularly pleased to note that, when
the Council decides to take action based on Chapter VII
of the Charter, it will no longer limit itself to political and
military considerations but will henceforth take account of
the humanitarian consequences of armed conflict for
civilians. This is an important step towards discharging
the collective responsibility that flows from common
article 1 of the Geneva Conventions, which requires
States parties not only to respect but to ensure respect for
the provisions of these Conventions. In this context, I
should like to point out that Article 89 of the first
Protocol Additional of 1977 requests States to act in cases
of serious violations of the Conventions and the Protocol,
both jointly and separately, in cooperation with the United
Nations and in accordance with the Charter.
The uncontrolled availability of arms is a threat to
civilians that the Council is now beginning to take into
account. In conformity with the mandate entrusted to it by
the most recent International Conference of the Red Cross
and Red Crescent, held in 1995, the ICRC undertook a
study of the availability of arms and the situation of
civilians in armed conflict, in which it provided an
account of its experience in the field and analysed the
consequences of the availability of weapons in terms of
human rights violations. It is therefore very pleased to
note that the Secretary-General agrees with the various
initiatives taken to deal with this difficult problem, and
has proposed several recommendations to States as part
of the measures to be taken to strengthen the physical
protection of civilians.
During the open debate in this Chamber on 12
February, the President of the ICRC, Mr. Cornelio
Sommaruga, expressed his deep concern about the fact
5
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
that in a number of armed conflicts both States and non-
State actors do not respect even the minimum norms of
conduct of international humanitarian law.
That grim picture is brightened today by a note of
hope. Indeed, the results of the “People on War”
consultation, recently conducted throughout the world by
the ICRC for the fiftieth anniversary of the Geneva
Conventions, show that the norms enshrined in
humanitarian law are still relevant. The basic principles of
that law have just been reaffirmed in a solemn appeal,
adopted on 12 August, in the presence of the Secretary-
General. The ICRC would like to reiterate its deep gratitude
to him for his unconditional support.
The ICRC is endeavouring to protect civilians in
armed conflict by intervening directly with all parties,
including non-state actors, whatever cause they say that
they are defending. In this respect, paragraph 51 of the
report of the Secretary-General rightly states:
“humanitarian actors must be able to maintain a
dialogue with relevant non-state actors without thereby
lending them any political legitimacy”.
That is, indeed, the letter of the law. According to
common article 3 of the Geneva Conventions, offering the
services of an impartial humanitarian organization such as
the ICRC does not at all modify the legal status of the
entity to which the services are offered. Humanitarian
organizations should not, therefore, be criticized, as is
sometimes still the case, for maintaining necessary working
relations with armed opposition groups during an armed
conflict. Rather, they should be encouraged to maintain
dialogue with all of those who have some influence on the
fate of the victims they are trying to reach.
We join with the Secretary-General in recommending
that the Council call upon non-state actors to adhere to
these humanitarian norms. The ICRC would like to point
out that, if we deny the very existence of armed groups or
simply reduce them to the status of criminals or terrorists
to whom we should not even speak, that could provide
them with a pretext for them to flout their responsibilities
towards civilians, prisoners and the wounded.
Respect for humanitarian law, which is a sine qua non
for the physical protection of civilians, is of great concern
to the members of peacekeeping forces. The ICRC
therefore warmly welcomes the rules and principles in the
Secretary-General’s bulletin of 6 August, which was drawn
up with the participation of his legal experts. It is
furthermore essential, as the report of the Secretary-
General indicates, that the personnel involved in regional
operations respect and observe humanitarian law.
Adequate training seems to be absolutely necessary if the
rules and principles are not to become a dead letter.
The ICRC has repeatedly expressed itself on
measures recommended for strengthening legal protection.
I will therefore keep my comments in this area brief. Yes,
our advisory services for international humanitarian
assistance are prepared to continue to help States to
adopt, on a national scale, specific measures for the
appropriate implementation of this law. The adoption of
national legislation for punishing war crimes is a priority,
especially since the future International Criminal Court
will be complementary to national criminal jurisdictions.
The propagation of humanitarian law remains a
priority on the agenda of our institution. Local networks
are increasingly being trained in this area, and play an
irreplaceable role in helping the ICRC to adapt its
message to its various audiences and take fully into
account different cultural contexts and traditional values.
I should like once again to state that in the framework of
its mandate to protect humanitarian law, the ICRC is in
the process of putting the final touches on a universal
study to determine the content of customary regulations.
That study, which will be issued next year, will define
more clearly the obligations of all parties to an armed
conflict, whether the conflict be international or internal.
In his opening statement, the President of the
General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session mentioned a
number of urgent challenges to be faced: war, displaced
persons, refugees, gender equality and the fate of
children, in particular children in armed conflict — this
last being a direct follow-up to the important resolution
recently adopted by the Security Council on that subject.
This opens the door to a new era of synergy that can
strengthen the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The international Red Cross and Red Crescent
movement must, by its very essence, be an important
mechanism of this mobilizing strategy. The protection of
civilians in armed conflict goes to the heart of the debate
to be held at the twenty-seventh International Conference
of the Red Cross and Red Crescent in Geneva at the
beginning of November, in which all States parties to the
Geneva Conventions, as well as the movement as a
whole, will participate. Its work should lead to the
adoption of a specific plan of action for the years 2000 to
2003.
6
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of Iraq. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Hasan (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I should like first
of all to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate.
Civilians constitute the vast majority of human
casualties in armed conflict. They are the first victims of
the belligerent international environment we live in today.
The international community and its organizations should
give the utmost priority to this issue. On that basis, we
welcome the contribution made by the Secretary-General in
the report he has submitted to the Security Council on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, which is contained
in document S/1999/957.
We would like to make some observations on the issue
under consideration. First, we expect the Security Council
to take into account the views put forward by States that
are not members of the Council in the open debate held
earlier this year on the question of the protection of
children and of civilians in armed conflict. Those views
should be integrated into the Council’s programme of work,
in accordance with the functions of the Council, as
contained in Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations, under which it is to act as a representative of the
States Members of the United Nations in the fulfilment of
its duties, thereby complementing the work of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, United
Nations agencies and the international community in
general.
Secondly, when the Security Council and the United
Nations deal generally with this very important issue, a
global perspective must be taken that gives the utmost
priority to the prevention of conflicts through activating the
mechanism of preventive diplomacy and its machinery and
making the United Nations a focal point for that preventive
diplomacy. When considering the roots of intra- or inter-
State conflicts, we find that one of the reasons for their
outbreak is the inequitable and unbalanced international
economic environment, which adversely affects the
economies of developing countries and creates “hot spots”
for conflicts.
As the Secretary-General pointed out, the deteriorating
economic situation is conducive to the eruption of violent
conflicts for a number of reasons, not the least of which is
that the political environment tends to be more favourable
to conflict in times of recession than in times of economic
growth.
The Secretary-General reiterated that the money
currently spent on military intervention and humanitarian
assistance could be reallocated to support equitable and
sustainable development, thus reducing the likelihood of
the outbreak of war. We call upon the countries of the
North to contribute to establishing a balanced and
equitable world economy that preserves the rights and
interests of the countries of the South.
Thirdly, the United Nations, and in particular the
Security Council, must adopt the principle of collective
responsibility in the peaceful resolution of conflicts. The
eruption of a given conflict means the failure of
preventive diplomacy — that is, our collective failure. We
should all bear our share of this responsibility, including
the Council, whose part in this failure is quite clear since
it bears primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. We cannot make the
combatants solely responsible for the evils of war.
On the other hand, mistakes, bad judgement or the
abuse of the Security Council’s mandate can sometimes
result in catastrophes that are greater that those caused by
armed militias in poor countries. A crime of genocide
occurred in Rwanda in 1994, when the Security Council
could not muster the political will to stop the situation
from deteriorating, as its member countries did not wish
to expose their forces to danger in a struggle that did not
threaten their interests.
Another crime of genocide occurred, and continues
to this day, in Iraq, because the Council took, on 6
August 1990, an erroneous decision by imposing
comprehensive sanctions against Iraq. The victims of
those sanctions so far have been one and a half million
Iraqi civilians, and the fabric of Iraqi society has been
rent in a way that will affect future generations.
The Secretary-General, in paragraph 25 of his report
to the Security Council, pointed out that “recent
experience has shown that sanctions can have a highly
negative impact on civilian populations, in particular
children and women”. It is clear that the Secretary-
General was taking into account the suffering of the Iraqi
civilians as a result of the sanctions when he wrote this
paragraph, although he did not say that explicitly.
The report published by the United Nations
Children’s Fund on 12 August 1996 gives documented
7
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
figures showing that a half million Iraqi children under the
age of 5 have died because of the sanctions. Here I must
recall that the Charter has no mechanism for making the
Security Council accountable to the States Members of the
United Nations with respect to the legitimacy of its
resolutions and to what degree they conform to international
humanitarian law. It is crucial that we consider this very
important issue.
Fourthly, it is imperative that the Security Council
adopt a fair and equitable policy, eschewing selectivity and
double standards, that places the principles of the Charter
before the narrow interests of the powerful members of the
Council. The actions of the Security Council over this past
decade have given us convincing reasons to doubt its
integrity, its objectivity and its ability to be effective in the
prevention of armed conflicts and in the protection of
civilians.
Indeed, the Council has dealt selectively with
international crises. Palestinian civilians, for example,
experience the worst kind of coercion, humiliation and
forced migration as well as the destruction of their homes.
Iraqi civilians, suffering from comprehensive sanctions, are
exposed daily to attacks by American and British aircraft.
Hundreds of them have been martyred as a result of this
aggression, and roads, schools and laboratories have been
destroyed. All of this is occurring under the very eyes of
the Council, which has not taken any measures or called the
perpetrators to account. Furthermore, other situations —
less dangerous than the ones the Palestinians and the Iraqis
are facing — are exaggerated. We fear that the day will
come when CNN, the news network, will force a
programme of work on the Security Council — if it has not
done so already.
Fifthly, the role and task of the United Nations consist
of the peaceful resolution of conflicts. The exception to this
is the resort to coercive measures. The United Nations
demonstrates its effective assumption of its role whenever
it is restrained in such resort, as pointed out in the Charter.
We have noted, however, that in recent times, the United
Nations has had increasing recourse to coercive measures,
as if they were the sole and preferable solution. This is,
per se, proof of incapacity, not of power or strength.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the Netherlands.
The Netherlands warmly applauds the Secretary-
General’s report. It was indeed a tour de force to prepare
such an extensive and excellent report in just a few months.
The report provides us with a very comprehensive
overview of the issue on our agenda. In this connection,
we also wish to express our appreciation to the delegation
of Canada for having taken the initiative of discussing in
the Security Council the issue of the protection of
civilians. It goes without saying that the Netherlands will
vote in favour of the draft resolution before us.
The norm is that civilians must never be the victims
of armed conflict. Reality, however, is steadily moving
away from that norm. Most armed conflicts today are
internal conflicts. In such conflicts, civilians are often the
primary victims — not by accident, but because they are
deliberately targeted or callously exploited as pawns in
the political game. Restrictions on humanitarian access
usually have a similar background. Innocent civilians are
deliberately deprived of food and medicine as another
move in the same political game. All this seems to be
taken more and more for granted. Such practices blur the
distinction between military and civilians and make
warfare degenerate ever further into barbarity.
The Security Council can contribute to a reversal of
this trend. For one, better use could be made of existing
instruments of international humanitarian law. As we
suggested earlier this year, the Council could call upon
parties to a conflict to involve the International
Fact-Finding Commission established by article 90 of
Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions of 1949.
In relevant cases, this Commission could investigate
breaches of international humanitarian law or facilitate,
through its good offices, the re-emergence of an attitude
of respect for international humanitarian law.
It is also important that the International Committee
of the Red Cross and the United Nations maintain close
cooperation on the issue of civilians in armed conflict.
The Netherlands proposes that the Secretary-General’s
report be forwarded to the Red Cross Conference on this
subject which will take place in Geneva in the beginning
of November.
Humanitarian assistance is not a substitute for
effective political action. The Netherlands calls for a
coherent and integrated approach to conflict prevention
and conflict resolution in which the diplomatic, political,
military, economic and humanitarian aspects, as well as
development assistance, are treated as integral parts.
In conclusion, I wish to confirm that the Netherlands
subscribes to the views expressed by the representative of
Finland on behalf of the European Union.
8
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
I now resume my function as President of the Security
Council.
At the request of the Secretary-General, I call upon
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator.
Mr. Vieira de Mello (Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator):
On behalf of the Secretary-General and, indeed, of all heads
of agencies, members of the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee on humanitarian affairs, let me express the
gratitude of the Secretary-General and of the humanitarian
community as a whole for the Council’s generous reception
of the report. In particular, I thank you personally, Sir, as
well as Ambassador Fowler and your respective countries
for the particular role you played in bringing this debate
about.
We welcome the draft resolution before the Council,
which reaffirms the role of the Council in responding to
situations in which civilians are targeted, as has so often
been the case in countries that have been affected by
conflict in the last decade.
I thank the Security Council members for the rich and
varied debate, as well as the non-members for their
contributions yesterday and today. The seriousness of the
membership’s responses reflects the recognition by the
Council — and more largely by the membership of the
Organization — that the protection of civilians goes to the
very core of the mandate of this and other organs of the
United Nations. I am particularly grateful that, both in
the presidential statement of February and in comments
today, this concern is not one that is limited to the legal
protection of civilian populations, but includes their
physical protection, which is often what is lacking.
We note with particular satisfaction that the Council
gave particular consideration and support to the following
issues. First, it has addressed the culture of impunity and
the issue of ensuring accountability for breaches of
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law.
It was recognized that it is a duty of all States to hold
accountable, through their national legal systems and
through effective international tribunals, those responsible
for the most heinous crimes. In particular, member States
emphasized the importance of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) and its need to step in where national judicial
institutions fail to act. Several members called for
compliance with the existing ad hoc tribunals and the
possible creation of others, pending the establishment of
the ICC. The effectiveness of an international court will
depend first, obviously, on its coming into being and
thereafter on the support given by member States. There
was a recommendation that action be taken by the
Security Council to deal with States that do not cooperate
with the international tribunals, which we have noted.
Secondly, the Council addressed the issue of
inducing the compliance of non-state actors with
international law, including private-sector companies and
private security firms. In this context, we welcome calls
for States to ratify the Additional Protocols to the Geneva
Conventions, particularly since the obligations which they
create for non-state actors under international law are
those that are most frequently violated in conflicts of the
new generation.
Thirdly, regarding enforcement action, we were
pleased that several members referred to the need to
develop and apply objective criteria, ensuring consistency
in the Security Council’s action. Needless to say, the
Secretary-General, when requested, will be prepared to
assist.
Fourthly, in terms of comprehensive peacekeeping
mandates, it was encouraging to hear members emphasize
the changing perception of peacekeeping operations and
the recognition that modern peacekeeping entails more
comprehensive operations with extremely complex,
multifaceted programmes and, indeed, more robust
enforcement mandates, as has been discussed in this
Council in recent days.
We were particularly encouraged by the recognition
of the need for a rapid deployment capacity, including of
a preventive nature, both in terms of headquarters as well
as actual contingents. This is something we have been
striving for over the years, and it should, in our opinion,
include, in addition to military, also civilian components,
including humanitarian civilian police and others.
Fifthly, as for the need to control the flow of small
arms and, I might add, of heavy and more sophisticated
weaponry and equipment, often in violation of this
Council’s decisions, this is something we have flagged in
the past. We are extremely happy to see that most of the
members of the Council recognized it as an important
priority in terms of protecting civilian populations. We
welcome the suggestion by one of the members that arms
embargoes be imposed as soon as a party to a conflict
begins to target civilian populations.
9
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
Sixth is the question of the Convention on the
Protection of United Nations and Associated Personnel. As
you can imagine, this theme is very close to our hearts,
almost on a daily basis. We are grateful for yet again
overwhelming support for action to strengthen the
protection of United Nations personnel. Only yesterday in
Somalia a senior programme officer, a UNICEF medical
doctor, was murdered in an ambush, adding his name to a
very long and sad list of fatal casualties among civilian
staff working for humanitarian organizations. I welcome the
support expressed by some for an additional protocol to
ensure better protection of all humanitarian personnel, not
just those from the United Nations.
On the question of sanctions, we were pleased to hear
several speakers give priority to the development of
targeted and smart sanctions so as to penalize those directly
responsible for wrong-doing, rather than aggravating the
suffering of civilian populations. This is an area in which
my office has attempted to actively support decision-making
by the Council.
Other issues that were also mentioned included raising
the age of recruitment for participating in hostilities; the
suffering of all civilians, but particularly of women and
children; the question of access; and more cooperation by
the Council with other United Nations bodies and regional
organizations. We are in full support of those.
In conclusion, the plight of civilians can no longer be
set aside because of other interests that might be at play.
The initiatives taken in this Council are heartening. Their
plight should indeed be of central concern. We should treat
all conflict situations around the world equally. The best
way to protect civilians is, however, as was stressed, to
prevent conflict, and in this context, development and
combating poverty is an indispensable tool to achieve
sustainable peace and stability in conflict- and post-conflict
areas.
One Security Council member said the Secretary-
General had done his job and it was now up to the Council
to implement his recommendations. Let me assure you,
however, that the Secretariat remains ready to provide every
support for the mechanism which the Council will establish
to follow up on the recommendations.
We did not include, in responding to some of the more
critical observations, reference to all continuing conflicts.
Rather, we tried to focus on those which have been most
acute and have had the most acute impact on civilians in
recent years. Regarding the list of countries or situations
that were mentioned in the report in which United
Nations personnel have lost their lives, although we are,
needless to say — and I know something about that, most
unfortunately — greatly concerned at the loss of life
among United Nations peacekeepers. Paragraph 22 of the
report lists only the countries in which United Nations
humanitarian staff and other humanitarian personnel have
died.
I also note that two delegations believe that the
Secretary-General’s proposals invite the Security Council
to go beyond its mandate as contained in the Charter. But
the Charter, we believe, was not intended to be a static
document. It is alive. Moreover, the Secretary-General
was responding to the Security Council’s February request
to submit concrete proposals on how to improve its ability
to provide civilians with legal and physical protection. We
attempted to respond to that call — your call — in an
imaginative yet balanced manner. Needless to say, not
everything we have suggested is the sole prerogative of
the Security Council. These recommendations are
addressed to the membership as a whole and to other
organs of the Organization, as well as, obviously, to other
actors on the international and regional scene. Do not
blame us, therefore, for having attempted to respond to
your own request, which provided us with immense
encouragement, as did the debate in this room.
Let us not forget that the Charter begins not with the
words “We the States” but “We the peoples”.
The President: It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft
resolution before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall
put the draft resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Bahrain, Brazil, Canada, China, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Malaysia, Namibia, Netherlands,
Russian Federation, Slovenia, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1265 (1999).
10
Security Council 4046th meeting
Fifty-fourth year 17 September 1999
There are no further speakers inscribed on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.
11
