United Nations S/PV.7180
asdfSecurity Council
Sixty-ninth year
7180thmeeting
Thursday, 22 May 2014, 10 a.m.
New York
Provisional
President: Mr. Oh Joon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Republic of Korea)
Members: Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Perceval
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Quinlan
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Cherif
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Barros Melet
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wang Min
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Araud
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Omaish
Lithuania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Murmokaitė
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Lucas
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Laro
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Churkin
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Gasana
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . Sir Mark Lyall Grant
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Power
Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.
*1440706*
14-40706 (E)
2/18 14-40706
S/PV.7180 The situation in the Middle East 22/05/2014
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Albania, Andorra, Austria,
Belgium, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, the Central
African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Malta, the Marshall Islands,
Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Panama, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab
Republic, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, Ukraine and the United Arab Emirates to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2014/348, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, the Central
African Republic, Chile, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Latvia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, the Marshall Islands, Mexico,
Monaco, Montenegro, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Panama, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic
of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.
I wish to welcome Deputy Secretary-General Jan
Eliasson, to whom I now give the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I deliver this
statement on behalf of the Secretary-General.
“Since the outbreak of the war in Syria, I
have persistently called for accountability for
perpetrators of grave human rights violations,
crimes against humanity and war crimes. The
recent attacks against humanitarian convoys and
personnel, which may constitute war crimes, add to
the urgent need to see action now on accountability
in Syria.
“The Security Council has an inescapable
responsibility in that regard. States that are members
of both the Security Council and the Human Rights
Council have a particular duty to end the bloodshed
and to ensure justice for the victims of unspeakable
crimes.
“In February 2013, the Commission of Inquiry
concluded that the International Criminal Court was
the appropriate venue to pursue the fight against
impunity in Syria. The High Commissioner for
Human Rights has repeatedly called on the Security
Council to refer the situation in Syria to the Court,
most recently in April. The Syrian people have a
fundamental right to justice. The United Nations
and its Member States have a fundamental duty to
defend that right. I support mechanisms that can
genuinely hold perpetrators to account. It is clear in
this case that no side to the tragedy is innocent. Let
us also recall that accountability will help prevent
further atrocities.
“For more than three years, the Security
Council has been unable to agree on measures that
could bring an end to this extraordinarily brutal
war, which has deeply affected and damaged not
only millions of Syrian civilians but also the entire
region. If members of the Council continue to
be unable to agree even on a measure that could
provide some accountability for the ongoing
crimes, the credibility of this body and of the entire
Organization will continue to suffer.
“When we talk of accountability we should be
thinking not only of the parties to the conflict, we
should also think of those outside who are fuelling
the conflict and exacerbating the suffering by their
continued supply of weapons to those who are
committing the atrocities.
“I call again on the Council and plead with the
members to set aside their differences and to finally
work together on a joint approach that can bring an
end to this long nightmare for the Syrian people.
14-40706 3/18
22/05/2014 The situation in the Middle East S/PV.7180
means acquiescence, compromise and complicity.
I do not ignore the divisions that exist within the
Council; I know the differing analyses of members. I
respect them even if I do not share them. But certain
facts are clear to all. As Mr. Brahimi said here in the
Council a few days ago, there are no prospects in Syria
today for negotiation. This is not the time or place to
assign responsibility for that, but just to point it out.
To argue that the involvement of international justice
would undermine the peace process therefore makes no
sense, as there is no peace process and, in the short
and medium term, there are no prospects for any peace
process either.
They refuse to negotiate because they want to
be victorious and think they can be. They will not
negotiate because they think it is a matter of killing or
being killed. They will not negotiate with those whose
brothers and wives they have killed or tortured. They
are so afraid of their vengance that they must kill them
too.
In that context, France’s proposal is based on the
belief that the impasse should not lead us to turn our
gaze away from the atrocities committed in Syria every
day. It aims at overcoming our differences in order
to focus on the asepct of our humanity we all share.
The draft resolution was rewritten in order to make it
acceptable to all. It aims to apply in the Syrian situation
a principle already agreed in resolutions 2118 (2013) and
2139 (2113), namely, to reject impunity. It also covers
the territorial integrity of Syria. With regard to the
responsibilities of the parties, it again includes language
repeatedly agreed and merely calls for recognizing
the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court in
the Syrian civil war in line with similar provisions in
resolution 1593 (2005), on the situation in Darfur, and
in resolution 1970 (2011), on Libya, against which no
Member State vote against.
Acting in unison, the Council would thereby say
that it would not forget the crimes being committed
today on a mass scale in Syria; that it would not
forget that leaders tolerated them or even encouraged
or ordered them; that in 2014 people could no longer
behave as they did in 1942 or 1994; and that it would not
allow the state of barbarity to return. Perhaps we could
stop an executioner on the verge of committing a crime.
In any case, we would restore the Council’s honour by
allowing it to say the right thing and to re-establish
morality over its divisions. I am convinced that, those
divisions aside, we share the same values, the same
They desperately need an end to the violence, and
a political solution. We all have a responsibility
to help the Syrian people finally see a future of
peace.”
The President: I thank Mr. Eliasson for his
statement.
I shall now give the floor to the member of the
Security Council who wishes to make a statement
before the voting.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I have
asked to speak before the voting on draft resolution
S/2014/348, which France had the honour to present,
in order to explain the reason behind our approach.
France’s proposal is not a new chapter in the divisiveness
besetting the Security Council when it comes to the
Syrian crisis; on the contrary, it aims at re-establishing
the Council’s unity around the values shared by its
members.
All of us around this table are horrified by the
tragedy being experienced by the Syrian people: more
than 160,000 deaths, more than 9 million displaced
persons and refugees, a country destroyed, hunger
and epidemics. That is already an overwhelming tally,
against the backdrop of the certainty that both sides have
committed atrocities against defenceless civilians. The
presentation to the Council and the media of the “Cesar”
report several weeks ago, on France’s initiative, served
to underscore the barbarity. Thousands of photos,
verified by independent experts, showed starved and
tortured corpses in the regime’s prisons.
Killing, torture and rape occur today in Syria not just
as atrocious consequences of a civil war, but as part of a
deliberate policy to terrorize and punish. Commanders
give free rein to their troops to ignore the law — or put
more simply, humanity itself. The Government bombs
civilian neighbourhoods with explosive barrel bombs,
missiles and chemical weapons. Terrorist groups carry
out indiscriminate attacks. Tens of thousands of people
have been disappeared. Torture and starvation are
carried out on a large scale. In a country with an ancient
civilization, we are seeing the unleashing of brutality
and cruelty whose victims are not mere statistics,
behind which we too often hide, but men, women and
children with names, faces and loved ones.
In the face of so many trampled lives and the
negation of the values for which the Organization
stands, nothing is worse than silence. For silence
4/18 14-40706
S/PV.7180 The situation in the Middle East 22/05/2014
that joined us in sponsoring the effort to refer those
atrocities to the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Sadly, because of the decision of the Russian
Federation to back the Syrian regime no matter what it
does, the Syrian people will not see justice today. They
will see crime but not punishment. On 15 April, the
members of the Council were briefed on a report that
included 55,000 gruesome photos of the emaciated and
tortured bodies of dead Syrians whom world-renowned
international lawyers concluded had been methodically
eliminated by a Government killing machine.
The photos were reportedly provided by an
individual, alias Caesar, who worked for 13 years as
a member of the Syrian military police. When the
fighting began, he says that he was instructed to record
the images of people starved, beaten, tortured and
executed by Syria’s security forces. Those photos shock
and horrify, even after some of us wondered if there
was anything that the regime could do that would still
shock. Syrian soldiers had already compelled doctors
not to care for the wounded, dragged patients out of
hospital beds, laid siege to whole neighbourhoods, cut
off access to desperately needed supplies, and carried
out chemical weapons attacks and barrel bomb attacks
with the full confidence that meaningful action by the
Council would be obstructed.
A judicial process does more than hold perpetrators
accountable. It also allows victims to speak. The vetoes
today have prevented the victims of atrocities from
testifying at The Hague for now. Nonetheless, it is
important for us in the Council today to hear the kind
of testimony we might have heard if Russia and China
had not raised their hands to oppose accountability for
war crimes and crimes against humanity. Because of
the vetoes just cast, one of Al-Assad’s victims, Qusai
Zakarya, will not soon be called to testify before the
International Criminal Court. But Qusai’s story of life
in Moadamiyah during the siege, as hard as it is to hear,
must be heard. Qusai Zakarya is in the Council with us
today, and I would like to ask him to stand.
Today, I will tell Qusai’s story as he told it to us.
Qusai’s home, Moadamiyah, just outside Damascus,
was one of the Al-Assad regime’s prime targets. During
the August 2013 chemical weapons attacks, Qusai
ran out to the street and tried to help his neighbours.
He quickly lost his ability to breathe. His eyes afire,
Qusai’s heart stopped, and he was left for dead before a
friend stumbled upon him and realized that he had again
begun breathing. Qusai recounts his bewilderment as
indignation and the same resolve. The time has come to
say so. The time has come to prove it.
The draft resolution I have the honour of presenting
to my colleagues for a vote is an appeal to human
conscience. It is not a political gesture; it is quite
simply a moral act. If the Council were not to adopt
it, that would be an insult to the millions of Syrians
who are suffering. It would be proof that some have
learned nothing from history. It would recall that some,
whatever they may claim, have opted for unconditional
support for the Damascus regime, whatever crimes it
commits, and by the same stroke to exonerate Al-Qaida.
Extending equal impunity to all criminals is not a
paradox; there is brotherhood in crime.
A veto today would recall that fact. A veto would
cover up all crimes; it would be a veto against justice. It
would give new justification to the French proposal to
limit the use of the right of the veto in the case of mass
atrocities.
The President: I shall now put the draft resolution
to a vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Chad, Chile, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, Republic of
Korea, Rwanda, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and United States of America
Against:
China, Russian Federation
The President: There were 13 votes in favour,
2 votes against and no abstentions. The draft resolution
has not been adopted, owing to the negative vote of a
permanent member of the Council.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make a statement after the vote.
Ms. Power (United States of America): Today is
about accountability for crimes so extensive and so
deadly that they have few equals in modern history.
Today is about accountability for Syria, but it is also
about accountability for the Security Council. It is the
Council’s responsibility to stop atrocities if we can
and, at a minimum, to ensure that the perpetrators of
atrocities are held accountable. It was towards that
minimum that we sought to make progress today. My
Government applauds the vast majority of Council
members that voted to support and the 64 countries
14-40706 5/18
22/05/2014 The situation in the Middle East S/PV.7180
Republic of the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Mali and Kenya
deserve international and impartial justice, but the
Syrian people do not? Why should the International
Criminal Court pursue accountabililty for the atrocities
in Africa but not those in Syria, where the worst horrors
of our time are being perpetrated? For those who
have asked the Security Council that very reasoanble
question, today they have their answer — the Russian
and Chinese vetoes.
Our grandchildren will ask us years from now how
we could have failed to bring justice to people living
in hell on Earth. The history books may well depict
photographs taken by Caesar of emaciated, acid-scarred
corpses juxtaposed with a photo of the two members of
the Council that prevented justice for the victims, such
as Qusai, who longed to see the end of such horrors.
Today is therefore about accountability not just
for the victims of Al-Assad’s regime or Qusai and his
neighbours in Moadamiyah but for members of the
Security Council. Month after month, year after year,
we have each spoken about the importance of justice
and the need for accountability in Syria. Victims and
survivors have begged for action and cried out for
justice. The international community has supported the
ad hoc efforts to collect evidence to record testimony.
We have launched commissions of inquiry to find facts
and held meeting after meeting but before today, we
have not put forward a draft resolution to refer the
situation to the International Criminal Court. We have
not done so because we were afraid that it would be
vetoed.
However, the victims of Al-Assad’s industrial
killing machine and of terrorist attacks deserve more
than to have more dead counted. They deserve to have
each member of the Security Council counted and
held to account. They deserve to have history record
those who stood with them and were willing to raise
their hands to deny them the chance of justice. While
there may be no accountability before the ICC today
for the horrific crimes being carried out against the
Syrian people, there should be accountability for those
members of the Council that have prevented such
accountability.
The representative of Syria and perhaps of Russia
may suggest that the draft resolution voted on today
was biased, and I agree. It was biased in the direction of
establishing facts and tilted in the direction of a peace
that comes from holding accountable individuals, not
entire groups, such as the Alawites, Sunnis or Kurds.
he watched neighbours suffocate, friends panic and
families perish. He remembers the face of a 13-year-old
boy just a few feet from his home. He describes the boy
as so innocent. He recalls that he had done nothing, yet
the expression on the 13-year-old’s face was the most
terrifying thing that Qusai has ever seen as white foam
streamed from his mouth and death crept in.
If Qusai could testify, he might tell the story of his
neighbour, Abou Mohammed, a waiter in Damascus,
while his wife and daughter lived in Moadamiyah. Abou
Mohammed’s daughter was seven years old. She had a
heart condition that required medication not available
in besieged Moadamiyah, so Abou Mohammed did
what any father would do and attempted to bring
her medicine from Damascus. He was captured by
Al-Assad’s mercenaries, tortured with acid and
ultimately killed. His body was thrown on Highway
40. Without medicine to treat her heart condition, Abou
Mohammed’s seven-year-old daughter died. Qusai
might also tell the story of Rana, an 18-month-old baby
girl. Rana’s dad ran a grocery store before the siege.
After the siege, he watched as his daughter Rana died
from malnutrition because she could not get milk that
used to sit on his store’s shelves.
Qusai has said that when he walks around the
United States, he notices people in restaurants getting
on with day-to-day life. He notices the small leftovers
that we leave on our plates, and he remembers watching
his neighbours’ desperation to get a small piece of
rotten bread in Moadamiyah. Qusai’s account of his
experience in Moadamiyah deserves to be heard. It
deserves to be examined by an independent court and,
if crimes are proven, those responsible deserve to be
held accountable.
The vetoes cast today prevent that from happening.
Strikingly, those vetoes also protect the monstrous
terrorist organizations operating in Syria. Those who
would behead civilians and attack religious minorities
will not be soon held accountable at the ICC either, for
today’s vetoes by Russia and China protect not only
Al-Assad and his henchmen but also the radical Islamic
terrorists who continue a fundamentalist assault on
the Syrian people that knows no decency or humanity.
Such vetoes have aided impunity not just for Al-Assad
but for terrorist groups, as well.
In the past, when extraordinary crimes have been
carried out, the International Criminal Court has been
able to act. Why is it that the people of Uganda, Darfur,
Libya, the Central African Republic, the Democratic
6/18 14-40706
S/PV.7180 The situation in the Middle East 22/05/2014
Rwanda has repeatedly called for a political
solution to the Syrian crisis within the framework of
the Geneva peace process. We have also endorsed the
call of the Secretary-General, urging all concerned
States Members of the United Nations to refrain
from supplying weapons to aid any side in Syria. We
agree that no concerned State has heeded that call.
Nonetheless, the magnitude of human rights violations
in Syria requires immediate action by the international
community, in particular the Security Council. We all
know that the Syrian jurisdiction is currently not in a
position to hold the perpetrators of mass atrocities in
Syria to account.
We therefore thank France for introducing the draft
resolution as a strong signal to the warring parties
in Syria that the Security Council is committed to
accountability. That is why Rwanda voted in favour
of the draft resolution. Despite the failure to adopt it,
which we regret, Rwanda has not lost hope in justice
and accountability in Syria. However, to achieve that
goal, we need the permanent members of the Security
Council to open their minds and hearts in order to find
a solution to such a humanitarian and human rights
disaster. Despite the real achievements in eliminating
the Syrian chemical programme, it is clear that the
Council’s credibility in maintaining international
peace and security remains seriously challenged over
its inability to end the horror being committed in Syria.
As co-chair of the Group of Friends on the
Responsibility to Protect, and given our own history
of genocide, Rwanda takes this opportunity to reiterate
its call to all permanent members of the Security
Council to consider seriously and carefully the French
proposal of a code of conduct among themselves by
which they will voluntarily refrain from using the veto
in situations of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity. In that context, pending a
meaningful reform of the Security Council, we believe
that such a code of conduct could be a necessary tool
to enable the Council to re-embrace the moral values
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
In conclusion, all of us must commit ourselves to
putting action for humanity above inaction for interests.
That is the only way we can honour the Syrian victims
and show to a sceptical world that we, the members of
the Security Council, have learned lessons from the
past and have decided to live up to the noble mission
with which the community of nations has entrusted us.
The outcome of today’s vote, disappointing as it is, will
not end our pursuit of justice.
My Government will continue to work with the many
other Governments and organizations to encourage and
facilitate the further gathering of evidence. There is
no limit to our determination to see that the victims
of the atrocities in Syria and their loved ones receive
answers in accordance with the majesty of law. In that
quest, we will be guided by the fundamental principle
of civilization, which has truly stood the test of time.
As Solon, the Athenian sage, said more than 2,500
years ago, “Those who are not wronged, no less than
those who are wronged, exert themselves to punish the
wrongdoers.” The overwhelming majority of Council
members affirmed that today.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Rwanda takes the floor to
explain its vote on draft resolution S/2014/348, which
requests the referral of the situation of the Syrian Arab
Republic to the International Criminal Court (ICC). I
thank Mr. Jan Eliasson, Deputy Secretary-General, for
his statement and acknowledge the presence among us of
Ambassador Bashar Ja’afari, Permanent Representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations.
Rwanda’s position on the ICC, which we have
expressed on several occasions in the Council, is well
known, The debate on the International Criminal Court
is indeed legitimate and should continue within the
United Nations with a view to together achieving a fair
and more efficient criminal justice system that is better
able to fight against impunity for the most serious
crimes.
However, we are not here today to hold another
substantive debate on the ICC, as Ambassador
Samantha Power said. I fully agree with her. Our
grandchildren will one day ask us what we did to stop
the Syrian tragedy. We are here as fathers, mothers,
human beings and representatives of the community of
nations, who should listen to the voices of the more than
160,000 people slain over the past three years in Syria.
That reminds us that the Council cannot be inured to
mass atrocities. We are here as a collective body, vested
with the responsibility to maintain international peace
and security. That includes the responsibility to protect
and the obligation of hold accountable the perpetrators
of the most serious crimes. Children are being gassed,
women sexually abused and men tortured. Barrel
bombs have been used against hospitals and schools.
The communities devastated by the terrorist attacks in
Syria are living in endless horror.
14-40706 7/18
22/05/2014 The situation in the Middle East S/PV.7180
of impunity pursued since the beginning of the Syrian
crisis and based on our belief in the principles of the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. We
would like to express our deep regret that the Council
was unable to adopt the draft resolution today.
At the same time, we would like to emphasize our
support for the French initiative, which is designed to
limit the use of the veto when the Security Council is
voting on draft resolutions related to the perpetration of
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity, in
order to avoid a repetition of what we have seen today.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): For
over three years, Syria has been foundering each day
a little further into the horror of an indiscriminate
violence that kills in a climate of absolute impunity.
That absolute impunity is one of the reasons that the
parties to the conflict in Syria continue to engage in a
bloodbath in which civilians are the first victims.
Evidence of atrocities in Syria accumulate as
succeeding reports are issued, whether it be the reports
of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
established by the Human Rights Council, the reports
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the Caesar (S/2014/244, annex) on systematic
torture committed on an industrial scale in Syrian
prisons, or non-governmental organizations’ reports,
including on the use of barrel bombs against the civilian
population. Syria is at war, yes, but war does not justify
everything. Even war has its rules under international
law, and those rules are violated every day in Syria.
More than 160,000 people have already died in the
Syrian conflict. The list of atrocities in Syria is too
long for us to list them all, but I would like to mention
here the untold suffering inflicted on children in the
conflict. More than 10,000 children have been killed.
Countless children have been injured or maimed by
aerial bombardments in populated areas, with Syrian
Government forces indiscriminately using cluster
munitions and barrel bombs. Children are arrested,
recruited as combatants, arbitrarily detained, abused
and tortured. A number of children have been victims
of sexual violence or have disappeared. All parties to
the conflict have targeted schools and hospitals or have
used them for military purposes.
To end the conflict and atrocities in Syria, it is
essential to work for a political solution. Everyone
recognizes as much. But the efforts to reach a political
solution are at an impasse, mainly because the Syrian
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): We have
heard time and again in this Chamber the horrific scale
of violations and abuses carried out against civilians
by the Syrian regime over the past three years of the
conflict: the indiscriminate bombardment of civilian
inhabited areas; horrendous violations, including
systematic murder and torture in regime detention
centres; the arbitrary denial of humanitarian access to
those in need; and the use of siege and starvation as a
weapon of war.
Today’s draft resolution S/2014348 /offered Syrians
the prospect of an end to impunity for the individuals
who committed those atrocities. Holding perpetrators
to account for their actions is a vital element of a
sustainable peace. No settlement in Syria can be
real or lasting without justice. The draft resolution
would have given the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court a mandate to investigate all war crimes
and crimes against humanity perpetrated during the
conflict, regardless of the identity or affiliation of the
perpetrator.
The draft resolution had the support of 13 members
of the Security Council, 65 sponsors, more than
100 non-governmental organizations from all around
the world, and the Syrian National Coalition. That
shows the strength of international feeling on this
issue. It is to Russia and China’s shame that they
have chosen to block efforts to achieve justice for the
Syrian people. It is disgraceful that they have yet again
vetoed the Security Council’s efforts to take action in
response to the appalling human rights violations being
committed every day in Syria. Russia and China will
have to justify their behaviour, not only to those States
and organizations, but to so many of the Syrian people
who continue to suffer under Al-Assad’s brutal regime.
The United Kingdom is committed to accountability.
Despite today’s vote, we will continue to look for
ways to ensure that there can be accountability in
Syria. We will continue to support efforts to document
atrocities and will remain ready for the time when those
responsible can be held to account. The perpetrators of
appalling crimes in Syria may be able to hide behind
Russian and Chinese vetoes for now, but they will not
be able to evade justice forever.
Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Today,
Jordan voted in favour of draft resolution S/2014/348
based on our deep conviction regarding the principles
of criminal justice and the need for criminal
accountability, in an attempt to put an end to the policy
8/18 14-40706
S/PV.7180 The situation in the Middle East 22/05/2014
today, and that the draft resolution could not be adopted
because two permanent members, Russia and China,
voted against it. This double veto is doubly damaging
because it will have a serious impact on the future of
the Syrian people, who daily endure the horrors of
an endless spiral of violence, and because it affects
the Security Council’s credibility and effectiveness,
condemning it to inaction in the face of impunity.
Today’s vote has highlighted the impasse the Security
Council finds itself in, thanks to the abuse of the right
of veto. In that regard, Luxembourg supports France’s
proposal that the five permanent members refrain from
resorting to the right of veto in cases of mass atrocities,
genocide, war crimes or crimes against humanity. A
voluntary code of conduct such as this would help to
strengthen the Council’s credibility and, above all, its
effectiveness in protecting civilian populations.
Despite today’s vote, we will not throw up our
hands. Faced with the war crimes and crimes against
humanity committed in Syria, we will never stop
calling for justice for the Syrians. And we will not give
up the hope that our shared humanity will ultimately
prevail.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
deeply regret that the draft resolution we have just voted
on (S/2014/348), which sought to refer the situation
in Syria to the International Criminal Court for the
investigation and subsequent punishment of those
responsible, whoever they may be, could not be adopted.
On many occasions Chile has joined those calling on
the countries that enjoy the right of veto to refrain from
using it in situations involving crimes against humanity,
war crimes, genocide or ethnic cleansing. We believe
that the Security Council should have the ability to act
in support of the values and principles that are most
fundamental for humankind. Chile sponsored the draft
resolution in a spirit of openness and in the conviction
that it represented a necessary step in obtaining justice
for all the victims of the conflict in Syria, without any
distinction between the various sides.
Our country is a party to the Rome Statute and,
as such, we believe that its integrity must be upheld so
as to enable it to be fully implemented and effective
in the fight against impunity. The International
Criminal Court has shown itself to be the best tool
for investigating the acts that have produced the draft
resolution that could not be adopted today.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Today the Security
Council has again failed the people of Syria. The
authorities refuse to discuss a genuine political
transition. For our part, we cannot accept the political
impasse being used by some of our partners as an excuse
to prevent us from taking action against impunity in
Syria. Fighting against impunity is not incompatible
with the search for a political solution — quite the
contrary. To fight against impunity is to fight against
precisely the elements that fuel war and violence. To
fight against impunity is to deter perpetrators from
committing more crimes. We deeply believe that
justice is an essential ingredient — an indispensable
ingredient — to restoring peace in Syria.
That is why, since January 2013, along with
57 other States, Luxembourg has pleaded relentlessly
with the Security Council to refer to the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) the situation
that has prevailed in Syria since March 2011, without
any exceptions and without distinguishing among the
alleged perpetrators of crimes. The victims in Syria
are begging us to give them at least that, a glimmer
of hope that ultimately they will have justice and the
perpetrators of the heinous crimes that have been
committed in the country will be held accountable for
their actions. The ICC was established precisely in order
to end impunity for the perpetrators of the most serious
crimes of concern to the international community as a
whole, and to ensure the effective prosecution of such
crimes when a State is unwilling or unable to do so.
That is certainly the case in Syria.
For that reason, Luxembourg sponsored and voted
in favour of today’s draft resolution (S/2014/348),
proposed by France to the Security Council, to refer the
situation in Syria since March 2011 to the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court. Beyond what divides
us, there is a set of shared values, a shared humanity
and a shared belief in the dignity and worth of human
beings that should unite us and generate unanimity in
the Security Council. The draft resolution proposed
by France reflects those shared values. Without
polemicizing, it was aimed at referring to the ICC all
violations committed by all parties to the conflict in
Syria — the widespread violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law committed by
the Syrian authorities and pro-Government militias,
on the one hand, and the violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law committed by the
non-State armed groups, on the other.
It is with deep regret that we have to conclude that
our shared humanity and values have not prevailed
14-40706 9/18
22/05/2014 The situation in the Middle East S/PV.7180
draft resolution (S/2014/348), 65, and the 13 votes in its
favour, should send an unmistakable message to those
responsible for these crimes. The draft resolution may
have been vetoed, but there is no statute of limitations
on the crimes being committed in Syria, and we will
continue to pursue justice for the victims.
The Security Council has a responsibility to
protect, a responsibility mandated by all our leaders
at their World Summit in 2005, and to prevent mass
atrocities where we can. The Council’s role was
specifically recognized in the Rome Statute, because
accountability is central to protection and to the
Council’s fundamental responsibilities relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
use of the veto to block a balanced draft resolution,
attempting to deliver accountability for the commission
of mass-atrocity crimes, comes at a great human cost.
The Council will, correctly, be judged harshly for that
failure. At the very least, today’s failure underlines the
importance of voluntary restraint on the use of the veto
in situations where mass atrocities are so clear.
This is the fourth veto in the Council in three
years to prevent action in Syria. In implementing our
mandate on peace and security, the Council is now
engaged in authorizing some of the highest numbers
of peacekeepers ever and increasingly in robust
operations to protect civilians in many crises. We are
doing that by common agreement among all members,
as we should. But when we fail, as we have again on
Syria today, the consequences can be devastating. The
victims of conflict have a right to the support of the
Security Council and action on our part. The Council
has a responsibility to provide that support and to act.
Ms. Murmokaité (Lithuania): I think we all knew
what the outcome of today’s voting would be, and yet
it is profoundly disappointing and disturbing to see
a fourth veto on the situation in Syria, this time on
the referral of the Syrian conflict to the International
Criminal Court (ICC). We thank France for creating
draft resolution S/2014/348, which was sponsored by
65 States, including my own.
With more than 160,000 lives lost, 2.7 million
refugees and close to 6.5 million displaced persons, this
veto is what it is — an endorsement of impunity. It is a
license for all perpetrators of human rights violations,
mass atrocities, crimes against humanity and war
crimes, in Syria and elsewhere, to continue those
grisly acts at will. Gross violations of international
war there is now in its fourth year. The country has
been broken apart, possibly irretrievably. Almost half
its population of more than 20 million people have
fled or been displaced. One family flees Syria every
60 seconds. We face a regime whose military strategy
is based on the deliberate targeting of civilians through
sieges, the use of starvation as a weapon of war,
indiscriminate aerial bombardment, the targeted use of
barrel bombs on residential neighbourhoods, arbitrary
denial of humanitarian access and medical supplies,
the targeting of hospitals and medical personnel, mass
systematic torture, sexual violence and execution,
forced depopulation of towns and cities and denial of
humanitarian supplies to its own citizens not living in
Government-held areas.
The humanitarian crisis, the greatest in this century,
is spiralling downwards. There is no solution in sight.
All sides in the conflict, including the extremists and
terrorists who have sought to hijack the opposition,
are guilty of terrible crimes. There is a pervasive
culture of impunity. No one is held accountable. The
Independent International Commission of Inquiry for
Syria has documented extensive evidence over the
past three years against those who have committed
war crimes and crimes against humanity. The United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has
concluded that such crimes have been committed and
over the past three years and has consistently called
for referral of the situation in Syria to the International
Criminal Court (ICC). In April, the Council itself was
shown the chilling photographic evidence, contained
in the Caesar report (S/2014/244, annex), documenting
the widespread and systematic torture and execution
on an industrial scale of detainees held by the Syrian
regime. The Secretary-General has persistently called
for accountability for the crimes we are seeing in Syria.
The International Criminal Court was specifically
established to ensure that those most responsible for the
worst mass-atrocity crimes would be held to account,
particularly in cases where their national authorities
were unwilling or unable to do so domestically.
The Syrian authorities have not only failed
in that responsibility, they are themselves among
the perpetrators of such crimes. The international
community must therefore act. Australia was one of
58 United Nations States Members who wrote to the
Council 18 months ago seeking referral of the situation
in Syria to the ICC, and the situation has become so much
worse since then. The number of sponsors of today’s
10/18 14-40706
S/PV.7180 The situation in the Middle East 22/05/2014
Today’s veto is a stand on the wrong side of justice
and accountability — a stand on the wrong side of
humanity. And yet, I am encouraged to see that today,
so many more chose to stand on the right side of history.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Since we joined the Council in January 2013 and on
numerous occasions, Argentina has supported the
referral of the situation in Syria to the International
Criminal Court so that the Court could impartially
exercise its jurisdiction with regard to all parties to one
of the most cruel, atrocious and overwhelming realities
of our time.
Allowing the perpetuation of impunity to be
the response to the crimes committed by all parties
in Syria corrodes not only the ethical, political and
legal foundations of the United Nations, but also the
Council’s responsibility to maintain international peace
and security. It is untenable and even offensive today
to seek to present a false dichotomy between peace
and justice. We have all learned that there is no justice
without peace and that peace is endangered without
justice.
Following our political resolve, our ethical
responsibility and our respect for international law,
Argentina voted in favour of the referral of the situation
in Syria to the International Criminal Court. Our
sole, firm and clear objective was the investigation
and prosecution by the Court of perpetrators of the
grave crimes idenfitied in the Rome Statute and the
recognition of the inalienable rights of their victims
to truth, memory, justice and reparation. At the same
time, Argentina decided not to be a sponsor of the
initiative, because it was also our objective to preserve
the integrity of the Statute, which requires referrals to
the Council to be formulated in the appropriate terms so
as not to undermine the legal foundations of the Rome
Statute itself or the Court’s validity and effectiveness.
On the one hand, it would seem that once again
we are to accept as normal the exercise of selective
justice. We should not be surprised that in comparable
situations where heinous crimes are committed, some
are considered appropriate to be referred to the Court
while others are not. On the other hand, there seems
to be an attempt to make us believe that undermining
the integrity of legal instruments in no way hinders
the objective of achieving justice. In some cases,
transcendent values are invoked, whereas in others
sophisticated arguments are brought into play, although
humanitarian law and human rights law continue
in Syria on a daily basis. Barbaric crimes are being
committed on a massive scale — crimes that should
have no place in the twenty-first century. Terrorism
is on the rise. Starvation is used as a weapon of war.
Humanitarian access is denied humanitarian aid
manipulated to force surrender. The level of physical
destruction and devastation is beyond description. A
generation of Syria’s children — 5.7 million, according
to UNICEF — are growing up robbed of a childhood,
education, home and consequently of their future. They
represent a huge lost generation.
Last month, during an Arria Formula meeting,
many of us were shocked into silence by the images
contained in the Caesar report (S/2014/244, annex)
of thousands of emaciated bodies bearing multiple
signs of horrific torture. To us, shocking as they were,
these were just images. To countless victims in Syria,
they are the gruesome facts of their daily lives. More
recently, many of us witnessed another testimony to the
atrocities committed by the Syrian regime, resulting
from the indiscriminate use of barrel bombs — again,
images too shocking to bear, yet gruesome facts of
daily life for the people of Syria.
Yet none of that seems to have moved those who
once again chose to veto a Council resolution on Syria,
and who by doing so chose to protect the victimizers,
not the victims, and opened even wider the floodgates
of bloodshed and impunity. The Syrian regime had
ample opportunities to first prevent and then stop the
bloodshed. It never sought to do so. A referral to the
ICC would not and could not have impeded any process
towards peace and reconciliation, because no such
process was taking place. All sides think they can win
the battle by force, which means even more civilian
deaths and even more destruction. The long-suffering
people of Syria deserve better.
As a permanent international court with a mandate
to prosecute war crimes and crimes against humanity
when national authorities are unable or unwilling to
do so, the ICC was created to address exactly the type
of situation that exists in Syria today. Although the
Court’s work can be only one piece of the larger justice
and accountability effort needed in that war-ravaged
country, Syria’s referral could have been a crucial first
step in the right direction. By today’s veto, that first
crucial step towards justice and accountability was
callously denied.
14-40706 11/18
22/05/2014 The situation in the Middle East S/PV.7180
to amend the standard of the Statute with regard to the
Court’s jurisdiction in a given situation or the fact that
if a decision is needed, the Court is ultimately the judge
of its own jurisdiction.
With regard to the funding for referrals, the
provision in paragraph 8 is not in accordance with the
Rome Statute and the Relationship Agreement between
the United Nations and the International Criminal
Court; Relationship Agreement. It is blatantly unfair.
Argentina disagrees with the Council’s claim that the
expenses of the referrral will not be met by the United
Nations. The Council cannot assume powers that it
does not possess, such as that of deciding the funding
of the referral. Under the Charter of the United Nations,
that is within the General Assembly’s jurisdiction. That
is also clear in paragraph 8, which refers to General
Assembly resolution 67/295. When it considers it
timely, the General Assembly therefore can, under
the Relationship Agreement, decide on the funding of
referrals made by the Council.
In conclusion, I would like to say that this is an
extremely sensitive and regrettable meeting. What
we should have done in good faith and failed to do by
speaking with one voice was in the end achieved through
powerlessness. Countless victims have heard that the
Council was unable to reach agreement on putting an
end to the deadly violence, eliminating the humiliating
impunity or helping to restore the lost peace in Syria.
However, the noble task and functioning of the ICC
in a multilateral system that seeks to end impunity,
establish the rule of law, promote and encourage
respect for human rights and achieve a lasting peace
in accordance with international law and the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, as
stated in the Kampala Declaration, does not allow us to
believe that we will never achieve what we have been
unable to do so to date. There is too much injustice for
us not to be fully confident that the Security Council
sooner rather than later will change its perception of
power and its way of working.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): For more than
three years, the situation in Syria has worsened daily.
There is no sign of improvement or calm on the horizon.
Nearly every day brings its share of new victims. Syrian
civilians, in particular women, children and the elderly,
are caught in the middle and continue to be the targets
of deliberate attacks, daily facing air strikes, artillery
fire, barrel bombs, forced displacement, car bombings,
they mainly lean on the pragmatic principle that the end
justifies the means. We have learned from experience,
however, that not every means leads to the desired end.
For Argentina and many other Member States,
neither the normalization of arbitrary behaviour, nor
legal regression nor pragmatism without values are
valid options. In our view, every heinous crime must
be subject to justice, wherever it may be committed and
whoever its perpetrators may be. Just as with human
rights, we cannot claim to respect some but not to
recognize others. We cannot maintain that we defend
the applicability of some provisions of a norm, but not
its entirety.
In 2005, when the Council adopted resolution
1593 (2005), referring the situation in Darfur to the
International Criminal Court, Argentina, as an elected
member of the Council at the time, maintained that
certain elements of the resolution should not become
permanent. However, today, we face the same scenario,
since the draft text before us reflects the intention
to refer only certain individuals, allows exemptions
regarding the scope of the jurisdiction of the Court
and the obligation to cooperate with it, and includes
a paragraph stating that the Council recognizes that
expenses incurred in connection with the referral will
not be borne by the United Nations but by the States
parties to the Rome Statute or through voluntary
contributions, thereby contradicting the provision of
the Statute. Is it necessary to recall that the Security
Council has the authority to compel all Members of
the United Nations, both parties and non-parties to
the Rome Statute, to cooperate with the Court? It is
disappointing that the Council does not put that ethical
obligation into practice.
With regard to exceptions of jurisdiction for
States not party to the Statute and the lack of United
Nations funding for referrals, I must mention not only
Argentina’s strong objection to such provisions but also
our understanding of the outcome, including for the
two previous referrals. In accordance with the Rome
Statute, in a referral the Court exercises its jurisdiction
over nationals of parties and non-parties to the Rome
Statute. The Security Council does not have the power
to declare an amendment to the Statute in order to grant
immunity to nationals of States non-parties who commit
crimes under the Statute in a situation referred to the
Court. That is to say, nothing in the text of paragraph
7 or of any other paragraph of the draft resolution on
which we have just voted would have had the power
12/18 14-40706
S/PV.7180 The situation in the Middle East 22/05/2014
been no dearth of complaints about the lack of unity
concerning Syria among the five permanent members
(P5) of the Security Council. Indeed, when that unity is
present, we manage to achieve concrete positive results.
Among such results, undoubtedly, was the adoption of
resolution 2118 (2013) on the destruction of the Syrian
chemical stockpile. That programme is about to be
successfully completed. Another important benchmark
was resolution 2139 (2014), on humanitarian issues.
P5 unity is important. After all, it is the reason
for which France has been pushing for P5 engagement
in the political settlement of the crisis. It has failed,
however, to advance any positive substantive ideas.
Why deal such a blow to P5 unity at this stage? Is it
just to try once again to create a pretext for armed
intervention in the Syrian conflict? We must not
overlook the fact that the head of French diplomacy saw
fit to take advantage of his recent visit to Washington,
D.C., to publicly criticize the United States for refusing
to shower missiles and bombs on Syria last fall.
It should be pointed out that this damage to
P5 unity is being inflicted at a critical point in the
efforts to find a political solution to the Syrian crisis.
The involuntary hiatus created by the resignation of
Lakhdar Brahimi should be used for an in-depth, fair
and collective analysis of the situation and to seek
out any possible resource to break the vicious cycle
of violence. In that respect, there is food for thought
contained in the political testament left behind by
Lakhdar Brahimi for the Security Council on 13 May.
That is exactly what the draft resolution presented by
Russia is aimed at: fostering the process of local truces.
That draft resolution is not to the liking of our Western
colleagues. They claim that the settlements already
achieved cannot be used as standards.
One cannot help recalling the Russian saying
that a bad peace is better than a good quarrel. What
are our Western colleagues proposing instead? They
are offering talk, which is good for naive people, and
assering that they will supply new types of weapons
to good opposition groups only. Their list of good
guys now includes the Al-Nusra Front, which has
openly confessed to a series of brutal terrorist attacks,
including the recent one in Aleppo that claimed the
lives of dozens of civilians. I would note that our
Western colleagues are demanding that cross-border
humanitarian deliveries to Syria be conducted through
border crossings controlled by the Front. At the same
time, they have long blocked any condemnation by
rape, torture, abduction and kidnapping. Such acts are
serious violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law and their perpetrators, whatever their
affiliation, should be brought to justice.
Chad has always denounced and firmly condemns
all kinds of violence and atrocities against civilians by
whomsoever. Unfortunately, we note with regret that
all such atrocities have not only gone unpunished but
have become more frequent as the conflict escalates.
We believe that the scope of violence and the lack of
prospects for a peaceful way out of the crisis jeopardize
the conditions conducive to the credible and fair
prosecution of the most serious crimes in national
courts. In that regard, not to support an initiative
seeking to combat impunity and the denial of justice
would be a serious failure by Chad as a State party to
the Rome Statute. In that strong belief and wanting to
contribute to the common effort to put an end to the
suffering of victims, Chad voted in favour of the draft
resolution that we have just voted on but, unfortunately,
not adopted.
While voting in favour on principle, Chad regrets
that the draft resolution, like those on Darfur and
Libya, provides for the discretionary treatment of a
category of State nationals with respect to the same
crime. However, such exemptions, which are in some
cases justified, are difficult for victims to accept and
undermine the principle of settling scores and the ideal
of independent and credible international criminal
justice for all, without exception, for the most serious
crimes.
In conclusion, Chad reiterates its appeal to all
parties to the Syrian conlfict to immediately meet their
obligation to protect civilians, humanitarian personnel
and medical vehicles and to allow the humanitarian
agencies unimpeded access to the entire civilian
population.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We understand the motives of many
delegations that supported or co-sponsored draft
resolution S/2014/348, referring the case of Syria to
the International Criminal Court (ICC). We share the
emotions elicited in them by the crisis in Syria, which
has dragged on for far too long. It is hard to witness the
destruction, loss of life and suffering of the people.
It is more difficult to discern the motives that led
France to initiate the draft and put it to a vote, fully
aware in advance of the fate it would meet. There has
14-40706 13/18
22/05/2014 The situation in the Middle East S/PV.7180
Great Britain is a party to the ICC, but for some reason
is unenthusiastic about the exploration in the Court of
crimes committed by British nationals during the Iraq
war. If the United States and the United Kingdom were
to together refer the Iraqi dossier to the ICC, the world
would see that they are truly against impunity.
We proceed from the premise that the Geneva
communiqué of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex)
remains at the core of efforts to settle the Syrian
crisis. The communiqué interprets the principles
of accountability and national reconciliation as
interrelated, leaving the leading role in that process to
the Syrians themselves.
We are convinced that justice in Syria will
eventually prevail. Those guilty of perpetrating grave
crimes will be punished, but if that is to happen, peace is
needed first and foremost. Russia will continue to make
every effort to stop the bloodshed as soon as possible.
We call upon our Western colleagues to abandon their
futile, dead-end policy of endlessly escalating the
Syrian crisis. We invite everyone who truly values the
interests of the Syrian people to join us in our efforts
to find a Syrian political settlement. Judging, as France
has today, that the political process is dead is just
irresponsible. Indeed, it is treachery towards the Syrian
people.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): For
over three years, the escalation of the conflict in Syria
has inflicted deep suffering on the Syrian people and
posed a serious challenge to the countries of the region
and the international community. China has always
maintained that all parties in Syria should respect
human rights and international humanitarian law and
prevent innocent people from being harmed during the
conflict. China is firmly opposed to all violations of
international humanitarian law or serious violations of
human rights committed by all parties to the conflict
in Syria. However, with regard to draft resolution
S/2014/348, on which the Council voted earlier, China
has some serious reservations.
First, China believes that any action to seek
recourse to the International Criminal Court (ICC) to
prosecute the perpetrators of serious violations should
be conducted on the basis of respect for State judicial
sovereignty and the principle of complementarity.
China is not a State party to the Rome Statute. China
always has reservations concerning the referral by the
Security Council of particular country situations to the
ICC. This is our principled position.
the Security Council of the numerous terrorist attacks
committed in Syria.
Pursuing regime change by force in Syria at all
costs will prolong the crisis and undermine the Geneva
negotiations. It is telling that Ahmad Jarba, the leader
of the National Coalition, made no effort to show up
to the Geneva negotiations, and is instead travelling
the world in search of weapons. Moaz al-Khatib, one
of his predecessors, was removed from office just for
attempting to launch talks with Damascus to stop the
bloodshed. In that context, it is striking that there is
not a single word on the political settlement and the
negotiating process among Syrians in the communiqué
issued on 15 May following the meeting of the so-
called London 11. The Western troika took great pains
to dissuade the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative from calling another round of Geneva
negotiations.
What justice can one talk about when the overriding
policy is aimed at escalating the conflict? The draft
resolution rejected today reveals an attempt to use
the ICC to further inflame political passions and lay
the ultimate groundwork for eventual outside military
intervention. It should be noted that the so-called
Caesar resport (S/2014/244, annex), which was used
to build up tension in the run-up to the introduction
of the draft resolution, was based on unconfirmed
information obtained from unverifiable sources and
therefore cannot serve as a platform for taking such a
serious decision.
One cannot ignore the fact that the last time the
Security Council referred a case to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) — the Libyan dossier, through
resolution 1970 (2011) — it did not help resolve the
crisis, but instead added fuel to the flames of conflict.
After the cessation of hostilities, the ICC did not exactly
rise to the occasion, to put it mildly. It did not contribute
to a return of normalcy or justice in Libya, and instead
evaded the most pressing issues. The deaths of civilians
as a result of NATO bombardments was somehow left
outside its scope. Our colleagues from NATO countries
arrogantly refused to address that issue altogether. They
even refuse to apologize, even as they waxed eloquent
about shame. They advocate fighting impunity but are
themselves practicing a policy of all-permissiveness.
The United States frequently indicates the ICC
option for others, but is reluctant to accede to the Rome
Statute itself. In todays’s draft resolution, the United
States insisted on an exemption for itself and its citizens.
14/18 14-40706
S/PV.7180 The situation in the Middle East 22/05/2014
to the country’s conditions and accommodating the
interests of all sides through dialogue and negotiation.
China is highly concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Syria and sympathizes with the suffering
of the Syrian people. It has provided humanitarian
assistance to the Syrian people and Syrian refugees
in neighbouring countries through various channels
on many occasions. China attaches great importance
to the legitimate concerns of all sides and of the Arab
countries on the question of Syria. We remain willing
to maintain close contact with all parties and promote
active efforts to seek a political solution to the question
of Syria and to maintain peace and stability in the
Middle East region.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.
The Republic of Korea voted in favour of draft
resolution S/2014/348. The situation in Syria requires
resolute and swift action by the Security Council.
Seeking accountability should be part of that action,
because sustainable peace is not possible without
justice. That is why we voted in favour of the draft
resolution, which referred the crimes against humanity
in Syria to the International Criminal Court.
It is extremely regrettable that the Council was
not able to agree to take action due to the vetoes. We
are letting down the aspirations of the international
community and of the Syrian people. It is also
disappointing to see the misplaced perception that
efforts to deliver justice cannot be compatible with
efforts to seek a political solution.
Having said that, I still believe that the Council
cannot afford to take today’s vote as a lasting setback
in our efforts. The current situation on the ground is
simply too serious and continues to call for effective
action on the part of the Council. The Republic of Korea
remains committed to working with other members to
answer the call.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The representative of France has asked for the floor
to make a further statement.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I had hoped
that the tone of my speech would have demonstrated to
everyone seated around this table and in the Chamber
our determination that the Council not again manifest
the same divisions. I wanted my statement to reflect my
Secondly, efforts to seek a political settlement to
the question of Syria are encountering difficulties. The
international community must shore up its confidence,
remain patient and be steadfastly committed to the
overall direction of the political settlement. What is
most urgently needed now is to urge the Government
of Syria and the opposition to immediately implement
a ceasefire and put an end to the violence in order to
start a third round of negotiations in Geneva so as to
advance the political process and embark on a political
transition. In the current circumstances, to forcibly refer
the situation in Syria to the ICC is not conducive either
to building trust among all parties in Syria or to an
early resumption of the negotiations in Geneva. It will
only jeopardize the efforts made by the international
community to push for a political settlement.
Thirdly, for some time now, the Security Council
has maintained unity and coordination on the question
of Syria, thanks to efforts by Council members,
including China, to accommodate the major concerns
of all parties. At a time when seriously diverging views
exist among the parties concerning the draft resolution,
we believe that the Council should continue holding
consultations, rather than forcing a vote on the draft
resolution, in order to avoid undermining Council
unity or obstructing coordination and cooperation
on questions such as Syria and other major serious
issues. Regrettably, China’s approach has not been
taken on board; China therefore voted against the draft
resolution.
I have already clearly elaborated my country’s
position and explicitly highlighted the facts and reasons.
Just now, the United States, the United Kingdom and
other Western countries have made totally unfounded
accusations against China. That is irresponsible and
hypocritical. China firmly rejects the slander expressed
by those Western countries against China.
China has continued to uphold an objective and
impartial position on the question of Syria. China
pursues no self interest on the issue, much less shield
any party, faction or persons in Syria. As a permanent
member of the Council and a responsible member of
the international community, China has remained
committed to seeking a political settlement to the
question of Syria.
China has endeavoured comprehensively and in a
balanced manner to engage with the Government of
Syria and opposition parties to urge them, based on the
demands of all sides, to seek a middle path appropriate
14-40706 15/18
22/05/2014 The situation in the Middle East S/PV.7180
he vote in favour of an arms embargo? Clearly, I think
he would not.
Lastly, with regard to the statement that the Caesar
report (S/2014/244, annex) is not verifiable — I regret
to say that is simply not true. The Caesar report was
submitted to independent experts from several countries
and all of them said that the photographs could not have
been technically altered.
I regret having to respond in this tone to the direct
attacks on the French Ministry for Foreign Affairs and
France. I wanted this debate to consider only the crimes
and atrocities committed by both sides in Syria — as we
have stated — and our straightforward determination
to send the clear message that in 2014 we cannot not
allow what took place in 1942 — notably at Russia’s
expense — or in 1994 to happen again. There are
judges, and one day the criminals will pay. However,
some prefer to protect the criminals.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, on behalf of the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic, I would like to offer our
condolences to the Government and people of Nigeria
for the terrorist acts that have rocked Kano and two
other cities, taking the lives of hundreds of innocent
civilians, as well as to convey our sympathies to the
relatives of the victims. I wanted to begin my statement
with these condolences because, while all of us sitting
at this round table feel the enormity of terrorism, none
feel it as we Syrians do.
Some of the Member States that sponsored today’s
draft resolution (S/2014/348) on the Syrian situation
remind me of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde in the Scottish
writer Robert Stevenson’s novel. They are trying to play
the role of Dr. Jekyll, the good guy, by promoting noble
principles, while in reality they represent Mr. Hyde, the
evil guy. That evil role is manifest in their involvement
in supporting terrorism in Syria and contributing to
the continued bloodshed , while weeping crocodile
tears over it. Mr. Hyde’s hands are stained with Syrian
blood, although he makes false claims of friendship
with the Syrian people, to the extent that a few days
ago — as mentioned by my colleague the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation — the former
leader of the so-called Syrian Coalition, a coalition
orchestrated and manufactured by those who call
themselves friends of the Syrian people, himself
desire to respect the dignity of the debate — a debate
that has to do with the infinite suffering of the Syrian
people — and my desire that those who committed
crimes be one day held to account for them. I see no
other way except to appeal to the International Criminal
Court. It was therefore a quite simple intervention. I
regret the fact that the representative of the Russian
Federation replied with an invective and direct personal
attacks. I will refer to four points raised in my Russian
colleague’s intervention: absurdity, confusion, error
and, lastly, effrontery.
With respect to absurdity, it was said that we
introduced draft resolution (S/2014/348) in preparation
for a military intervention. I do not consider that point
even worth arguing. As Talleyrand said, whatever is
excessive is insignificant.
On confusion, we have heard and seen our Russian
colleague moving from Tripoli to Baghdad, as if the
crimes and excesses committed in Tripoli and Baghdad
excused the current crimes and excesses in Damascus
today.
In error, my Russian colleague asserted that
the Syrian National Coalition was responsible for
the current impasse in the Geneva talks. In fact, as
Mr. Brahimi said himself here in the Council, in reality
it is the regime that is refusing his proposed two-
pronged approach, namely, parallel negotiations on the
subject of terrorism and the matter of the transitional
Government.
The representative of the Russian Federation
appealed to Mr. Brahimi several times to convene new
negotiations in Geneva. And Mr. Brahimi replied that it
was impossible because the regime simply did not want
to negotiate the transition. He said that he first needed
a general agreement on terrorism, before negotiating
the transition. If I define my Russian colleague’s
description of the reasons for the failure of the Geneva
negotiations as erroneous, it is because I am being quite
polite.
Finally, referring to effrontery, I believe that in
New York it is known as “chutzpa”: just like accusing
Western Powers of providing weapons to the opposition
while in fact Russia has never stopped selling weapons
to the regime. I am absolutely speechless at the fact
that the Russian Federation dares to raise the issue
of weapons. But if the Ambassador of the Russian
Federation wants, we can impose an arms embargo on
Syria. I am ready to vote in favour of that. But would
16/18 14-40706
S/PV.7180 The situation in the Middle East 22/05/2014
in the name of law and justice. In an example of this
approach, a group of Member States submitted today’s
draft resolution, which is political, discriminatory and
interventionist par excellence. It is designed to upset the
presidential elections in Syria and reshuffle the cards,
fuelling the crisis and achieving propaganda goals. It
seeks to involve the Security Council in the attitude
of hysterical hostility taken by some Member States
to Syria and its people. Its submission represents the
ceaseless efforts by some Member States to arrogate
to themselves the right to be the custodians of Syria’s
people and their national choices, in open disregard for
the will of the Syrian people and in stark contrast to the
Security Council’s repeated affirmation of its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic
and to the call for a Syrian-led political solution to the
Syrian crisis.
Moreover, the grounds presented by the sponsors in
justificationoftherequestforreferraltotheInternational
Criminal Court are nothing but mendacious allegations
and fabricated lies based on politicized and biased
reports that defy reason. Those reports were provided by
committees that ignored all the complaints, documents,
evidence and proof provided by the Syrian Government,
and they effectively help to serve the agendas of States
engaged in a hostile campaign against Syria.
The Syrian Arab Republic believes in international
criminal justice, and was among the States that
participated actively in the United Nations Diplomatic
Conference in Rome that adopted the Statute of
the International Criminal Court and were its first
signatories. Syria’s view is based on how important
it is that justice be comprehensive, transparent and
in no way politicized, selective or subject to double
standards. Against that backdrop, Syria called for the
crime of aggression, as the chief of all crimes, to be
included in the Court’s jurisdiction. That, however, was
denied, which is why my country has not ratified the
Rome Statute. Today, the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic emphasizes that in order to achieve
justice we must have the following.
First, we must hold accountable the Governments
of Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, France, Israel and other
States that are openly inciting violence and terrorism,
including by funding, arming, sponsoring, training,
recruiting and facilitating the entry of thousands of
mercenaries and terrorists from various parts of the
world into Syria, and that not only turn a blind eye
described those friends by saying that half of them are
liars, impostors and hypocrites, and they are responsible
for the conditions we are witnessing today in Syria. He
added that the West seeks to partition Syria.
That is the statement of a former leader of the Doha
coalition, manufactured in well-known capitals. There
happens to be a historical coincidence providing much
evidence to back up this fact. On this very day in 1945,
the Syrian delegation participated in the San Francisco
Conference, convened to draft the Charter of the United
Nations, at which Article 78 was formulated, thus
guaranteeing that Syria would not become a territory
under the French Mandate. On 29 May, 1945 the
occupying French forces bombed the Syrian Parliament
and killed its garrison. Since, as we have heard, war
crimes are not subject to the statute of limitations,
we demand that the Security Council hold the French
Government accountable for the crimes it committed
against Syrians and the peoples of the many countries
it once occupied and whose resources it looted. We call
on the Government of France to apologize publicly and
pay compensation to our people. We assure the Council
that the Syrian people are not going to forget the Sykes-
Picot Agreement or the fact that France subsequently
handed over Syria’s Iskenderun region to Turkey.
Moreover, the people of our region will never ignore the
fact that it was France that introduced Israeli nuclear
terrorism to the region.
The international legal system is based on
fundamental pillars, of which the most important
is the fact that States have primary and exclusive
responsibility for establishing accountability and
justice in their territories. As a result of the regrettable
events in my country, the Syrian Government has
taken a series of steps designed to hold accountable the
people involved in those events and to take appropriate
legal action against them. Our national investigation
committee continues to work alongside the Syrian
judiciary, which since the crisis began has investigated
30,000 cases, issued rulings on those involved and
settled the conditions for others, confirming the Syrian
Government’s desire and ability to have justice and
negating the possibility of pretexts aimed at involving
any international judicial body that might contradict
our national judiciary’s powers.
The Syrian crisis has revealed the degree to
which double standards rule when it comes to using
the mechanisms of the United Nations in order to
target certain Member States in particular regions
14-40706 17/18
22/05/2014 The situation in the Middle East S/PV.7180
Guantanamo, the bombing of the Chinese Embassy in
Belgrade, the flooding of Libya with blood, the secret
prisons, the use of drones to kill innocent civilians, the
practices of mercenary companies, such as Blackwater
in Iraq, and others — all these are vivid examples of
double standards that have escaped accountability and
punishment.
It is ironic that those countries continue to try to
impose their national legislation beyond their borders
and recently imposed sanctions on the head of the
National Relief Committee in Syria, while paying lip
service to their alleged support for the Syrian people.
Imagine, sanctions have been imposed on the head
of the National Relief Committee for humanitarian
relief in Syria. Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos
knows the head of the National Relief Committee in
Syria, and I will refer those sanctions to her. I hope that
she will do something.
That evidence, among other evidence, highlights
the fact that justice is tailored to fit the measurements
of targeted States. A crime may be prefabricated for
some States in order to refer them to the Court, while
others are shielded by a curtain that blocks the view
of their documented crimes and violations. The draft
resolution has been formulated in a way that protects
Israeli war criminals from being held accountable
for their crimes against the Syrian people. The draft
resolution also keeps foreign terrorists and mercenaries
flowing into Syria from other countries beyond the
Court’s jurisdiction. That process not only undermines
the credibility of its drafters, but it also exposes their
malicious intentions and aggressive motives.
Having mentioned the sanctions imposed on the
head of the National Relief Committee, I would also
like to remind the Council of another scandal that took
place when sanctions were imposed on the Minister of
Electricity in Syria. We referred the matter of the head
of the National Relief Committee in Syria to Valerie
Amos, and we will refer the sanctions on the Minister
of Electricity to the Court of Thomas Edison.
I reiterate that my delegation assures all Member
States that claim their concern for Syria and its people
that the way to help the Syrian people is clear and well
known. It is by exerting sincere and serious efforts to
fight terrorism, which targets Syria and its people. It is
also through supporting the efforts aimed at finding a
national solution to the Syrian crisis. The solution should
take into consideration the Geneva process, which
to their crimes but also describe such terrorists as a
moderate opposition.
I would like to convey to the Council a piece of news
mentioned by the chief commander of the Libyan Air
Force. He said that the Al-Qaida terrorist organization
in Libya and the Muslim Brotherhood in Libya together
sent 224 flights from Libya to Turkey, and from there to
Syria, to transfer terrorist mercenaries to Syria.
The balance of international justice and the rule of
law therefore will not be set right without putting an
end to the practices of those States and their repeated
violations of international law and Council resolutions
related to combating international terrorism. Terrorism
is a crime, no matter by whom, wherever or for
whatever purposes it is committed. Just as the terrorism
practiced by the Boko Haram in Nigeria is unanimously
condemned, and must be countered, equal condemnation
should be directed towards the terrorism committed by
its counterparts who are supported by Israel in the area
of separation in the occupied Syrian Golan, backed by
Turkey in the north and armed by Western and Arab
Governments in full view of the United Nations. Those
terrorists have committed unspeakable crimes that
shame the human conscience, the most recent of which
was cutting the water supply to the city of Aleppo and
depriving nearly 3 million Syrians of drinking water
and sanitation. We would have liked to see the States
that submitted today’s draft resolution instead present
a draft resolution to combat the terrorism suffered by
Syrians.
Secondly, there is a lack of accountability for the
documented war crimes, crimes against humanity
and acts of aggression and occupation committed by
the Israeli authorities in the occupied Arab territories,
including the occupied Syrian Golan, for over seven
decades. Those crimes were committed with the
support of some permanent members in the Council
that have thus far enabled the Israeli war criminals to
escape punishment and have obstructed all initiatives
aimed at holding them accountable.
Thirdly, we are concerned about attempts to
undermine justice through the immunity that some
of the great Powers have arrogated exclusively for
themselves. That immunity has helped them escape
any accountability for their human rights violations
their crimes committed in other Member States,
with the aim of implementing colonial agendas and
schemes for domination and oppression. Abu Ghraib,
18/18 14-40706
S/PV.7180 The situation in the Middle East 22/05/2014
clearly that armed groups are covered. And, concerning
exemptions, paragraph 7 sets covers nationals of a
country that is not party to the Rome Statute but who
are engaged in operations established or authorized by
the Security Council. In other words, if for example,
citizens of a Member State of the Security Council
were to participate in operations on Syrian territory,
the International Criminal Court could prosecute
them. The exemption in paragraph 7 does not protect
terrorists, no matter what they nationality may be.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I should like to note that my French colleagues
has not sounded very convincing today.
The President: The representative of France has
again asked for the floor.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): Only those
wish to be persuaded are persuaded.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation wishes to make a further statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We shall not concede that point.
The President: The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at noon.
is based on the dialogue among Syrians themselves
in order to reach consensus on rejecting violence,
combating terrorism and establishing a national unity
Government, without attempts to impose guardianship
and interventionist agendas that do not mean any good
for Syria or its people. The Syrians who will go to the
polls to elect the President of the Republic will be doing
so to protect their country from “creative terrorism”,
chaos and attempts to undermine the concepts of the
State and sovereignty altogether.
In conclusion, it seems that the current French
Government has misunderstood the famous phrase in
French literature “Hell is the others” in terms of the
belief that others are always an embodiment of hell,
while what the French philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre
meant by this phrase is that hell might be oneself and
one’s view of others and the way one interacts with
them. Therefore, the French Government should look
first at itself so that it might see hell in its actions and
behaviours and not in others.
The President: The representative of France has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): Please
excuse me, Mr. President, I do not want to extend the
debate further or get into polemics. I simply want to
make a factual correction on the text of draft resolution
S/2014/348, on which a vote has been taken. Unlike
what our Syrian colleague has just said, the draft
resolution does not exempt foreign mercenary terrorists
from other countries from the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court. Paragraph 1 states very
