United Nations S/PV.4506
Security Council
Fifty-seventh year
4506th meeting
Wednesday, 3 April 2002, 10.30 a.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.
02-31389 (E)
*0231389*
President: Mr. Lavrov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Russian Federation)
Members: Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Tafrov
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Belinga-Eboutou
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wang Yingfan
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Franco
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Levitte
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fall
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ryan
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Jingree
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Lajous
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Kolby
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Bhatia
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wehbe
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . Sir Jeremy Greenstock
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Negroponte
Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian Question
Letter dated 1 April 2002 from the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2002/336)
Letter dated 2 April 2002 from the Permanent Representative of South Africa
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2002/342)
2
S/PV.4506
The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President (spoke in Russian): I would like to
take this opportunity to express my gratitude to His
Excellency Mr. Ole Peter Kolby, Permanent
Representative of Norway to the United Nations, for
his work as President of the Security Council in March
2002. I am convinced that I speak for all members of
the Security Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Kolby and his entire delegation for the
great diplomatic skill with which the President
conducted the business of the Council last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian Question
Letter dated 1 April 2002 from the Permanent
Representative of the Tunisia to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2002/336)
Letter dated 2 April 2002 from the Permanent
Representative of the South Africa to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2002/342)
The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Algeria, Bangladesh, Brazil,
Chile, Cuba, Egypt, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mauritania, Namibia, Oman,
Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Spain, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates and Yemen,
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lancry
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria), Mr. Chowdhury
(Bangladesh), Mr. Fonseca (Brazil), Mr. Valdés
(Chile), Mr. Requeijo Gual (Cuba), Mr. Aboul
Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic
Republic of Iran), Mr. Satoh (Japan), Prince Zeid
Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan), Mr. Abulhasan
(Kuwait), Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya),
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia), Mr. Ould Deddach
(Mauritania), Mr. Andjaba (Namibia),
Mr. Al-Hinai (Oman), Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan),
Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Kumalo (South
Africa), Mr. Arias (Spain), Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia),
Mr. Cengizer (Turkey), Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine),
Mr. Al-Shamsi (United Arab Emirates) and
Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
3 April 2002 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine
to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document S/2002/343 and which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council to be held
today, Wednesday, 3 April 2002, regarding the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure and with
previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
3 April 2002 from the Chairman of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, which reads as follows:
“In my capacity as Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, I have the
3
S/PV.4506
honour to request that I be invited to participate
in the debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, under rule 39
of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council.”
On previous occasions, the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In conformity with past practice
in this matter, I propose that the Council extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now continue its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in response to requests contained in a letter
dated 1 April 2002 from the Permanent Representative
of Tunisia to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council, document
S/2001/336, and in a letter dated 2 April 2002 from the
Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council, document S/2002/342.
The first speaker inscribed on my list is the
Permanent Observer of Palestine, to whom I give the
floor.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me, Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and to
express our personal pleasure at seeing you, the
representative of the fraternal Russian Federation, in
that position. We would also like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Norway for the active
role he played while presiding over the Council last
month and for his full cooperation with us during his
presidency, in the course of which Security Council
resolution 1402 (2002) was adopted.
The Security Council is meeting today at the
request of the Arab Group and of the Non-Aligned
Caucus. We highly appreciate that request. We express
our appreciation to all the members of the Council for
their serious and immediate handling of the grave
situation resulting from Israel’s new, bloody act of
aggression against the Palestinian people, the
Palestinian Authority and President Yasser Arafat. We
specifically appreciate the Council’s quick adoption of
its important resolution 1402 (2002) on 30 March.
Three days ago, Mr. Ariel Sharon delivered yet
another insane statement to be added to other ominous
statements, starting with that in which he rejected any
final settlement of the Palestinian question, continuing
with that in which expressed his regret that he had not
killed Chairman Arafat years ago, and ending with that
in which he said that the only remaining open road is
that of inflicting the greatest number of casualties on
the Palestinian people. Mr. Sharon spoke of war and
war alone in that statement. It seemed as if he were
determined to take all of us in the Middle East to the
precipice. He rejected a ceasefire and once again
categorized the only potential partner for peace on the
Palestinian side as an enemy. Yesterday Mr. Sharon
added yet another insolent and insane statement when
he suggested that President Arafat could leave his
country and homeland.
Alongside that statement, the Israeli occupation
forces broadened the scope of their military attacks and
aggression against our Palestinian people, which
started six days ago. They reoccupied the cities of
Qalqilya, Tulkarm, Beit Jala and Bethlehem, and today
Jenin was added to the list. The Israeli forces continue,
particularly in the city of Ramallah, to carry out
heinous crimes, including war crimes and State
terrorism. The Israeli occupation forces have killed
many Palestinians, including five members of the
Palestinian forces in an apartment three days ago; some
of those killed had surrendered two days earlier. The
occupation forces have shelled individuals and sites
with heavy weaponry and helicopter gunships. They
have attacked churches and hospitals and have
prevented ambulances and medical teams from
reaching their destinations.
In Bethlehem, the Israeli forces have imposed a
military siege against the Church of the Nativity, where
Christ, peace be upon Him, was born. Can Council
members imagine that? Tanks surrounding the Church
of the Nativity? God forbid that the world might be
witnessing the devastation of the Church of the
Nativity in addition to previous massacres, such as the
carnage at the Sabra and Shatila refugee camps.
The occupation forces have prevented any media
presence in Ramallah. They have declared the city a
closed military zone and have shot at journalists. They
have shut off water and electricity throughout the city’s
4
S/PV.4506
neighbourhoods and have imposed a curfew. They have
broken into homes, rounding up men and youths and
taking them to detention centres, where they are
pressured, beaten and humiliated.
It is difficult for us to enumerate all the
developments, taking into consideration the insane
escalation caused by the Israeli forces. The Israeli
forces have caused destruction in all our cities, which
is escalating by the hour. We welcome the international
community to a scene recalling Warsaw under Nazi
occupation, or any other European city occupied by the
army of Nazi Germany.
Furthermore, the Israeli occupation forces
continue to occupy President Arafat’s headquarters
after destroying most of it. They continue to lay siege
to the small office within the headquarters; they
continue to shoot at the office and try to tighten their
grip over it in every way. Once again, we strongly warn
of the dangers inherent in these practices that threaten
Mr. Arafat’s personal safety. He is the symbol of the
Palestinian national identity and of the Palestinian
struggle for liberation and independence.
Certain Israelis have insolently declared that the
Israeli military attacks will continue for weeks. That
would take us to the point of no return. It should be
rejected decisively by the international community. But
frankly, this Israeli position reminds us, unfortunately,
that influential international players have provided
cover for the whole series of Sharonic positions. We
hope this will end soon so that we can truly put an end
to the tragedy and return to the path of peace.
Yesterday Mr. Sharon also attempted, along with
many other Israeli officials, to link what Israel is doing
against the Palestinian people with what the United
States had done in Afghanistan. That is cheap political
prostitution that exploits the suffering in the United
States following 11 September and that erodes the
legitimacy of the fight against international terrorism.
Our position against all terrorist acts, including the
bombings in Israel, is clear and explicit. We condemn
them in their entirety.
But Israel remains an occupation force. It has
occupied our land for more than 35 years, during which
it turned the occupation into a colonial settler
occupation in which it transferred hundreds of
thousands of Israeli citizens to the occupied territories
and built settlements on our land. Israel rejects our
people’s rights. It has worked against the realization of
our right to self-determination and to the establishment
of our independent State. Israel is the only occupying
Power in the world. Israel is the country and the army
that has committed war crimes and State terrorism. It is
the State that continues to violate international law,
international humanitarian law and relevant Security
Council resolutions.
The main difference between what is occurring on
the Israeli side and on the Palestinian side is that in the
first case it is being carried out by a State army under
Government orders, including war crimes and State
terrorism, while in the second case it is being carried
out by illegal groups that are condemned by the
Palestinian Authority, which considers their acts to be
against Palestinian national interests. That is the true
picture. Failure to recognize this lacks ethical, political
and legal validity; such a position can only seriously
compromise the international community’s task,
including working to build peace throughout the world,
and particularly waging the fight against terrorism.
Mr. Sharon’s statement to which I referred earlier
was his response to Security Council resolution 1402
(2002). We believe that, in the face of that response,
the Security Council must seriously follow up on
implementation of the resolution in order to ensure the
immediate implementation of all its provisions. The
immediate implementation of resolution 1402 (2002) is
the only way to put an end to the rapid deterioration of
the situation and to begin to get back on track.
In view of the fact that the resolution has not
been implemented, the Arab Group has asked for the
submission of a draft resolution demanding the
immediate implementation of the provisions of
resolution 1402 (2002). Some Council members have
said that it is too early to adopt such a new resolution.
For a people under siege there is no such thing as too
early while the suffering, the siege and the
humanitarian tragedy continue, along with their
political repercussions. We appeal to the members of
the Council to adopt such a draft resolution as soon as
possible.
We are also convinced that following the
implementation of resolution 1402 (2002), the Council
must consider a way by which it can assist in moving
things forward. There is no doubt that one of the means
available would be the presence of an international
third party on the ground to assist both parties in
implementing the Tenet plan and the Mitchell
5
S/PV.4506
recommendations, advance the peace process and
provide protection to the Palestinian people.
We would like once again to express our
appreciation for the efforts made by the Secretary-
General to end the ongoing tragedy and to get the
situation back on the path to peace. We appreciate his
initiative to meet with the Security Council, as well as
the important statement he made to the Council. We are
confident that the Secretary-General and his Personal
Representative in the Middle East will continue their
efforts in coordination with the Security Council. In
this respect, we fully welcome the positions of the
Secretary-General with regard to the immediate
implementation of resolution 1402 (2002) and to an
international third-party presence, as well as with
regard for the need for a comprehensive approach that
includes both the political and security dimensions. We
call on the Security Council to respond positively and
to adopt the same positions, which would truly lead to
an end of the current tragic situation in the occupied
territories and put the situation back on the road to
peace.
I would like once again to thank all the members
of the Council.
The President (spoke in Russian): I think the
Permanent Observer of Palestine for his kind words
addressed to my delegation and my country.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Israel, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Lancry (Israel): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council, and to thank
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Norway, for his most able leadership.
The Council meets today at a critical moment for
the peoples of the Middle East. In the past seven days
there have been seven Palestinian suicide bombings in
Israel, killing over 40 people and wounding well over
100. On our northern border, Hezbullah is attacking
Israeli positions for the second day, following several
weeks of escalating tensions in the area. Yesterday we
met here in this Chamber and had a constructive
discussion on how to address the current situation and
on how we might best move forward. I appreciate the
willingness of Council members to engage in a frank
and open exchange of views in the spirit of dialogue.
We discussed resolution 1397 (2002), which
Israel has fully accepted both in the vision it articulates
and in the concrete steps it details. We have shown
ourselves to be willing to fully implement this
resolution, including the call for a genuine cessation of
hostilities, terrorism and incitement and full
implementation of the Tenet plan and the Mitchell
report, and we had begun to take concrete steps in this
direction prior to the Passover massacre last week,
which led to the current deterioration. Indeed, every
Israeli concession has been met with terrorism.
We also discussed resolution 1402 (2002), which
Israel has not rejected. We recognize the positive
elements of that resolution, namely, the call for a
complete and meaningful ceasefire, which we firmly
believe would lead to the withdrawal of Israeli troops.
No one should doubt that when the violence and the
terrorism have ended, so will the need for further
Israeli military action. Indeed, the key elements of
resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002) are
themselves the elements of the Tenet and Mitchell
plans, which Israel has accepted and continually shown
itself willing to implement. We still await a reciprocal
Palestinian response.
It is widely said that the obstacle to a ceasefire,
from the Palestinian perspective, is the lack of a
political horizon. But one need only look at the lengthy
list of agreements that have been reached in the past
decade, the Security Council resolutions that have been
adopted and the broad international consensus —
including among the Israeli people — that the
Palestinians are entitled to establish their own
independent State. The Mitchell report, permanent
status negotiations on the basis of resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) and the vision of two States
expressed in resolution 1397 (2002) — this is the
political horizon. But let us be very clear: even when
there was the clearest and brightest political horizon,
the Palestinians did nothing to curb violence and terror.
After Israel extended a far- reaching peace proposal at
Camp David in July 2000, the Palestinian leadership
launched a campaign of violence against us. And even
as the sides met and considered further enhancements
to Mr. Barak’s peace offer, namely, in the discussions
conducted at Taba, Palestinian violence and terrorism
still threatened the lives of Israelis.
The international community must recognize that
the Palestinians have made a strategic choice to engage
in terrorism for the achievement of political objectives.
6
S/PV.4506
While they speak of a strategic choice for peace, their
true strategic place itself is out on television every day,
and to gruesome effect. In such an atmosphere, Israel
has no choice but to exercise its right and duty under
international law to defend ourselves. This is a right
that any State would exercise under the conditions that
we have been facing, and in fact, several States have
already done so. No State would tolerate continued
daily assaults — suicidal terrorism — on the streets of
its cities. Israel will continue to do what it deems
necessary to protect ourselves against the threat. We
will act not to occupy, but to uproot the terrorist
infrastructure, even as Palestinian gunmen use Holy
Sites — including Bethlehem’s Church of the
Nativity — as a bunker, firing at Israeli soldiers from
its windows and seeking refuge in its sanctuary, in
violation of the most basic norms.
But make no mistake, our hand remains extended
in peace. Our immediate objective remains the
achievement of a ceasefire. And our ultimate goal is
the conclusion of a comprehensive and final settlement
of the conflict. If you do not believe this, I invite the
Palestinians, with the Security Council as a witness, to
put us to the test. Let us call for an immediate ceasefire
and begin implementing Tenet and Mitchell. Let us
discover what underlies Prime Minister Sharon’s
proposal as to painful compromises. Put us to the test
of peace. It is that simple. Do not look for any
ambiguous political horizon.
The Security Council has an opportunity to
facilitate this process by adopting the draft resolution
that will probably be submitted and which calls for an
immediate implementation of resolution 1402 (2002).
If the Council is to act in a spirit of responsibility and
balance, it must include, beside the demand of an
immediate implementation of resolution 1402 (2002), a
call for the Palestinian side to cease immediately the
suicide bombings in Israel. We believe that this not
only would be a more fair and balanced position but
could be the impetus needed to achieve a genuine
ceasefire, begin the withdrawal of Israeli troops and
ultimately put both parties back on the path towards the
process of dialogue, negotiations and, hopefully, final
status achievement in peaceful coexistence.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Israel for his kind words addressed to
me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Tunisia. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me, Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
hope that your work will be crowned with success. I
would also like to thank the Ambassador of Norway for
his excellent leadership of the Council during the
previous month.
I would like to thank you sincerely, Sir, for your
rapid response in convening this emergency meeting,
which is taking place in the light of the dangerous
deterioration of the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, despite the recently adopted
Security Council resolutions, namely resolutions 1397
(2002) and 1402 (2002), the latter being adopted last
Saturday.
Israel’s immediate rejection of resolution 1402
(2002) and the dangerous escalation of the activities of
the Israeli armed forces in the occupied Palestinian
territories, as well as the continuation of the siege
imposed on President Arafat’s compound, represent a
flagrant defiance of international law and international
humanitarian law. They clearly demonstrate that the
policy of the Government of Prime Minister Sharon is
based on a rejection of the peace option and is an
endeavour to abort any international or Arab initiative
that could lead to a comprehensive and just settlement
of the Middle East problem.
The fact that the Israeli Prime Minister has
threatened to exile President Arafat from his country
and homeland marks a new stage in the deterioration of
the situation, revealing the genuine intentions of Prime
Minister Sharon, who has flagrantly disregarded
international law, international humanitarian law and
the 1949 Geneva Convention. Those actions confirm
that he is continuing his policy of physical elimination,
that he is perpetrating war crimes punishable under
international law and that he considers the reoccupied
Palestinian territories as zones closed to journalists and
the media. This is further evidence of Prime Minister
Sharon’s intentions, namely, the physical elimination
and genocide of the unarmed Palestinian population.
We consider that Israel’s persistence in pursuing
such a futile policy and political adventurism not only
is harmful to the civilian population but will also have
serious repercussions for the Israelis themselves. In
7
S/PV.4506
fact, the excessive recourse to military force does not
guarantee the security of Israel. It can, in fact, lead to
further deterioration and to a flare-up in the region as a
whole, thereby creating a clear threat to international
peace and security.
In the light of this painful situation, we consider
that there is no alternative to withdrawing all Israeli
forces from all occupied Palestinian territories, the
lifting of the siege imposed on President Arafat’s
compound and addressing immediately the security
situation so that peace negotiations can be resumed.
The Arab States hope that the Security Council
will now call for the immediate implementation of
resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002) — as strongly
called for by the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
during his meeting with the Council and in his
presentation of his report — while recalling the need
for the immediate application of operative paragraph 1
of resolution 1402 (2002) without any linkage, as
called for by the Secretary-General and the previous
Security Council President, the Ambassador of
Norway. This should be done before a vote is taken on
any resolution.
International protection for the Palestinian people
has become one of the most urgent and overriding
requirements because this is the only guarantee
available thus far to halt the dangerous and very tragic
escalation of violence.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Tunisia for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Ukraine. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
and to make his statement.
Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): I would like to begin
by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. I am confident that,
under your able leadership, the Council will effectively
address burning issues of peace and security,
specifically the situation in the Middle East. My thanks
also go to Ambassador Kolby of Norway and his
delegation for the way in which they guided the
Council during the month of March.
Ukraine is participating in this debate to express
its deep concern about the extremely dangerous
situation in the Middle East. Each time the Security
Council considers this issue, it seems that the situation
has already reached its most critical point and that
common sense will guide the parties from the path of
violence to the path of dialogue. Much to our regret,
that logic has not been working in the Middle East, and
violence continues to dominate over wisdom.
Ukraine has condemned in the strongest terms
possible the recent terrorist acts in Israel, specifically
those in Netanya, Jerusalem and Haifa. No one can
justify the killing of innocent civilians. We call on the
Palestinian leadership to take urgent and decisive
action to prevent terrorist acts and to stop the activities
of terrorist networks. They endanger the prospects for
peace in the region and are not bringing the Palestinian
people closer to the fulfilment of their legitimate
aspiration to a Palestinian State.
However, one cannot realistically demand that the
Palestinian Authority and its elected President, Yasser
Arafat, fight terror while at the same time eliminating
their ability to do so. Israel must stop the devastating
raids into Palestinian-controlled territory, the excessive
use of force and the attacks on heavily populated areas.
Most immediately, we urge Israel to put an end to the
siege of the headquarters of Yasser Arafat and to
withdraw its forces from Ramallah and other
Palestinian cities. The use of force will not bring
security to Israel and its people.
Ukraine is confident that there can be no military
solution to the conflict and that none of the problems
that separate the Israeli and Palestinian peoples can be
resolved by means of force and violence. It is
necessary to look beyond the hatred and despair and to
find, through negotiation, the political solution that
will bring a comprehensive, just and lasting peace to
the Middle East. To achieve that goal, both security and
political efforts should be pursued in parallel.
Only last week, the Arab League summit adopted
a historic decision on the initiative of Crown Prince
Abdullah of Saudi Arabia, offering to establish normal
relations with Israel and to provide security for all
States in the region, in exchange for full Israeli
withdrawal from the territories occupied since 1967
and Israel’s acceptance of a Palestinian State. On the
eve of the summit, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1397 (2002), which affirmed the vision of a
region where two States — Israel and Palestine — live
side by side within secure and recognized borders.
Ukraine welcomes both of those decisions; they
restore a clear political perspective to the settlement
8
S/PV.4506
process and outline a concept of comprehensive and
lasting peace in the Middle East, based on Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and on
the principle of land for peace. The implementation of
the Tenet work plan and the Mitchell committee
recommendations would help negotiations to resume so
as to make this vision a reality.
These positive and encouraging steps should not
fall victim to the deadly explosion of shells. We urge
the parties to seize this opportunity and to implement,
unconditionally and without delay, the provisions of
the most recent Security Council resolutions on the
subject — resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1397 (2002) —
in fulfilment of their commitments under the United
Nations Charter. It is indeed unacceptable that the
Council’s decisions should be ignored at a time when,
at last, the Council has become fully engaged in the
settlement of the conflict.
Of particular importance is the need for the
maximum mobilization and coordination of
international diplomatic efforts aimed at breaking the
deadlock in the crisis and resuming peace negotiations.
It has become evident that the parties cannot achieve
this on their own. The Security Council should
continue to remain seized of the matter; in particular, it
might return to consideration of a third-party
mechanism.
We also welcome in this regard the ongoing
efforts of General Zinni and the “quartet”, and we
consider the personal involvement of the Secretary-
General, Kofi Annan, in the process as a critically
important factor. As an active participant in all of these
efforts, Ukraine is ready to further contribute to this
end.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Ukraine for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council is holding an open debate for the
second time in less than 96 hours in an attempt to find
a way out of the tragic circumstances to which the
people of Palestine are being subjected as a result of
the continued Israeli acts of aggression inside the
territories of the Palestinian Authority and inside the
compound of its legitimately elected leadership.
Once again, we would like to reiterate that Israeli
defiance — its refusal to implement Security Council
resolutions, most recent among them resolution 1402
(2002) — will lead to further deterioration. The peace
and security of the Israeli people, which Israel claims
to be seeking, will not come about unless security for
the Palestinian people is realized. Peace will not be
achieved unless the Palestinian people obtain their
rights in full.
What is required today of the Security Council is
for it to reaffirm its earlier resolutions. The Council
must call for an immediate Israeli withdrawal from the
Palestinian territories, an immediate lifting of the siege
imposed on Palestinian cities and an end to all forms of
aggression against the Palestinian people and its
legitimate leadership. The Israeli Government must
realize that all aspects of its aggression against
Palestine are doomed to failure, because the Palestinian
people will stand up forcefully to such aggression and
will continue its resistance to end Israeli occupation of
its territories. The occupation is the origin of the
problem. It must be ended immediately if the region is
to enjoy stability and calm.
Many Israeli government officials speak of peace.
They speak of a desire to live in peace with the
Palestinians. They say that they are extending their
hand in peace. These are claims that no one in his right
mind can believe any longer, in the light of what we
see clearly on our television screens. Israel is asking
for a unique kind of peace: a peace built on attempts to
subdue Palestinians so that they will accept the
occupation of their territories, which are subjected to
forcible settler colonization by terrorist elements for
whom armed force is a way of life. Israel is asking for
peace, but under conditions tantamount to transforming
the Palestinian people into splinter groups living in
isolated bantustans in the service of the Israeli
economy and Israeli society, or into refugees exiled
from their land or prisoners allowed to stay there under
aggression and tyranny.
Those who speak of civilization and barbarism
must learn from history that barbarism is, at best, the
occupation of other people’s territory, settler
colonization and the killing or physical liquidation of
those who resist or oppose. That is the true face of
barbarism, which we thought we had left behind us 57
9
S/PV.4506
years ago. They speak of democracy and of the free
world. They say they are part and parcel of democracy
and of the free world. To them, I say that the free world
does not occupy the territory of others by force and
does not subject other peoples to occupation. True
democracies do not occupy the territory of others and
do not commit aggression against what is not rightfully
theirs. Let them stop the lies, because they can no
longer convince anyone.
The situation calls for a very conscientious and
in-depth look at what is really required. Egypt calls for
international action, through the Security Council, that
would achieve a final and comprehensive settlement of
the Arab-Israeli conflict. What is required for the
attainment of that objective is an agreement on the
necessary elements of any settlement. They are well
known to all of us and can be summarized as follows:
first, Israeli withdrawal from the Palestinian territories
occupied since 5 June 1967; secondly, the
establishment of an independent, sovereign Palestinian
State with East Jerusalem as its capital; thirdly,
arrangements guaranteeing security for all parties on an
equal footing in terms of rights and commitments; and
fourthly, the establishment, after all withdrawals have
been carried out, of comprehensive peaceful relations,
good-neighbourly relations and constructive
cooperation among the region’s States and peoples on
the basis I set out earlier — the Madrid formula of land
for peace, endorsed by the international community and
accepted by the parties. Or at least we thought they had
been accepted by the parties.
The importance of those principles, as well as the
need for them to be part of any settlement plan, must
be reaffirmed. That would lead to a measure of
confidence-building in this political process, which
must be restarted after Israel’s attempt to demolish it.
This plan will lead us to negotiations on the details of
such a just and comprehensive final settlement, whose
elements we reviewed a moment ago.
Once again, I reiterate that Israel’s continued
occupation, acts of aggression, attempts at repression
and failure to recognize the Palestinian people’s right
to self-determination and to the establishment of an
independent State on its land will only lead to further
suffering by both Palestinians and Israelis. The forces
of aggression, darkness and terror cannot be victorious.
All involved must shoulder their responsibilities —
primarily the States members of the Security Council,
and in particular the permanent members. They all bear
a special responsibility, and they cannot forget, or
claim to have forgotten, it.
The President (spoke in Russian): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Spain, whom
I invite to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated
with the European Union — Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia — the associated
countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, and the European
Free Trade Association country belonging to the
European Economic Area Iceland align themselves
with this statement.
Today the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the
European Union are holding a special meeting in
Luxembourg to discuss the tragic situation in the
Middle East.
Since the Security Council public meeting that
took place last Friday night, the situation of terror and
violence on the ground has escalated further. The
European Union is dismayed at this seemingly
unending spiral of death, destruction, revenge and
reprisal. We reiterate our urgent call on both sides to
take immediate and effective action to stop the
bloodshed. Terror and violence must stop. The
Palestinian Authority and the Israeli Government must
prove their leadership and assume their responsibilities
with respect to their own peoples. Months and years of
violence should have taught us that we cannot conceive
of a military solution to this conflict.
We reiterate that there is no military solution to
this conflict. The language and the logic of war have to
stop and be replaced by dialogue and negotiation.
Peace and security for both parties can be achieved
only through negotiation. In this regard, it is essential
to address and implement security, political and
economic measures in parallel and simultaneously in a
single process.
The European Union warmly welcomes the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1402 (2002),
which reflects the grave concern and the strong
commitment of the international community.
Resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002) must both be
implemented immediately, in particular the demand for
10
S/PV.4506
an immediate cessation of violence, including acts of
terror, provocation, incitement and destruction; the call
for both parties to move immediately to a meaningful
ceasefire; the call for the withdrawal of Israeli troops
from Palestinian cities, including Ramallah; and the
call for the parties to cooperate fully with Special
Envoy Zinni and others to implement the Tenet work
plan and the Mitchell report’s recommendations, with
the aim of resuming negotiations on a political
settlement.
The European Union wishes to recall the common
understanding of the Security Council members that
operative paragraph 1 of resolution 1402 (2002) does
not indicate — I repeat, does not indicate — any
sequence of the elements listed, as stated by the
Council President.
The European Union condemns in the most
categorical terms the latest terrorist attacks and
reiterates its demands to the Palestinian Authority and
to its President, Mr. Arafat, to adopt all possible
measures to stop the cycle of violence, to dismantle all
terrorist networks and to ensure that initiators and
perpetrators of the attacks of recent days do not go
unpunished. However, the legitimate fight of Israel
against terrorism and its reaction to the brutal attacks
also have to be compatible with the effective operating
capacity of the Palestinian Authority and of its
President, legitimate representatives of the Palestinian
people. This capacity should in no way be weakened.
Therefore, the European Union urges an end to
the occupation of the headquarters of the Palestinian
Authority in Ramallah and to the isolation and
restriction of movement of President Arafat, and calls
for the immediate withdrawal of the Israeli Defence
Forces from that city and from other areas under the
control of the Palestinian Authority. Closures and other
restrictions must be lifted immediately. There is
nothing to be gained by destroying the Palestinian
Authority. Peace cannot be achieved by ignoring or
continually humiliating one’s opponent, or simply
hoping to destroy him.
Israel, notwithstanding its right to fight terrorism,
must respect international law. The practice of
extrajudicial killings is contrary to international law.
The use of excessive force cannot be justified. The
actions against medical and humanitarian institutions
and personnel are absolutely unacceptable and contrary
to United Nations conventions and international
humanitarian law. Such personnel must be able to
perform their functions fully. Both parties must respect
international humanitarian standards and protect
civilian lives.
The European Union welcomes the resolution
adopted at the summit of the League of Arab States in
Beirut, which could be a solid basis for progress
towards a political perspective for a fair and
comprehensive peace in the region and the
establishment of normal relations between Israel and
the Arab world, safeguarding the security of all
countries involved and offering them a future of
stability and prosperity.
The European Union is currently in close contact
with the parties, the countries in the region, the United
States, the United Nations and Russia. In order to break
this cycle of unprecedented violence, the “quartet” of
special envoys must be given full access to all parties
to try to help them to achieve an immediate ceasefire.
Diplomat and consular representatives must also have
full access to their own citizens in the territories and be
able to fully perform their tasks.
In the face of escalating violence and mutual
distrust, the European Union remains convinced that an
impartial monitoring mechanism is called for, and we
urge the parties to accept observers. The European
Union and its member States stand ready to participate
in such a monitoring mechanism.
Israel needs recognition of its right to live in
peace within secure boundaries guaranteed by the
international community, in particular the Arab
countries. At the same time the Palestinian people also
need the recognition of their right to live in peace, in a
democratic, viable and independent State of Palestine,
bringing an end to the 1967 occupation. We reaffirm
that a just, lasting and comprehensive solution to the
conflict must be based on Security Council resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002) and on the
principles of the Madrid Conference, of Oslo and
subsequent agreements.
The President (spoke in Russian): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of
Iran): Mr. President, we are very pleased to see you
presiding over the Council this month, and we thank
11
S/PV.4506
you for having convened this timely public meeting on
the grave situation in the Palestinian territories. My
gratitude goes also to Ambassador Kolby of Norway
for the praiseworthy manner in which he conducted the
work of the Council last month.
The situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories has continued to deteriorate since the
Council last met on this issue. The bloody campaign
against defenceless civilians in the occupied territories
goes on unabated. Palestinians are trapped and
besieged by Israeli tanks and other state-of-the-art
weapons generously made available to the Israeli
regime. All-out repression, excessive use of force,
collective punishment against an entire people — a
people that has been enclosed and humiliated — have
thus far fuelled the endless cycle of violence and could
engulf the entire Middle East region. Media reports
indicating that food supplies and medicine are rapidly
running out in the besieged towns are further cause for
concern.
At a time when the plight of the Palestinians is
the focus of the entire international community and
when public opinion throughout the world finds the
atrocities committed by the Israeli troops to be
increasingly appalling, the Israeli regime, in order to
conceal its crimes in the Palestinian territories, is
increasingly taking on journalists who are struggling to
cover the aggression and its serious impact on
civilians. In so doing, Israeli troops curb and even
deliberately fire upon reporters with a view to
intimidating and dissuading them from carrying on
their work. Moreover, hundreds of peace activists,
mainly Europeans, as well as medical teams, are
abused and fired upon.
Decades of struggle by the Palestinian people for
their right to self-determination have clearly
demonstrated that the repressive policy atrociously
employed by the Zionists has thus far only hardened
the resolve of the Palestinians. The intensity of
resistance that the people under Israeli occupation are
currently exhibiting is truly unprecedented in the past
half-century. Evidently, it puts the occupiers on notice
that, unless the aspirations of the Palestinians are
realized and their rights restored, they should expect
graver consequences by the day.
In the midst of the tragic events taking place in
the course of the ongoing conflict, the international
community must contemplate the reasons that prompt
Palestinian teenagers and youngsters, who normally
should be seeing a bright future ahead, to sacrifice their
lives. It should be borne in mind that the exceptionality
of the response demonstrates the exceptionally ruthless
crimes committed against the Palestinian people over a
very long period of time — crimes that, by any
measure, are unprecedented, even in comparison to
similar instances in the colonial era.
Undoubtedly, approaching the issue
simplistically, playing the blame game and restoring
repetitious and superficial rhetoric by evoking
terrorism will, in this case, lead nowhere. Each time the
Israelis bulldoze more Arab homes and each time they
kill Palestinians and their hopes, they create more
militants. This may go on and on forever. What is now
unfolding in the Palestinian territories is a struggle for
national liberation and the right of self-determination
stolen from the Palestinian people for so long.
By refusing to withdraw from Palestinian towns,
as stipulated in Security Council resolution 1402
(2002), and, contrarily, by strengthening its occupation,
the Israeli regime is bluntly defying the will of the
international community, represented by this Council.
It is very unfortunate that those who stretch and
baselessly interpret Council resolutions just to advance
their narrow interests are now grasping at straws in
flouting the letter and spirit of a clear-cut resolution.
There is no doubt that selective enforcement of
the Council’s resolutions has an adverse impact on the
authority of the Council, thereby undermining the
entire international security system. We urge the
Council to heed the call of the international
community, to live up to its Charter responsibility and
to take further effective action to halt the ongoing
bloody action against the Palestinian people. The
Israeli act of taking advantage of the defencelessness of
the Palestinians is repugnant and, if the Council does
not act to put an end to it, more bloodshed may lie
ahead.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran for his
kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Japan. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Satoh (Japan): I found it very embarrassing
here today to have to choose between the two seats —
12
S/PV.4506
one on the side of Israel and the other on the side of
Palestine. I want to tell both my Palestinian and my
Israeli colleagues that my sitting here today on this side
does not mean anything more than sheer convenience. I
cannot divide myself. I hope that the Security Council
can find a way for us to sit in a more politically
comfortable way in the future.
The Government of Japan is gravely concerned
over the escalating violence and terror in Israel and the
Palestinian autonomous territories, which include the
series of terrorist attacks by Palestinian extremists and
the military campaign into Palestinian cities by the
Israeli Defence Forces.
We are particularly concerned over the killing of
innocent civilians, which can never be justified. In the
past six days alone, more than 80 Israelis and
Palestinians have reportedly been killed and hundreds
more injured. We extend our deep condolences and
sympathies to all the victims and their families.
It is all the more deplorable that these events are
occurring at a time when there are constructive
developments for peace in the region. These include,
first, the adoption by the Security Council of resolution
1397 (2002), which affirmed, for the first time, a vision
of a region where two States, Israel and Palestine,
would live side by side and within secure and
recognized borders; and secondly, the Arab peace
initiative adopted at the Arab summit meeting, based
on the proposal of Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi
Arabia.
The Japanese Government condemns in the
strongest terms all acts of terrorism aimed at innocent
civilians. We have urged the Palestinian Authority at
various levels to do its utmost to suppress extremists.
Last Friday in Tokyo, Foreign Minister Yoriko
Kawaguchi urged the Palestinian Authority, through the
visiting Speaker of the Palestinian Legislative Council,
Mr. Abu Ala, to act immediately against those
responsible for terrorist actions.
At the same time, the Government of Japan has
urged the Israeli Government to exert maximum
restraint. In a telephone conversation last Saturday,
Foreign Minister Kawaguchi told the Israeli Foreign
Minister, Mr. Shimon Peres, that the incursions into
Palestinian cities by Israeli forces and putting the
headquarters of Chairman Arafat under siege were not
conducive to restoring calm to the situation. She also
called for the immediate withdrawal of Israeli forces
from Palestinian cities. It should be recalled that
Mr. Arafat is the legitimate leader of the Palestinian
people, elected through a democratic process.
The Security Council, with its recent resolution
1402 (2002), has once again sent a strong message to
both parties to put an end to the escalation of violence
and return to the negotiating table. The Government of
Japan fully supports that resolution and requests the
parties concerned to implement it without delay.
We also regard American engagement
indispensable in order to break the impasse and bring
the peace process back on track. In this context, the
mission of General Zinni of the United States, who
remains in the region to continue his mediation efforts,
is of utmost importance. The Government of Japan
appeals to both parties to respond positively to his
efforts and to achieve a ceasefire agreement as soon as
possible. To that end, it dispatched to the region its
special envoy, Ambassador Hiroshi Shigeta, in order to
support General Zinni’s efforts. The Government of
Japan is determined to extend all possible assistance to
the efforts to improve the situation.
The President (spoke in Russian): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Yemen. I invite him to take the seat reserved for him at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like at the outset to express my sincere
congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
Also, I cannot fail to express our deep appreciation to
Ambassador Kolby for his successful presidency of the
Security Council last month. Allow me to pay tribute to
the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan. His positions
on the deteriorating situation in the Palestinian
territories have been characterized by wisdom, courage
and a sense of responsibility. Ever since he delivered
his now famous statement before the Security Council
on 21 February (see S/PV.4474), he has been placing
before the international community positive views that
contribute to a resolution of the current grave situation.
The explosive situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory is increasingly dangerous. Since
Israel decided to launch an extensive war against the
Palestinians, we have been witnessing a genuine
tragedy. Israeli tanks and warplanes attack Palestinian
cities, while the headquarters compound of the elected
Palestinian President, Yasser Arafat, is under total
13
S/PV.4506
siege, and he and his aides are being humiliated
through the cutting of basic electricity and water
services.
The Security Council is meeting today for three
reasons. The first is that Israeli acts of aggression have
expanded. The number of wounded and dead increases
daily, and destruction continues as we speak. Secondly,
Israeli aggression has widened to such an extent that it
now threatens peace and security in the entire region.
Thirdly, the Council is meeting because Israel refuses
to accept resolution 1402 (2002). Even though Israel’s
representative today claimed that Israel accepts the
resolution, it refuses to implement it because it calls for
a ceasefire and a simultaneous withdrawal of Israeli
forces from Palestinian cities. Furthermore, the
resolution stresses that withdrawal from Palestinian
cities, including Ramallah, must take place
immediately. More than 96 hours later, the resolution
remains a dead letter.
Instead, Israel has reinvaded other cities in a
broad plan to reoccupy Palestinian territory. Israel is
also attempting to undermine the Palestinian Authority
and to destroy its infrastructure, including leadership
installations, official buildings and other civilian
installations.
Arab public opinion boils over as it watches
television screens showing the criminal acts
perpetrated by the Israeli army. We wish this Council
could view those images in order to see the truth of the
assassinations, the attacks on ambulances and other
inhuman acts. Denunciation has not come just from the
Arab world; it has come from many other world
capitals, including in the form of large demonstrations.
We call on the Security Council to reaffirm
resolution 1402 (2002), which calls for a withdrawal of
Israeli troops from Ramallah and other Palestinian
cities. We call on the Council also to take a decision
reaffirming the need to deploy international
peacekeeping forces and international observers to
supervise the withdrawal and to separate the two
parties, the Palestinians and the Israelis. The
defenceless Palestinian people, under blatant Israeli
attack, cannot defend itself because of the massive
imbalance of military force. How can a Kalashnikov
rifle face Merkava tanks or Apache helicopters?
The Republic of Yemen, through the positions
taken by President Ali Abdullah Saleh as reflected in
his statement at the Beirut Arab summit, has expressed
the Yemeni people’s solidarity with and support for the
struggle of the Palestinian people in this dark hour, as
it faces the barbarity of the heavily armed Israeli
forces. As stated by President Saleh, we also stand in
full solidarity with our brother Yasser Arafat, the
elected President of the Palestinian people, who is now
encircled by the Israeli occupation forces, as he stands
steadfast defending his people and its dignity.
We urge the Council to take a strong stand to
compel Israel to abide by resolution 1402 (2002) and
the previous resolution on this matter, resolution 1379
(2001), and to withdraw from Palestinian towns and
cities, including Ramallah, or, if Israel continues its
rejection, to take the necessary measures under Chapter
VII of the Charter.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Yemen for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, Mr. President, let me convey to
you our greetings and express our appreciation for
implementing the first part of rule 48 of the provisional
rules of procedure of the Security Council by enabling
the international community, on whose behalf you
work, to participate in the work of the Council. We
truly appreciate that.
Secondly, let me say from the beginning that my
statement will be directed to minds and to consciences.
My statement will also be a record for future events
and for history. Nothing continues eternally. God alone
is eternal. We are born, we live, and we die. We are
recording for future generations to see that words of
truth were uttered in the Security Council when it
seemed that right had no place to thrive on this planet.
Might has become right, and it seems that there are no
rights and no might whatsoever for any in this world at
this particular time.
To describe history, for my statement to be
directed to consciences and to record history, I would
say the following.
First, throughout history — and I would
challenge any person to come forward with any atlas or
geographic map with the word Israel in any part of this
14
S/PV.4506
world — that name has never been applied to a single
inch of land. The name Israel is the name of the
prophet Jacob, and when God spoke to the Israelites he
said, you sons of Jacob. Never in history or geography
was there ever a State called Israel on Palestinian land.
Secondly, four countries were put forward as
candidates for a Jewish homeland: Argentina; Uganda;
Jabal Al-Akhdar in my country, Libya; and Palestine.
So what rights exist in Argentina, Uganda, Jabal Al-
Akhdar in Libya, or even Palestine?
Thirdly, we must differentiate between two
things: nationalism or nationhood and religion. For me
to worship God as a Muslim, following the word of
Mohammed, does not mean that I am not Libyan.
Golda Meir and Peres came from Byelorussia, their
country. Being Jewish is a religious issue; it has
nothing at all to do with nationality or nationhood.
Sharon also was never Palestinian. Begin came from
Poland; he was Polish. His homeland was Poland, not
Palestine. Netanyahu is American. He is a New Yorker
from Brooklyn, I believe.
If they have the right to settle in Palestine
because Moses, may God bless his memory, was born
there or received the word of God there, that argument
would also apply to Christians. Jesus, may God bless
His memory, was born in Palestine. The word of God
came to Him in Palestine. If that argument can also be
applied, then all Muslims, from Indonesia all the way
to the United States of America, can also go and settle
Mecca and Medina, in Saudi Arabia. Where does faith
connect with nationalism or nationality? Palestine is
for Palestinians — Muslims, Christians or Jews, the
oriental Jews who have lived in Palestine.
Fourthly, there has been talk about peace. Let us
review that. Our brothers, the Palestinians, were told:
put your liberation efforts aside, sit at the negotiating
table in a political process, and they went along that
path. They went everywhere they could, from Oslo to
Madrid to Wye River to Wye Plantation to Wye-I-do-
not-know-where to Camp David to Sharm el-Sheikh.
No stone was left unturned. So what happened? Did
they obtain anything? Did the other party comply with
its previously signed agreements? Not at all.
Look at the latest issue of Time magazine. At
least it is not a Libyan magazine; I think you all know
that. There is a map in it. I am sure that members have
seen it. However, kindly look at it again. Members may
note that what is left of the West Bank and Gaza Strip
is now all settlements. All these places are settlements.
What will negotiation be about? The land already
has been filled with colonial settlements. What will be
returned to the Palestinians? Hundreds of villages and
towns have been built on the West Bank and in the
Gaza Strip. What is to be returned? The land cannot be
returned because it is now full of new settlers from the
four corners of the globe. The Palestinians are
deported, are exiled from their land. Those who have
been exiled are prohibited from returning. Palestinians
own the lands where the settlements were built. Their
homes were destroyed, their farms were destroyed, and
even the trees were bulldozed and uprooted.
What is left for the Palestinians? What are the
Palestinians to build a State upon? After all that, the
Palestinian who attempts to defend his home, honour,
children, whose land is being usurped, whose home is
being bulldozed, whose trees are being uprooted, is
labelled a terrorist. Where is the logic in that? The
terrorist who is now occupying is given the legitimate
right to defend himself. What right? He is aggressing.
He is killing. He is beating. He is occupying, and he is
uprooting the trees of others. He is building settlements
on that land. He brings in new settlers from all over the
globe. That person has the right to defend settler
colonialism? Where is the logic in that?
That is the very logic that has turned young boys
and girls into martyrs who have decided to die in order
to free their land and their own personal and family
property. They do so in defence of their freedom. So
have they become terrorists? That logic can be stood
squarely on its head. This is a provocation to the world
and to all free peoples. This is turning logic on its
head. We thank them because they have unmasked
Arab regimes even of the very fig leaf of that logic. We
also thank them for having revitalized the Arab street.
I have previously said in both the Security
Council and in the General Assembly that our region is
pregnant and that no one can say whether the child to
be born will be healthy or not. Most probably, the child
will not be healthy. Legitimacy has now been bestowed
upon all forces, whether religious, nationalist or
otherwise. They have all been given the green light for
change, including, most regrettably, religious extremist
organizations. They have been given great legitimacy.
An Arab President is being detained and the very
dignity of an Arab people is being raped and overrun
15
S/PV.4506
by tanks and bulldozers on its own land. The Arab
peoples can therefore only step on the Arab regimes
that are now kneeling in cowardice. In those
circumstances the Council will be utterly helpless and
able to do absolutely nothing because the will of the
people in the streets of the Arab world will rage. This
is a certainty; it is only a matter of time. However,
those official Arab regimes, by kneeling before the
facts, have given legitimacy to all those movements.
What, then, is to be the solution?
The Security Council must deal with this issue as
one of occupation, the last case of occupation in the
world. The Council has an opportunity before it. Those
of sound mind and logic have an opportunity to look
into, consider and evaluate a solution — the same
solution we saw in South Africa — if indeed there are
those who are searching for peace and security in our
region.
We know what is taking place. We know full well
what will happen. We are therefore not speaking of
decisions to be taken. We know what the balance of
political power is in the world, in the United Nations
and, most particularly, in the Security Council. Since
1990, the Security Council has been in a straightjacket.
We therefore direct our statements to minds and
consciences. We are recording these words for history.
The President (spoke in Russian): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Chile. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Valdés (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I would
first like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April, and to thank you for having
convened this meeting to discuss a conflict whose
developments and specific implications are within the
purview of the entire world. I should also like to thank
the presidency of Norway for its excellent work last
month.
Our country associates itself with the statement
that will be made by Costa Rica later in the meeting on
behalf of the countries of the Rio Group.
Chile vigorously condemns both the horrific
suicide attacks against the civilian population of Israel
and the military actions being taken against Palestinian
cities at intolerable costs to their inhabitants. We also
condemn the attack against the headquarters of
President Yasser Arafat, the legitimate leader of the
Palestinian people. We consider these events an affront
to the civilized conscience of mankind and a threat to
international peace and security. Chile joins in the
overwhelming outcry of the international community
resolutely denouncing and repudiating the spiral of
violence and demanding its immediate cessation.
My country looks with concern and unease at the
fact that the violence affecting us is moving
dangerously and proportionately away from the efforts
of the international community to achieve peace. The
refusal of the parties to comply with Security Council
resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002) has a serious
impact on the credibility of the United Nations and its
ability to act as an indispensable tool in the search for a
solution to the conflict. It thus also has an impact on
Member States and, accordingly, on our own ability to
comply with the principles and objectives set out in the
Charter in this regard.
As the Council has frequently indicated, only the
implementation of the Tenet plan and the speedy
realization of the measures contained in the Mitchell
report can create avenues towards peace. However, my
country understands that, in the light of the seriousness
of the current situation, we must focus on creating a
minimal degree of trust between the parties so that they
can set aside rigidity and retaliation and immediately
and simultaneously move forward towards
implementing a real ceasefire and a withdrawal of
Israeli forces from Palestinian cities, including
Ramallah. We call upon the President of the Palestinian
Authority to condemn terrorist acts and to call for a
cessation of all violent action. For its part, the
Government of Israel must put an end to the bellicose
actions against the Palestinian Authority and people.
That is the only responsible course of action.
Chile believes that those measures cannot be
carried out without the presence of a third party in the
field with a clear mandate bestowed by the Security
Council to verify compliance with the provisions to be
agreed once a ceasefire has been agreed. The Council
must continue to do its utmost to promote this
initiative, in keeping with the responsibility incumbent
upon it with regard to the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Chile reiterates the fact that there must be a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East on
the basis of resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397
16
S/PV.4506
(2002) and 1402 (2002), as well as the Madrid
principles. Likewise, we would like to stress the
essential role of the Palestinian Authority, which
continues to be the legitimate and indispensable partner
in the peace negotiations. We appeal for preserving the
physical integrity and restoring the freedom of
movement of its President. It is once again necessary to
reiterate the inalienable right of the Palestinian people
to establish an independent, viable and democratic
State, and Israel’s right to live within secure and
internationally recognized borders.
Chile is proud to have large communities of
Palestinian and Jewish citizens. For over a century they
have made a rich contribution to our culture and
development. That is why Chile is experiencing great
sorrow at this conflict. We fervently wish that an end
be put to the bloodshed in a thrice holy land. We hope
that the Security Council, as a result of this debate, will
adopt unanimous and decisive measures leading to the
implementation of its resolutions in such a way as to
strongly encourage the end of the occupation of
Palestinian territories, as the only lasting solution to
the conflict.
The President (spoke in Russian): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of South Africa.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): My delegation is
pleased to see you, Mr. President, preside over this
emergency meeting of the Security Council. We joined
in calling for this meeting today in response to the full-
scale military operations that are under way in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem. We
would like to express our appreciation to the Council
for scheduling the open debate during the day, when all
Member States have an opportunity to express their
views before the Council.
We also note with appreciation that the Security
Council has taken a step in taking action on our
suggestion that it consider meeting with Prime Minister
Sharon and President Arafat by instead meeting with
their representatives here in New York.
However, we believe that more may need to be
done. We would like to remind the Council of the
suggestion by some of the members of the Non-
Aligned Movement that the Security Council visit the
region to obtain a first-hand impression of events on
the ground. A visit to Israel and Palestine by the
Council at this time would be another signal that the
international community is very concerned about the
deteriorating situation.
The Non-Aligned Movement is concerned that
Israel has for many years refused to comply with
Security Council resolutions. This cannot be allowed to
continue if the Council is to fulfil its role of
maintaining peace and security. At some point this
Council will have to stand up to all countries that do
not obey its resolutions. We believe that this time is
right now.
The Non-Aligned Movement has consistently
maintained that there can be no military solution to the
Middle East conflict and that occupation, settlement
activities and collective punishment of the Palestinian
people are the root causes of violence and insecurity in
the region. In other words, the enemy in the Middle
East is not President Arafat or the Palestinian
Authority. The enemy in the Middle East is the lack of
peace between Israel and Palestine.
We are therefore deeply distressed by the fact that
the Israeli Government has chosen to respond to the
symptoms of its own military occupation by using
disproportionate lethal force, with a resulting
escalation in conflict and tragic consequences for the
civilian populations of both Palestine and Israel.
Clearly, Israel’s decision to destroy Palestinian
infrastructure, to humiliate and humble Palestinian
civilians and to threaten the life of the legitimate,
elected and internationally recognized leader of the
Palestinian people cannot be justified as acts of
counter-terrorism or even self-defence.
Israel’s militaristic approach is all the more
inexplicable and inexcusable since it is taking place
against a backdrop of renewed efforts by the
international community to mediate a peaceful solution
to the conflict. The Government of South Africa found
it inexplicable that Israel saw fit to prevent President
Arafat from travelling to Beirut to endorse and support
the Saudi initiative. This action was short-sighted and
provocative. It played directly into the hands of the
extremists, whose sole goal was to prevent creation of
the conditions that would allow the achievement of a
ceasefire and promote movement towards a substantial
dialogue on peace in line with the requirements of the
Mitchell report.
It is also deeply troubling to the South African
Government that at precisely the time when both the
17
S/PV.4506
Israeli and Palestinian leadership were engaged in
discussions with General Zinni about establishing the
conditions for the implementation of a ceasefire,
extremists once again targeted Israeli civilians in
attacks that left scores of dead and injured.
Israel’s response to these killings was once again
the same massive, predictable military escalation
witnessed in the past, which sought to target President
Arafat as an enemy, to destroy the Palestinian
infrastructure and to try to humiliate and bludgeon the
Palestinian people into submission.
Despite these setbacks, the United Nations
Secretary-General, the Arab League, the Non-Aligned
Movement, the European Union, the Russian
Federation, the United States of America and others
continue to intensify their efforts to encourage dialogue
between the Palestinians and the Israelis. We therefore
remain convinced that it is possible to achieve a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the crisis.
However, the trauma, intense mistrust and fear
generated by the current spasm of terrorist acts and
military attacks will not be easily overcome, and a
credible, multinational monitoring mechanism will be
required on the ground to monitor the implementation
of agreements between the two parties.
Through the adoption of resolution 1397 (2002),
the Security Council has recognized the right of the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples to exist side by side, in
peace and security with their neighbours, in States of
their own. The Council has also adopted resolution
1402 (2002), demanding the immediate cessation of
violence and calling for the implementation of a
meaningful ceasefire and the withdrawal of Israeli
troops from Palestinian cities. The least we expect is
for Israel to obey Security Council resolutions and to
implement particularly resolution 1402 (2002).
In conclusion, please allow me to restate a
fundamental truth: Israel’s security cannot be achieved
through the barrel of a gun. The current cycle of
growing violence and the ever increasing death toll of
innocent Israelis and Palestinians cannot be ended
without a political solution.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of South Africa for his kind words
addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Saudi Arabia. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me first of all to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency for this month. We wish
you every success in guiding the Council’s
deliberations to the desired outcome. I would like to
thank you for responding so promptly to our request to
convene an emergency meeting of the Security Council
to discuss the grave situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories. We would also like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Norway and to
congratulate him on the wisdom he showed during his
presidency of the Council during the month of March.
The bloody events in occupied Palestine confirm
what we have said before: Israel does not desire or seek
peace. The current Prime Minister of Israel promised
his country that he would bring about conditions of
security there. He decided that peace would not bring
about security for Israel, and therefore engaged in acts
of inhumane oppression and aggression, affecting both
the Palestinian people and its territory. He used every
cheap trick he could, on the pretext of providing
security and with the claim that he was fighting
terrorism. Comparing the terrorism committed by Israel
with the national Palestinian resistance further
exemplifies the gross injustice that is being inflicted on
a people seeking to liberate its lands, realize its rights
and maintain its dignity and freedom.
The State terrorism committed by Israel is not
being undertaken in self-defence or as a means of
protecting its citizens. It is being undertaken as a
means of protecting its occupation and of consecrating
its usurpation of Palestinian territory. Israel has no
legitimate right to be in the West Bank, East Jerusalem
or the Gaza Strip — areas that it entered in the 1967
war and which it has never left. Palestinians, like any
other people living under occupation, have a right —
indeed, they are duty-bound — to liberate their land
and recover their freedom.
In the face of the ugliness of the Israeli
occupation and the carnage committed by its occupying
forces, Israel is blaming the Palestinians. The
Palestinians should not — Israel claims — have paid
attention to occupation; they should have ignored the
fact that heavy artillery was used against them. They
should have forgotten the thousands of dead and
18
S/PV.4506
wounded. They should have forgotten about their
property and their rights, which were usurped, and
about their homeland, which was destroyed. The
Palestinians should not have expressed any
indignation; they should not have resisted. They should
have enjoyed the bounties of Israeli occupation and the
peace of indiscriminate killing; the security of physical
liquidation, siege and starvation; the peace of tyranny
and destruction. They should have enjoyed the peace
represented by arsenals brimming with nuclear arms
and other weapons of mass destruction, and the
security brought about by pressure, threats and
provocation — the peace of false promises; the
unimplemented agreements; the fact that international
legitimacy was ignored. They should have enjoyed the
peace represented by the building of settlements — the
peace of Palestinian parcels of land, created here and
there, and under siege by Israelis.
The Palestinian people resorted to resistance after
many long years of bitter frustration and lack of hope
that justice and equity would come about through a
peaceful settlement. Their objectives were not realized
because of Israel’s intransigence and prevarication, as
well as of its failure to implement its commitments.
The Palestinians had no option but to turn to the
intifada and resistance when the Security Council
failed to enforce the resolutions that it adopted and
when it rejected the idea of sending international
observers to the occupied Palestinian territories. Such
observers, if not able to put an end to the situation,
could at least have prevented its further deterioration.
What could the Palestinians do, now that they
faced humiliation by day and by night? How could they
act, given that the international community had turned
a completely deaf ear to their rights and had failed to
enforce respect for international legitimacy? What
could that people do — the people who have been
prevented from enjoying peace and stability and the
most elementary requirements for a life in dignity, like
that enjoyed by all other peoples? How could they face
the policies of closure, siege, starvation and collective
punishment?
Are the inhumane acts perpetrated by the
occupation forces in keeping with the provisions of the
Fourth Geneva Convention as they apply to occupied
areas? After all that we have seen, heard and read in
newspapers, on radio and on television, can we still
wonder why the Palestinians have descended into such
hopelessness and despair? The aggressive behaviour of
the Israeli Government shows how far it has moved
from dialogue and the language of peace, and how
much it has resorted to war and destruction as a means
of realizing its expansionist goals and policies.
The theory that Israeli might can stifle Palestinian
demands is totally and utterly invalid. If Israel planned
to turn its aggression into a war between victor and
vanquished — a battle that ends up with the
Palestinians raising the flag of surrender — it must
remember that never in human history has a
defenceless people surrendered to brute power, no
matter how mighty or strong. The struggle of a people
will be rewarded, as long as they stay the course and
absorb the strikes of the occupier. The ability to stand
is part of right and of justice. Just as other peoples
under occupation have won their independence, God
willing, the people of Palestine will win its
independence, too.
The senseless acts of aggression in occupied
Palestine highlight the tyranny of occupation. The
Israeli leadership, which came to power under
extremely grave and complicated circumstances, seeks
to explode the situation in the region, to invert the
balance of power and to ensure new faits accomplis
before it agrees to sit down at the negotiating table to
discuss a final settlement. Now that it has realized that
it cannot achieve its ambitions through a process of
peace and just settlement, it imagines that time will be
in its favour. It imagines that the Palestinians will be
forced to accept a new fait accompli because of the
Security Council’s hesitancy to enforce its resolutions
and to send international observers to the occupied
Palestinian territories — as it has done to other
regions —and because of the fact that the international
community has been satisfied simply to denounce the
situation without taking measures to force Israel to
respect international legitimacy.
That is a flawed vision, and flawed logic. If Israel
has succeeded in pushing the Palestinians to despair, it
has at the same time brought fear and insecurity upon
itself from the Palestinian people, who have lost
everything, including their hope of enjoying what other
peoples enjoy: liberty, dignity, security and stability.
His Royal Highness, Crown Prince Abdullah Bin
Abdul-Aziz, Deputy Prime Minister of the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, presented an initiative to attain peace,
security and stability for all the region’s peoples. The
Arab Summit adopted the initiative. That alone
19
S/PV.4506
confirms the Arabs’ desire for peace and stability for
all.
We expect that the Israeli people will not let
another opportunity for peace go to waste. We would
like the Israelis to bet on justice and fairness and to
realize that security will not be achieved through
aggression, but through understanding, mutual interests
and cooperation.
We call on the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibilities and act swiftly to press Israel to
implement the resolutions of international legitimacy;
to immediately end its acts of aggression and lift its
siege, without conditions, from the Palestinian people
and Yasser Arafat, recognized as its elected leader by
all the world’s countries; and to withdraw at once from
the occupied Palestinian territories, in accordance with
the provisions of relevant Council resolutions.
We also call on the Council to deploy
international observers and peacekeepers to supervise
the Israeli withdrawal and disengage the Palestinian
and Israeli parties. In addition, we call on Israel, the
occupying Power, to respect the provisions of the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and the Hague
Agreement, as well as the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.
Here, I should like to call attention to a statement
by the Secretary-General concerning the Middle East,
to the effect that the problem there has been the Israeli
occupation, which has led to the undermining of
security and to an increase in violence and terror in the
region, not to speak of economic deprivation and
suffering. These problems are interlinked as one
problem, and any attempt to treat it as a problem of
security alone will not solve it. We must address the
security problem and the political issues at the same
time so that we can revive hope among the Palestinian
people for a better and more secure future.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Saudi Arabia for his kind words
addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Turkey, whom I invite to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Cengizer (Turkey): My delegation
congratulates you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and wishes you
every success in that very important work. We also
wish to express our appreciation of the excellent way
in which Ambassador Ole Peter Kolby of Norway
conducted the Council during the crucial previous
term.
Turkey aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union. It should be a sobering call on both
parties to assume their responsibilities to their people
and to most of the international community. The
eruption of outright and dangerously escalating conflict
in the Middle East continues unabated, and we are
meeting for the second time within the space of not
even 96 hours, testifying to the seriousness of the
situation. Tragedy abounds; fear and foreboding spill
throughout the region. Certainly, this situation is more
dangerous than many can bring themselves to avow
and is getting more out of hand by the hour. Not only
are the Israelis and the Palestinians at the brink, but the
whole region is exposed to wider dangers, and this at a
time when the international community must deal with
a number of other problems and problem areas of
unprecedented scope and urgency.
The Middle East is important to the world. So
many unsurpassed achievements and great faiths trace
their origins to the heart of this region that no one can
afford to have the false sense of comfort that a
misplaced disinterestedness or an imaginary sense of
control are apt to create.
The Middle East is important to Turkey, because
it was in Anatolia and in the Middle East that we first
met two ancient and cherished friends. It is because of
the way in which these friendships have unfolded over
nearly a millennium now that we are privileged to be
within the fold and at the forefront of the great faiths
and traditions of mankind. We have shared friendship,
wisdom and timeless memories that we nurture today
with the Jewish and Arab nations. Their well-being was
important to us in the past; it is important today and
will be so tomorrow.
That is precisely why the current situation is
unbearable for us. We can accept neither suicide
bombings, which are sheer and simple terror in one of
its most frightening forms, nor aggression against the
legitimate leader of the Palestinian people, President
Arafat. Sadly, we are horrified by almost every scene
that reaches us from that part of the world these days:
civilians covered with blood, headquarters under a
barrage of bombs and gunfire. We cannot bear to see
this self-destruction.
20
S/PV.4506
The events of the past few days and the manner in
which this situation is unfolding make clear that the
parties cannot be left to their own devices and that the
international community, particularly the United States,
has a responsibility to intervene to draw the parties
back to the negotiation process.
The way to bring the crucial element of
negotiation back into the picture is to stand at a fair
and equal distance from both parties. In fact, both we
and the parties need that, because these rampant
delusions about a militarily achieved solution are
dangerous, not only to those who have them but also to
the region as a whole. The entire geography is being
dragged towards a major crisis that might lead to a
collapse of stability in more than one sense of the
word. Those are reasons enough for the United States,
which had the principal role in all previous peace
initiatives, not to pause in carrying out its
responsibility. Its influence should be brought to bear
on the prospects for a peaceful settlement.
Let me be clear on one point: we vehemently
condemn the terror perpetrated through suicide
bombings, and we fully share the agony of the Israeli
people. There can be no plausible degree of terror nor
any redeemable reason or understandable motives for
it, and there can be no leniency with regard to it. All
Palestinians and their leadership have the responsibility
to do everything they can to prevent the recurrence of
these acts of terror.
At the same time, we strongly protest the
treatment to which President Arafat is being subjected
by the Israeli Government. No one has the right to
commit such disrespect towards a nation’s elected
leader and to dismantle and destroy its administrative
apparatus and mechanisms. What other action, if not
those, will push the Palestinian people to succumb to
the pressure from the extremist fold? The majority of
the Palestinian people keep their faith in peace. We
need to safeguard that reality today more than ever, and
we must find ways for it to prosper — not, of course,
paving the way for the clouds of darkness that
extremists wish to bring upon their people.
Security Council resolution 1402 (2002) must be
implemented forthwith. Israeli troops must withdraw
from Palestinian cities. The Palestinians’ human rights
are being violated and they urgently require
humanitarian assistance. Everyone is asking about the
true scale of the ambition behind this military
campaign. The world is worried about the
destabilization that the campaign is bent on producing.
We cannot bite our tongues while we watch both
parties help each other commit suicide. Indeed, Turkey,
aware of its historical and contemporary
responsibilities, is determined to act in a way that
befits our implacable friendship with all peoples of the
region. As a matter of fact, the situation requires
assistance from every quarter. We deem it essential to
draw up a concrete plan that will end occupation,
violence and terror. We think all the interested parties
should act in a concerted manner to have an effect on
developments in the region, on the basis of the Madrid
and Oslo Agreements. Turkey is working creatively
towards this end.
Turkey has always assumed a conciliatory role in
the Middle East conflict. Our forebears achieved peace
for no less than half a millennium in that region. For
centuries, Turkey ensured that mutual respect and
tolerance reigned among the adherents of the three
great religions, who were divided into nearly 100
different nations and groups.
I must repeat: we cannot bear this sight of
fighting and violence between those who are especially
dear to us. As a nation that has traditionally had good
relations with both Israel and Palestine, we ask them to
let us help them. Better and more honourable prospects
are not yet lost. The appeals of the international
community, along with the sentiment of friends, are
there to be received in good faith.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Turkey for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of the United Arab Emirates, whom I invite to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Al-Shamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): Mr. President, on behalf of the United Arab
Emirates, it is my pleasure to congratulate you on your
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month and to express our wishes for all success in
your task. Also, I cannot fail to express to your
predecessor, the representative of Norway, our
appreciation for his presidency last month.
I would also like to thank you and the Council
members most sincerely for your prompt response by
holding this important emergency meeting, which we
21
S/PV.4506
hope will reactivate the Council and its responsibilities
vis-à-vis events in the Middle East region, where a war
of extermination and practices of flagrant ethnic
cleansing are being perpetrated by the Israeli
Government against the defenceless Palestinian people
and their historic leadership.
The Council is meeting again today under
exceptionally grave circumstances imposed by images,
shown daily on television screens since last Thursday
from within Palestinian cities and villages, of human
massacres, destruction, a war of extermination and acts
of mass detention that have been perpetrated for over a
year and a half. In spite of many international
resolutions calling on Israel to lift the siege of the
Palestinian cities and villages, to respect the Tenet
ceasefire plan and the Mitchell recommendations, we
are astonished at the Israeli Government’s persistence.
It has escalated its spiteful, aggressive campaign
against the Palestinians, including a premeditated plan
to reoccupy Palestinian cities, to destroy completely
the Palestinian Authority headquarters and its national
institutions, to kill or detain dozens of its employees, to
lay siege and to isolate President Arafat and some of
his aides. This is one of the most immoral political and
legal acts we have witnessed since the creation of the
United Nations.
Returning to history, we find that the war
declared by Prime Minister Ariel Sharon some days
ago against Palestinians and their besieged cities —
which are closed to peace advocates, television
cameras and international humanitarian
organizations — is not new; it is merely an extension, a
new episode in the series of criminal acts perpetrated
by Sharon, who is known for his hatred of Arabs and
Palestinians. How can the world explain the situation
in Ramallah today, this tragic repetition of the siege
against the Palestinian President, the massacres in the
Sabra and Shatila refugee camps in Beirut, events in
Bethlehem, Qalqilya, Tulkarm, Jenin and other cities
and Palestinian villages and refugee camps? Everybody
knows what Sharon and his war machine are
perpetrating today — the killing and execution of
Palestinian civilians, particularly in Ramallah, where
the streets and closed quarters are strewn with dozens
of wounded and dead Palestinians, a city closed to
ambulances and Red Crescent vehicles. Furthermore,
the Israeli army has not stopped its siege or its sniping
at anything that moves in the Palestinian cities, villages
and refugee camps. Indeed, since last Friday it has cut
electricity and water, food supplies and emergency
services to defenceless people. It has invaded homes
and destroyed hospitals and houses of worship. It has
killed civilians under the pretext of pursuing wanted
men.
The pretext of security and of fighting terrorism
declared by the Sharon Government to justify its
increasing violence against the Palestinian people and
its plan to reoccupy their land cannot be believed by
international public opinion, which every day is
witnessing these war crimes against the Palestinian
people and their national leadership perpetrated by
tanks, warplanes, armoured personnel carriers and
Israeli artillery. The international community and the
Security Council, which have always condemned
terrorism in the past and which have renounced
colonialism and occupation in all forms, must
differentiate immediately between State terrorism and
war crimes perpetrated relentlessly, on a daily basis, by
the Israeli army inside occupied Palestinian territory,
and the legitimate struggle of the defenceless
Palestinian people to lift this unjust occupation, to
defend themselves, their properties and their
aspirations to an independent State, with Jerusalem as
its capital.
While reaffirming our solidarity with and full
support for the fraternal Palestinian people and its
courageous leadership, we call on the Security Council
and all States of influence, particularly the United
States of America and the European Union member
States, to shoulder their political, legal and moral
responsibility vis-à-vis the question of Palestine and
the grave developments there. These should include the
following measures.
First is the strongest possible rejection and
condemnation of these war crimes and Israeli terrorism
so that Israel does not misunderstand the message of
the international community, as enshrined in Security
Council resolutions, particularly the most recent one,
resolution 1402 (2202), calling for a withdrawal from
all Palestinian territories that were reoccupied in
violation of previous agreements — the Oslo
Agreement in particular — and other relevant
international resolutions.
Secondly, we must demand an immediate and
unconditional Israeli withdrawal, which must also
mean lifting the siege against the President of the
Palestinian Authority, Yasser Arafat, as the legitimate
22
S/PV.4506
elected leader of the Palestinian people, and the release
of thousands of Palestinian detainees. Thirdly, the
dispatch of international observers from the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, human rights
organizations and international emergency aid
organizations in order to protect the Palestinian people
and ensure provision of food, medicine and
humanitarian assistance to the thousands of displaced
persons and to identify those Israeli war criminals who
have killed hundreds of people, including women and
children.
Fourthly, Israel must be compelled to pay
adequate compensation for the grave damage to the
Palestinian infrastructure and property of defenceless
Palestinian civilians. Fifthly, we must promote and
strengthen the role of the “quartet” of the United States
of America, the European Union, the Russian
Federation and the United Nations, based on
evenhandedness and transparency in order to help the
two parties — the Palestinians and the Israelis — to
implement the Tenet plan and the Mitchell
recommendations and to resume dialogue and peace
negotiations from the point at which they stopped in
the year 2000.
Sixthly, we must support and adopt the historic
peace initiative of the Arab leaders at the Beirut
summit as the strategic basis for a comprehensive
settlement of the Palestinian question and the Arab-
Israeli dispute, including a just and comprehensive
peace based on international legitimacy and the
relevant United Nations resolutions, including General
Assembly resolution 181 (II) and Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and
1402 (2002), and the principle of land for peace.
In looking forward to the declaration in the near
future of the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as its capital, as a
fundamental reason to strive for a just, comprehensive
and lasting peace in the Middle East, we express the
hope that the international community will provide
urgently needed financial, economic and humanitarian
assistance to the Palestinian people in order to heal
their wounds and to allow them to rebuild the towns,
villages and economic and social infrastructures that
have regrettably been destroyed by Sharon and his
accomplices in war crimes.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of the United Arab Emirates for his kind
words addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Malaysia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation wishes to
thank you, Sir, at this early stage of your presidency,
for convening this urgent meeting of the Security
Council to consider the grave situation in Palestine. We
associate ourselves fully with the statement made by
Ambassador Kumalo of South Africa as Chairman of
the Non-Aligned Movement. We are grateful to
Ambassador Al-Kidwa of Palestine for updating us on
the latest developments and for his very restrained
remarks, in spite of the provocation on the ground. It
must have been extremely difficult for him to do so.
The entire world watches with utter consternation
and disbelief the blatant and ruthless actions taken by
Israel to intimidate, terrorize and subdue the
Palestinian people and their leadership. Day and night,
through its overwhelming military might, Israel has
unleashed a reign of terror — for that is what it is —
against the Palestinian people. I am therefore not at all
embarrassed to sit where I am. It is at least a symbolic
support for the people of Palestine at this critical time.
With the all-out military onslaught mounted by
the Israeli armed forces against Palestinian towns and
cities and the siege being laid to the headquarters of
President Yasser Arafat in Ramallah, the intent of the
Israeli Government has become crystal clear. Indeed,
the Israeli Government has made no bones about its
real intention. Its objective, carried out in the name of
destroying the so-called “infrastructure of terrorism”, is
actually to dismember and dismantle the infrastructure
of the Palestinian National Authority and to cripple and
render impotent its leadership. In doing so, it is
destroying the very foundations of political dialogue
between the two sides that had been painstakingly laid
down and built upon through the Madrid and Oslo
processes. By isolating President Arafat and rendering
him “irrelevant” — that is the word that has been
used — the Israeli Government is tearing up all the
agreements, accords and understandings arrived at
between the two sides since the beginning of the peace
process. This is insanity and it must be stopped. The
Israeli Government must be told in no uncertain terms
that there can be no military “solution” to the problem,
23
S/PV.4506
as no military might, however overwhelming, can ever
vanquish the will and determination of the Palestinian
people to establish an independent and sovereign State
in their homeland. If there is just one lesson that Israel
should have learned throughout this entire tragic
conflict in the Middle East, it is that lesson.
The situation in Palestine is a matter of grave
concern to the international community, but especially
to the Islamic countries. In this regard, my delegation
wishes to draw the Council’s attention to the statement
issued by the foreign ministers of the States members
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) at
their current meeting in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
While the special ministerial meeting of the OIC was
convened for the specific purpose of dealing with the
issue of the global campaign against international
terrorism and the role of Islamic countries in that
campaign, the ministers found it necessary to
pronounce themselves on the situation in Palestine.
This statement will be formally communicated to the
President of the Security Council very shortly by Mali,
as the current chairman of the OIC foreign ministers,
but, as the host of that meeting, Malaysia deems it
appropriate to highlight at this important meeting of
the Council the salient points of that statement, which
are as follows.
The Conference strongly condemns Israel’s recent
storming of Palestinian cities and villages, as well as
the headquarters of the Palestinian presidency, and its
endangering the life of President Arafat and other
Palestinian leaders. The Conference considers this
assault a violation of all international norms and laws
and the culmination of State terrorism practised by
Israel.
The Conference requests the Security Council,
the two sponsors of the peace process and the European
Union to assume their responsibility to immediately
stop the Israeli aggression and effect the withdrawal of
Israeli troops from all occupied Arab and Palestinian
territories.
The Conference reaffirms the continuing support
of the Islamic States for the Palestinian people’s
struggle against Israeli occupation and for the
restoration of their inalienable national rights,
including the right of return for refugees and the right
to self-determination and to establish their sovereign
State, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.
While condemning Israel’s practice of State
terrorism, the Conference calls on the international
community to take immediate action to stop the Israeli
aggression and illegitimate practices and to lift the
blockade. The Conference also requests the Security
Council to take the necessary measures to provide
international protection for the Palestinian people and
to apply deterrent sanctions against Israel.
The Conference considers Israeli terrorist actions
and aggressive practices as posing a threat to
international peace and security and as dragging the
region towards an all-out war, and therefore
necessitating immediate action by the Security Council
under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.
The Conference welcomes the Arab peace
initiative taken at the recent Arab summit conference in
Beirut and requests the Security Council to put in place
a mechanism for its implementation in accordance with
the relevant resolutions of the Council and
international legitimacy.
It is the hope of my Government and that of all
OIC member States that, in addressing the critical
situation in Palestine, the Council will give serious
consideration to this statement. Several of the OIC
member States have spoken before me and my
delegation fully associates itself with their eloquent
and even passionate statements.
All peace-loving countries abhor terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations and have joined in the
global alliance to fight this scourge. The Islamic
nations have done no less and are meeting in my
capital city, Kuala Lumpur, to coordinate their actions
so as to contribute effectively to this campaign, from
which we must emerge victorious. However, it is
necessary for the international community to
differentiate between terrorism per se and the
legitimate struggle for independence against foreign
occupation and alien domination. While the killing of
innocent civilians by individuals or groups of
individuals cannot be justified and must be condemned,
so must the massacre of innocents by the apparatus of
the State. If we, the international community, are
serious in our quest to combat terrorism, there cannot
be double standards.
The Council must exercise its responsibility
under the Charter and take immediate action to stop the
carnage. It must act promptly to save the Palestinian
people and its imperilled leadership, who is about to be
24
S/PV.4506
disposed of by an Israeli Government that is bent on a
military victory at all costs. While we welcome the
adoption of Council resolutions 1397 (2002) of 12
March 2002 and 1402 (2002) of 30 March 2002 as
positive steps in addressing the situation, we call on the
Council to back its pronouncements with immediate
and concrete action. It is imperative for the Council to
follow up on these resolutions, in particular, resolution
1402 (2002) which, inter alia, calls for an immediate
ceasefire and the withdrawal of Israeli troops from
Palestinian cities, including Ramallah. It is important
for the Council not to allow itself to be sidelined again.
To take no action would be tantamount to condoning
the aggressive policies and actions of the Israeli
Government and, worse still, would allow the situation
to explode into a catastrophe of monumental
proportions, which we would all regret.
The situation in the occupied territories is
intolerable to the Palestinian people. Indeed, it is
intolerable even to watch on the television screen. My
delegation has warned time and again that unless
immediate and resolute efforts are made by the Council
to stop the violence we might reach a point of no
return. In our view, that point has almost been reached.
We continue to hold the belief that what is
urgently needed to stop the violence and arrest the slide
towards war is for the Council to authorize the dispatch
of a United Nations or international peacekeeping or
monitoring force to the occupied territories, or at the
very least to dispatch, initially, a Council fact-finding
mission. We are therefore grateful to the Chair of the
Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement
for renewing the Movement’s proposal to the Council
just now.
Given the deep antipathy between the
Palestinians and the Israelis, the intervention of a
neutral third party is imperative. This is where we feel
the Security Council can and should play a critical role.
Along with others who are prepared to do so, it must
become fully engaged in the effort to stop the violence
and must join in the search for a lasting peace between
the Arabs and the Israelis. It must stop the rampaging
that is relentlessly going on in the occupied territories.
It must help give substance to the vision of a
Palestinian State that was articulated in Council
resolution 1397 (2002).
The United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, remain the last hope for the Palestinian
people. They look to the United Nations, as the
champion of the oppressed, for the restitution of their
rights as a people — rights that they have been
deprived of for decades. My delegation is hopeful, Sir,
that under your astute leadership, the Council will be
able to muster the necessary political will and the
wisdom and courage to do what is right and just for the
Palestinian people.
In conclusion, Sir, let me commend you most
sincerely for allowing non-members of the Council to
address the Council before members have the
opportunity to speak. I can assure you that this is very
much appreciated by the non-members.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Malaysia for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Brazil. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): Let me first congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and thank the members of the Council
for convening this timely debate.
The international community comes once more to
this Chamber to express its sadness in the face of the
horrendous events that continue to take place in the
Middle East. Brazil has consistently advocated a
peaceful solution to the conflict. In the face of recent
events, the Brazilian Government has reiterated that
position in press communiqués over the past days. We
also join the Rio Group in its call released yesterday
for an immediate cessation of all acts of terrorism,
provocation, incitement and destruction.
There are definitely no positive developments on
the ground in the Middle East. But if there is a single
trend that we welcome and encourage in the most vivid
terms, it is the growing responsiveness of the Council
to the challenge before the international community at
this moment. In times of despair and disappointment
for so many in the Middle East, it is towards the United
Nations that world public opinion looks in the hope
that reason and peace will eventually prevail. It is only
natural that high hopes are placed on possible action by
the Security Council. We welcome the recent adoption
of resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002) and fully
back their terms. But we strongly believe that the
25
S/PV.4506
Council can certainly do more to fully assert its
responsibilities in this matter.
The Brazilian Government remains deeply
alarmed by the growing and fast deterioration of the
situation. We call upon the parties to comply
immediately and thoroughly with Council resolutions
1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002), especially with regard to
a meaningful ceasefire. We join the international
community in the call on Israel to suspend all military
actions in the occupied territories, to roll back illegal
occupation and settlement activities, to respect the
Palestinian Authority and its leadership and to
withdraw, without delay, from Palestinian cities. The
threat that military escalation has brought to holy
shrines of all three major monotheistic religions must
stop immediately.
Recent military actions against the Palestinian
Authority compound in Ramallah are, at the least,
deplorable. The Israeli authorities must understand that
excessive use of force does not generate any sense of
security for their own people. On the contrary, it only
fuels the dreadful spiral of violence and reprisals that
makes the vision even more remote for everyone. We
condemn the decision to isolate President Arafat and
the attempts to threaten his physical integrity and
demoralize his leadership over the Palestinian
Authority and the Palestinian people. Any attempt to
exile him from his homeland would be yet a further and
a grave mistake. It cannot, and will not, be accepted by
the international community.
We fully understand the grievances of both
Israelis and Palestinians. We all want their suffering to
stop. But the disproportionate and lethal use of force by
Israel as well as unacceptable acts of terrorism and
suicide bombings by Palestinian militants only
jeopardize even further any prospect of a lasting
political settlement to the conflict in the Middle East.
We are dismayed by the fact that the two parties are
failing to keep the course towards a negotiated solution
to the conflict and that their daily attitude towards each
other seems to be designed to make that goal even
more distant.
The Brazilian Government reaffirms its
preparedness to cooperate fully with the Security
Council in the implementation of actions designed to
resume the peace process and promote peaceful
coexistence between Israel and a Palestinian State. We
remain faithful to the aspiration of the State of Israel to
exist within secure and recognized borders as well as to
that of Palestine to an independent, democratic and
economically viable State.
No military solution can ever bring about that
vision. Nor will it be achieved through the isolated
efforts of any party no matter how powerful and
influential it may be. The only possible route is respect
for human rights and for the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination. The only possible
instruments are those based on the legitimacy of
international law. Resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and the principle of land for peace are the points
of reference for the resumption of the peace process in
a negotiated settlement between the parties. A ceasefire
is urgently needed, but it cannot be obtained through
the expansion of illegal occupation and the use of
increased armed force. No ceasefire will stand in the
absence of a political framework.
The practical question before us today is what
should the Security Council do to further the cause of
reason and peace. We think we need more active
involvement of the Council on the ground. We believe
that the Council has a special responsibility to use its
tools in order to demand compliance with its decisions.
We think that it is the Council’s duty to call upon the
representatives of Israel and Palestine to explain, at the
highest possible level, what they are effectively doing
to respond to the Council’s demands. We believe that
the Council should be directly briefed by all emissaries
whose efforts the international community continues to
support. We remain committed to the idea of
establishing an international monitoring mechanism to
help the parties implement the recommendations of the
Mitchell report and the Tenet plan and support the
efforts carried out on the ground by the special envoy
Anthony Zinni. An international presence, with the full
backing of the United Nations, seems indispensable
now.
Last but not least, the Security Council must lay
out a clear strategy to move ahead with new and
constructive approaches, such as the initiative by
Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia, recently
endorsed by the League of Arab States. Let me reaffirm
that Brazil will strongly support any initiative decided
upon by the Security Council with a view to achieving
political freedom, peace, stability and prosperity for all
in the Middle East.
26
S/PV.4506
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Brazil for his kind words addressed to
me.
The last speaker on my list before I suspend the
meeting is the representative of Pakistan. I invite him
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): Thank you, Mr.
President, for accommodating me at this late hour. I
know that we are all running against time. I promised
that I would be brief, and I will be.
First, my congratulations go to you, Sir, on your
presidency. Then, I express profound appreciation to
my colleague, Ambassador Peter Kolby, for a very
productive presidency, at the last meeting of which the
Council produced its resolution 1402 (2002).
The question is, how long shall we continue to
repeat our scripts one after the other? The time has now
come for action. The Security Council must address
itself to how to enforce its decisions. These debates
reflect international sentiment both here in the
Chamber and in the outside world, but now the
Security Council must meet in some other room and
seriously address the question of the enforceability of
its decisions.
The Council met only last Friday to consider the
grievous situation in Palestine. Resolution 1402 (2002)
was adopted to reverse the spiralling violence and
bloodshed. Painfully, there has been no let-up in the
scale of carnage. Many more people have died, and
violence has generated more violence. This only
demonstrates how helpless the Security Council has
become and how scanty is the respect for its
resolutions and decisions. This trend is not only a
cause for serious concern, but it is also alarmingly
indicative of the inability of the Council to uphold its
moral authority and its Charter obligations.
What is being said today by most of my
colleagues one after the other was said at the last
meeting and at earlier meetings, so I shall not repeat all
the things I said in my last statement. I would only say
that it is time to seriously address the question of
implementing the outstanding resolutions of this
Council without selectivity or delay. The very
credibility of this body depends on that.
We strongly urge all concerned to fulfil their
Charter obligations and to take the necessary steps to
implement Security Council resolutions 1397 (2002)
and 1402 (2002), ensuring an immediate and effective
ceasefire along with an Israeli withdrawal from
Palestinian cities, followed up with the resumption of
the peace process, including the implementation of the
Tenet work plan and the Mitchell report
recommendations.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Pakistan for the kind words he
addressed to me.
In view of the lateness of the hour, I would also
like to thank the interpreters for their understanding.
I shall now suspend this meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.40 p.m.

United Nations S/PV.4130 (Resumption 1)
00-39810 (E) This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be
incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation
concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.
Security Council Provisional
Fifty-fifth Year
4130th Meeting
Wednesday, 19 April 2000, 3 p.m.
New York
President: Mr. Axworthy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Canada)
Members: Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Listre
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Chowdhury
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wang Yingfan
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Levitte
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Miss Durrant
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Hasmy
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Keita
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Andjaba
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Scheffers
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ben Mustapha
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Yel’chenko
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Sir Jeremy Greenstock
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Soderberg
Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General to the Security Council on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/1999/957)
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
The meeting was resumed at 3.20 p.m.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of Portugal. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): I again have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the European
Union — Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and
Slovenia — and the associated countries Cyprus and Malta,
as well as the European Free Trade Association countries
members of the European Economic Area, Iceland,
Liechtenstein and Norway, align themselves with this
statement.
This debate is another important milestone in the
discussions also initiated under the Canadian presidency of
the Security Council in February 1999 on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. The European Union would like
very much to thank you, Mr. Minister, as well as the
Canadian delegation and Ambassador Fowler, for
organizing this debate today and for having chaired the
informal working group established pursuant to resolution
1265 (1999).
We hope that a concrete framework of action will
emerge from this debate and that, based on the
recommendations and proposals contained in the rightly
commended report of the Secretary-General on this subject,
that framework will establish clearer guidelines for the
response by the United Nations system to the growing need
to protect civilians in armed conflict. The European Union
sees the work currently being undertaken on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict as an ongoing process and
looks forward to the next report by the Secretary-General
on this subject.
In recent times, conflicts have most often been of an
intra-State nature. In his report to the Millennium
Assembly, the Secretary General wrote that such conflicts
“have violated, not so much borders, as people” (A/54/2000,
para. 193) living within those borders. We are increasingly
confronted with the need to protect individuals and
communities against armed conflict in their immediate
neighbourhoods.
Safe and unimpeded access to those in need of
assistance is an obligation under international humanitarian
law and one which national authorities are legally bound to
ensure. This obligation also extends to all other parties to
a conflict. We know, however, that in many instances this
legal obligation is deliberately flouted. The European
Union believes the Council should make clear in its
relevant resolutions that civilian populations must have
unimpeded access to humanitarian assistance and that
there should be full cooperation with the United Nations
in providing such access. The safety and security of those
entrusted with the delivery of assistance and supplies
must also be ensured.
While men account for the largest number of
combatants, women and children are disproportionately
represented among civilians affected by conflict. Women
also constitute the majority of refugees and internally
displaced persons. The specific needs of women, children,
the elderly and the disabled should be taken into account
in camps for refugees and internally displaced persons, in
the mandates of peacekeeping and peace-building
operations and, whenever possible, during the negotiation
of peace agreements. The situation of children in armed
conflict is an area of particular concern.
The humanitarian character of camps and settlements
for refugees and internally displaced persons should be
strictly enforced, and the deployment of international
military observers or other personnel should be envisioned
when it has become evident that these camps are being
used to achieve military purposes.
The dire situation of some 25 million persons who
have been forced to leave their homes due to the outbreak
of conflict is receiving increased attention on the part of
the international community. The Secretary-General
recommends in his report on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict that the States concerned follow the legal
guidance afforded by the Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement. We most definitely support that
recommendation. The European Union would also like to
encourage the Council to contribute to an increased
awareness among Member States of the importance of the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement and to
examine what possible role it could play with regard to
the protection of internally displaced persons and in the
dissemination of those Principles.
We also welcome the decision adopted by the
Inter-Agency Standing Committee earlier this month to
the effect that the Emergency Relief Coordinator, acting
in his own capacity or on suggestions from the
humanitarian or resident coordinators, should bring to the
attention of the Security Council issues concerning
2
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
internally displaced persons whenever that is deemed
appropriate.
The legal protection of civilians in armed conflict can
also be enhanced. The European Union fully supports the
call of the Secretary-General for the ratification of the
major instruments of international humanitarian law, human
rights law and refugee law, for the withdrawal of those
reservations which weaken the protection of civilians, and
for the taking of all appropriate legislative, judicial and
administrative measures to implement those instruments.
The Security Council could play an active role in
convincing Member States that have not yet done so to
ratify the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United Nations
and Associated Personnel. Serious consideration should be
given to expanding the scope of the Convention to include
locally recruited personnel, who are essential to the
functioning of peacekeeping and humanitarian missions.
Furthermore, the activities of the two existing ad hoc
Tribunals should be fully supported by all Member States,
especially with regard to complying with their orders and
requests for the arrest and surrender of accused persons. In
this context, the International Criminal Court will be
crucial. The European Union urges those who have not yet
signed the Rome International Criminal Court Statute to do
so and all States to proceed to ratification as soon as
possible. Our common persistent efforts to combat impunity
for war crimes is also an important contribution to the
prevention of renewed armed conflict.
The first step to be taken in the protection of civilians
is, of course, to prevent conflicts. The link between the
prevention of armed conflicts, the facilitation of the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the protection of
civilians during armed conflict, in particular the protection
of human life, has been well established by this organ, most
recently in its presidential statement of 30 November 1999.
The European Union stresses the importance of a
comprehensive approach to conflict prevention extending
from early warning to post-conflict peace-building. This, in
turn, requires the promotion of a culture of prevention
within the international community. It also entails paying
attention to an expanded view on security.
However, it should be reiterated that conflict
prevention is based on respect for the Charter of the United
Nations and other provisions of international law, including
human rights. When this fails, the international community
has an obligation to act. It has at its disposal a plethora of
measures that, if used judiciously and in a timely manner,
can be powerful tools in the prevention of full-fledged
conflicts.
The European Union would like to encourage the
Secretary-General to resort more often to the prerogative
conferred on him by Article 99 of the Charter. Both the
Secretary-General and Member States should be invited
to bring to the attention of the Council any matter which,
in their opinion, may threaten peace and security. The
establishment in the Council secretariat of an
early-warning mechanism for coordination and systematic
dissemination of reliable early-warning information,
including human rights information, could be one way to
support and facilitate the work of the Secretary-General.
The early deployment of preventive missions should
also be considered whenever possible. Because conflict
situations evolve quickly, the United Nations must be
ready to plan and deploy its operations accordingly. They
must be placed on the ground as soon as possible, with
sufficient resources to achieve the mandates entrusted to
them by the Security Council.
At that early stage a number of measures could be
envisioned, ranging from the use of fact-finding missions,
special envoys and monitors to preventive diplomacy and
a more consistent use of information and analysis made
available by independent treaty body experts and
mechanisms of the United Nations Commission on
Human Rights in order to determine potential conflicts
and to act preventively. Improvement of the capacity of
the Secretariat in terms of expertise and resources could
also be contemplated upon the identification by the
Secretary-General of any additional requirements needed
to fulfil his capabilities.
The European Union supports proposals to expand
the scope of the United Nations standby arrangements
system, including by increasing the number of civilian
police and specialized civil administration and
humanitarian personnel. We also support the proposal that
peacekeepers and humanitarian personnel be trained in
human rights and international humanitarian law,
including child- and gender-related provisions.
With regard to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes, these can be essential
to a peace process and should be included early in the
relevant peace agreements and mandated by the Security
Council with sufficient resources. A successful DDR
programme can break the cycle of violence.
3
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
There are about 500 million small arms and light
weapons in circulation and considered responsible for
roughly 90 per cent of all deaths in contemporary conflicts.
Their easy availability has aggravated too many conflicts,
whose ruthlessness is hardly understandable at the dawn of
the twenty-first century. Stopping the illegal traffic of these
weapons must be a priority for the international community.
A greater use of embargoes is one of the tools at the
disposal of the Council and one it should use more often,
but embargoes per se can be of little value if they are not
respected and enforced by all States, not least by the
neighbouring countries.
As the Secretary-General recommends, the Security
Council can also use targeted sanctions to deter and contain
those who commit grave violations of international
humanitarian law or human rights, including those parties
to a conflict which do not refrain from attacking civilians.
In this context, it is very much linked to the other debates
we had under your presidency, Sir.
The European Union had the occasion to further
elaborate on the subject of sanctions in a statement
delivered before this Council on 17 April, and again on 18
April on the occasion of the consideration of sanctions
against UNITA.
The Secretary-General has identified, in his report on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, a
comprehensive set of preventive measures that, if followed
through, could have a positive impact on enhancing the
security of civilians in conflicts. General pronouncements
alone will not change much, even if they do, importantly,
raise awareness of the plight of civilians in conflicts.
As the Secretary-General has himself stated:
“We know what needs to be done. What is now
needed is the foresight and the political will to do it”.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Israel. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Lancry (Israel): I wish to emphasize our
appreciation for your leadership in this discussion and to
commend the several discussions that preceded it over this
past year. In the months since the Secretary-General
presented us with his report, we have seen special attention
given to the protection of civilians in places like Sierra
Leone, Angola and others. This gave birth both to
short-term and long-term measures. More importantly, it
added to a renewed focus on the plight of civilians
targeted in armed conflict.
As the report of the Secretary-General pointed out,
physical protection must precede legal protection. It is the
more immediate need. We have seen efforts to begin
integrating ex-military forces into civil society. We have
seen attempts to place United Nations peacekeepers in
areas where civilians are vulnerable. We have seen plans
to increase civilian police, which would be a welcome
development across the globe.
Still, all of these practical steps begin with a legal
one: identifying the deliberate targeting of civilians as a
distinct crime. As we recall, resolution 1265 (1999)
strongly condemns the deliberate targeting of civilians.
We should also recall that the Secretary-General’s report
in September specifically used the word “terror” to
describe such actions and noted that:
“The violence is frequently perpetrated by non-state
actors ... and privately financed militia.”
(S/1999/957, para. 8)
These affirmations serve to identify and help
criminalize the tactic of wilfully targeting civilians. They
also reaffirm that any violations by States or militias are
worthy of the attention of the Security Council. Moreover,
by criminalizing the tactic itself, we prevent actors from
hiding behind their political or military purposes. The
international community has finally established that no
end justifies a deliberate assault on the innocent. This is
a universal principle, and the next step might be for
Member States and entities to explicitly outlaw the
practice.
Still, we have only scratched the surface. The
question still plagues us: how did the century that saw the
birth of our international human rights instruments also
witness the most vicious targeting of civilians in human
history? Less than 50 years after the conventions on
genocide, human rights and humanitarian law, we saw the
systematic destruction of entire civilian households, both
in Europe and in the African continent.
Moreover, our current age has marked the growth of
a new tactic, which is as cynical as it is brutal: the use of
civilians as human shields. This practice must itself be
included as part of the same theme, for it is in essence
the same crime: the deliberate attempt to cause the death
and suffering of civilians in armed conflict.
4
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
Nevertheless, the root causes continue to elude us. The
above-mentioned report refers in paragraph 48 to “the
obligation ... to prevent the open incitement to violence
against particular groups”. We must recall that the worst
case of targeting civilians, in the century just past, began
with the vilification of an entire people. This continues to
be the case today. Groups that attack civilians are often also
guilty of conducting media campaigns against entire peoples
or ethnic groups.
This is no coincidence. We must demand that States
do their utmost to prevent demonization before — and
especially after — it reaches the point of violence. The
outlawing of incitement to violence is a step in the right
direction. But more must be done to promote a climate of
peace and respect for human rights. This begins with
respect for the human rights of all peoples, regardless of
ethnic group, religion or nationality.
There is another point that is worth emphasizing:
civilians must never be the direct target of war; however,
they must certainly be the target of peacemaking. All
efforts at diplomatic reconciliation, between States and
parties, must be supplemented by efforts to promote
normalization of relations between peoples and societies. In
this manner we can lay the groundwork for a climate in
which civilian life and human dignity will be respected. Let
us hope that the focus on the innocent, beginning in this
forum, will set the stage for a greater recognition of the
inherent rights of all human beings across borders and
continents. Then civil society will be truly safe and free.
The President: The next speaker is the representative
of the Republic of Korea. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Suh Dae-won (Republic of Korea): I would like
to begin by expressing my delegation’s appreciation to you,
Minister Axworthy, for your efforts to generate greater
participation in the work of the Security Council. I likewise
commend you for once again providing a forum for the
interests and concerns of the international community
relating to security issues of a humanitarian nature,
including in the open debate of the Council on “general
issues relating to sanctions” on 17 April 2000. My
delegation also offers thanks to the Secretary-General and
his staff, and Mr. Kellenberger, the new President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, as well as the
informal working group of the Security Council, for their
indispensable work on this issue.
Since my delegation introduced the issue of the
protection of humanitarian assistance to refugees and
others in conflict situations to the Council during its
Security Council presidency in 1997, we have been
following the Council’s successive measures on this issue
with deep interest. We note with satisfaction that the
Council has held a number of meaningful discussions
dealing with the protection of civilians in conflicts, which
resulted in the adoption of resolution 1265 in September
1999. We applaud the Council’s continued efforts to fulfil
its responsibilities in this regard in a more concrete and
action-oriented manner.
In his report in document S/1999/957, the Secretary-
General rightly emphasizes the close connection between
widespread violations of the rights of civilians and
breakdowns in international peace and security. The
Security Council has also confirmed through many
resolutions that violations of international humanitarian
law constitute a continuing threat to international peace
and security. Today’s alarming breaches of international
humanitarian norms therefore flout both the authority of
this Council and the spirit of the Charter of the
Organization.
My delegation supports the Secretary-General’s
recommendations contained in document S/1999/957 and
the Council’s decision to consider appropriate steps to
implement his recommendations at this juncture. The
ever-widening gap between our international humanitarian
norms and an often dreadful reality calls for not only the
Security Council, but the whole international community
to act decisively and promptly.
Let me address several points to which my
delegation attaches particular importance.
First, despite an ever-expanding legal corpus, there
is still room for improving the protection of civilians in
conflicts within our international legal framework. Indeed,
the existence of international law does not mean that it
can be upheld only by effective measures to ensure
compliance. It is imperative that a culture of compliance
begin to prevail so that legal protection and physical
protection are no longer two separate matters.
It is in this context that my delegation echoes
previous speakers in expressing its expectations for the
future role of the International Criminal Court (ICC). I
am pleased to announce that my Government signed the
Statute of the ICC last month, and we invite others that
have not yet done so to become signatories. My
5
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
delegation also supports the Secretary-General’s view that
there is a need to consider using enforcement measures to
facilitate the arrest and surrender of those persons accused
by ad hoc tribunals and to devise judicial and investigative
mechanisms with national and international components
pending the establishment of the International Criminal
Court.
The Statute of the Court stipulates that attacks against
humanitarian or peacekeeping personnel constitute war
crimes. With a view to better ensuring the safety of United
Nations and humanitarian personnel, we join the
Secretary-General’s call for an early ratification of the 1994
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel. We also believe that the proposal to extend the
scope of the 1994 Convention to cover wider categories of
humanitarian personnel, including local staff, deserves
favourable consideration.
Secondly, my delegation concurs with the
Secretary-General’s recommendations for a more proactive
use of preventive monitoring in areas of potential conflict
and in the deployment of preventive peacekeeping missions,
which have already proved to be effective. In this context,
we would like to join in appealing to all Member States to
participate more actively in the stand-by arrangement
system. Today the Secretary-General made an important
suggestion: to create a rapid deployment force. This idea
certainly merits further discussion.
Furthermore, in view of the multifaceted nature of
recent conflicts, there is an urgent need to strengthen the
United Nations rapid-reaction capability to cover more than
the traditional mandates of peacekeeping. It should also
cover a number of other functions, such as the protection of
humanitarian assistance to civilians. It goes without saying
that mandates for peacekeeping operations should be more
precise and comprehensive in order to provide effective
direction and clarity.
Thirdly, my delegation appreciates the attention that
has recently been given to improving sanctions. The
Security Council, for its part, has made consistent efforts to
refine the use of sanctions. While we recognize the
difficulty of achieving effective “targeted sanctions”, we
also believe that there is a continuing need to minimize
collateral — albeit unintended — humanitarian suffering
through the imposition of more specifically targeted
sanctions and periodic substantial review mechanisms.
While we all continue to seek more effective and
smarter sanctions, tighter arms embargoes should be sought
in all situations where the parties to the conflict target
civilians. In this regard, effective measures must be taken
to control the flow of small arms and light weapons to
conflict areas. My delegation strongly supports the
suggestion made by Under-Secretary-General Prendergast
at Monday’s Council meeting that sanctions regimes
should be endowed with more effective monitoring
capabilities, including the necessary resources and
expertise. We will continue to support the efforts of the
Council and the Secretary-General to strike a balance
between upgrading the credibility of sanctions and
minimizing human suffering.
Fourthly, it is worth giving serious attention to the
Secretary-General’s suggestion that we provide States
with political and financial support to facilitate
compliance with the Ottawa Convention. Mine clearance
is an urgent precondition to a minimum level of safety for
civilians. A donor to the Mine Action Support Group, my
Government has also been contributing since 1996 to the
Voluntary Trust Fund for Assistance in Mine Clearance
in support of demining activities in Cambodia, Tajikistan,
Guatemala and El Salvador. We will continue to make
such contributions and invite others to do the same.
Finally, we would like to re-emphasize the primary
importance of maintaining the civilian and humanitarian
character of camps for refugees and internally displaced
persons. We fully support a number of practical
suggestions in this regard, in particular the deployment of
international military observers and the relocation of
camps to a safe area away from war zones. While
recognizing that primary responsibility for the protection
of internally displaced persons rests with the Governments
concerned, we support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation for a wider use of the Guiding Principles
on Internal Displacement in the work of the United
Nations.
Let me close by reiterating my delegation’s hope
that the Security Council will continue to expand its
involvement in the protection of civilians in conflict
situations in the months to come. The Republic of Korea,
for its part, will continue to be actively engaged in this
important process and to contribute to its success.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Austria,
Mrs. Benita Ferrero-Waldner, who is returning home to
the United Nations as a longtime member of the family
here.
6
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
I invite her to take a seat at the Council table and to
make her statement.
Mrs. Ferrero-Waldner (Austria): Let me begin, Mr.
President, by extending my appreciation to you and to your
country for having taken the initiative in February last year
to bring before the Security Council the very important
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict. It is a
particular pleasure to see you presiding over this meeting
today. I wish therefore to congratulate you, and, through
you, the Security Council, on the encouraging results
which — in a little more than a year’s time — have been
achieved so far in addressing this matter.
The steady increase in civilian casualties in conflict
situations strikes us as one of the past century’s most
horrific features. Sadly — and I am stating the obvious for
the Council — the 1990s proved no exception to this
pattern, but rather culminated in armed conflicts marked by
massive, deliberate brutality against civilians, with
particularly negative effects on women, children and other
vulnerable groups.
This is true for every region of the world, and I would
like to welcome the particular emphasis the Council has
placed recently on Africa. In my capacity as
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), I will concentrate today on
the OSCE region and on the steps taken by the OSCE to
better protect civilians in times of conflict.
An impressive number of instruments of international
humanitarian and human rights law have been adopted since
the Second World War. But as we enter a new century, we
are still far from a worldwide “climate of compliance”. The
law continues to be broken, violated and, unfortunately,
ignored. I would like, therefore, to welcome the landmark
report of the Secretary-General to the Security Council on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. In this report,
he has presented a set of courageous yet very practical
proposals, including measures that the Council can adopt
within its sphere of responsibility with a view to developing
effective responses to this ongoing challenge. In adopting
resolution 1265 (1999) of 17 September 1999, the Council
welcomed the Secretary-General’s report and supported
many of its recommendations. The Council also underlined
the importance of consultation and cooperation between the
United Nations and other relevant international
organizations and actors, including regional organizations,
in this respect. Furthermore, it expressed its willingness to
work in cooperation with regional organizations to examine
how these bodies might better enhance the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
As the Council is aware, cooperation between the
United Nations and the OSCE takes place on a multitude
of levels. Apart from our day-to-day cooperation in the
field and the humanitarian and political tasks we face
together in some regions of the OSCE area, there are
important issues of common concern regarding the way
we approach the challenges of the new century. The topic
of this debate concerns one of them.
As stated in the Charter for European Security,
adopted in Istanbul in November 1999, the OSCE will
seek ways of reinforcing the application of international
humanitarian law in order to enhance the protection of
civilians in times of conflict. I believe that working
together with the Security Council in this respect would
only seem natural and mutually beneficial.
At this point, I should also like to highlight that at
the Istanbul Summit, the OSCE laid the foundations for
a strong focus on the concerns and situation of the
individual human being. Ultimately, it is the OSCE’s aim,
as expressed in the Summit Declaration, “to improve
human security and thereby to make a difference in the
life of the individual”.
Keeping these words in mind, Austria, which holds
the Chairmanship-in-Office of the OSCE, strongly
believes that in situations of armed conflict, the OSCE
must focus its attention on the victims and the
vulnerable — their interests, rights and protection. In this
connection, and as part of an integrated approach to
security policy, the Austrian Chairmanship-in-Office has
put special emphasis on taking concrete steps to better
protect civilians in armed conflict.
One important aspect is the protection of children
affected by armed conflict, an issue that has been dear to
us for a long time. In September last year, therefore, we
suggested that the question of children in armed conflict
be considered regularly in the OSCE framework. Austria
greatly appreciated the initiative of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict, Olara Otunnu, in proposing a 10-point
agenda by which the OSCE could undertake to make the
protection of children affected by armed conflict a central
policy concern.
At the OSCE Istanbul Summit of November 1999,
the heads of State or Government of the participating
7
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
States of the OSCE endorsed this approach. They
committed themselves to actively promoting children’s
rights and interest, especially in conflict and post-conflict
situations. They decided to regularly address the rights of
children in the work of the OSCE, including by holding a
special meeting in the year 2000, dedicated to children in
armed conflict, and to pay particular attention to the
physical and psychological well-being of children involved
in war or affected by armed conflict.
In this connection, a Human Dimension Seminar on
children and armed conflict will be held from 23 to 26 May
2000 in Warsaw, with the aim of raising awareness within
the OSCE, including OSCE field presences, about the
effects of armed conflict on children and the aim of
examining the possibilities for intervention by the OSCE to
address them. I therefore take pleasure in informing the
Council that Mr. Olara Otunnu, as well as representatives
of the United Nations Children’s Fund and other
international organizations and non-governmental
organizations, will contribute to that meeting.
Another key issue which is high on our agenda as
OSCE Chairman-in-Office, is the problem of internal
displacement. Persons displaced within their own countries
by internal conflict and grave violations of human rights
and humanitarian law pose a great challenge to which both
our organizations are called to respond. The protection of
and provision of assistance to millions of internally
displaced people must become a priority concern to us. The
same holds true for the ultimate aim of their return to and
reintegration in their places of origin. Within the United
Nations, important work has been done on this topic by the
Representative of the Secretary-General for Internally
Displaced Persons, Mr. Francis Deng. He has been a
catalyst of greater attention to the problem of internal
displacement, working both within the United Nations
system and in collaboration with regional organizations,
such as the Organization of African Unity.
Austria also took the initiative to raise the issue of
displacement within the OSCE. A Human Dimension
Seminar on this topic, with the participation of Mr. Francis
Deng, will be held later this year. Among its objectives will
be the promotion of the wider use of the Guiding Principles
on Internal Displacement and their integration into the work
of the OSCE.
In conclusion, let me express my conviction that there
is great potential for further and closer cooperation between
our organizations in dealing with the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. The examples which I have mentioned
may be just a beginning. There is scope to intensify our
efforts and to expand cooperation to other areas of
common interest, such as the fight against the
proliferation of small arms, the monitoring, protection and
promotion of human rights in conflict zones and the
training of field mission personnel, as well as
peacekeeping and peace-building operations.
I strongly believe that such common endeavours to
protect the vulnerable, building on our positive
experiences of cooperation in the past few years, will
soon lead to concrete results. They will be felt positively
by those whose well-being we wish to secure. This in
itself should encourage us to intensify our work in this
direction.
Finally, let me greet the Austrian students from the
University of Vienna who are studying international
organizations and who are sitting in the Gallery. They
have followed this meeting very diligently.
The President: I endorse the welcome that the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Austria gave to the
students here. It is always great to see them observing the
Council in action.
The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Singapore. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Allow me to begin by
congratulating the delegation of Canada on arranging
another discussion on this important topic in this Chamber
and to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report. We would also like to commend you, Minister
Axworthy, for your decision to preside over this debate in
person. Your personal presence here bears eloquent
testimony to Canada’s commitment to its human security
agenda. We would also like to acknowledge the
contribution made by Mr. Kellenberger this morning and
to pay tribute to the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) for its substantial contributions over the
years through its efforts to bring relief to civilians and
those in need, often under very trying circumstances.
As this is the fourth meeting we have had on this
subject, it may be fair to ask ourselves whether we are
going in the right or wrong direction in our
discussions — that is to say, will all our discussions
actually lead to fewer civilians being killed in armed
conflicts?
8
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
Our first goal in the United Nations is always to
prevent conflict, or, as the United Nations Charter states,
“to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war”.
However, if conflict occurs — and it is likely to occur
again — our job is to ensure that we protect the lives of
civilians before those of soldiers in these conflicts. Is this
goal realistic?
We should begin by acknowledging that civilians have
been killed in armed conflict for thousands of years. In an
annex attached to our remarks, we have reproduced two
tables from a recent book by Michael Renner, which
indicate the heavy casualties among civilians in armed
conflicts before and after 1945. Whether we live in Asia,
North America or Europe, none of us has been spared the
horrors of war. Indeed, as recently as 1898, in the Spanish-
American War, up to 95 per cent of the victims were
civilians.
As we enter the twenty-first century, the great conceit
that we have begun to believe in is that mankind as a whole
has become more civilized. Indeed, we have in some
respects. Inter-State wars seem to be a sunset industry.
With a few exceptions, we do not see large armies in the
field killing each other.
But unfortunately, a new trend has emerged. In place
of inter-State wars, we now see more intra-State wars.
Hence, it is no longer a case of soldiers killing soldiers.
Instead, as we heard at the debate on the Carlsson report,
on Rwanda, last week in this Chamber, it is neighbours
who kill neighbours, friends who kill friends, civilians who
kill civilians. Rwanda is not the only place in recent history
where civilians have killed civilians. We have seen the
same thing in Sierra Leone, in Kosovo and elsewhere.
We should, of course, be dismayed that such recent
atrocities have taken place despite the great progress we
have made in formulating rules to protect civilians and
combatants alike against some of the more reprehensible
acts of war. These norms are clearly set out in the Geneva
Conventions, as well as in other instruments of international
humanitarian law. We can therefore support the call by the
Secretary-General to encourage a “climate of compliance”
(S/1999/957, para. 5), which many others have echoed in
their remarks today — a “climate of compliance” of
existing rules and principles.
But how does one explain humanitarian law to
combatants, who are often underaged, poor and illiterate, let
alone expect them to comply? Even the ICRC has
acknowledged the difficulties of applying accepted
humanitarian norms in today’s “new” conflicts. It states,
“The lack of discipline among belligerents, the
targeting of the civilian population as weapons
flood the territory and the increasingly blurred
distinction between combatants and non-
combatants often cause confrontations to take
an extremely brutal turn in which there is little
place for the rules of law.”
Clearly, the long-term solution to this problem is to
promote development and education. But is there anything
we can do in the meantime to save civilian lives when an
armed conflict breaks out? Here, we should be grateful
for the incisive analysis and recommendations contained
in at least three recent reports: the Secretary-General’s
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, of
8 September 1999, the Carlsson report on the 1994
Rwanda genocide, of 15 December 1999, and the
Secretary-General’s report on Srebrenica, of 15 November
1999. If we read these reports in detail, as we all should,
we will find many valuable solutions.
I also understand that the Council’s informal
working group has been studying the Secretary-General’s
comprehensive recommendations since last September to
examine how they could be implemented. But let us
remember that the peoples of the world will judge the
United Nations not by its words but by its deeds. What
message, for example, was conveyed by the deeds and
actions of United Nations operations in Rwanda and
Srebrenica? Will such history repeat itself again? Will the
United Nations once again be paralysed by political
inertia and apathy? Will soldiers again abandon
supposedly safe areas, leaving innocent civilians as sitting
ducks ready for the inevitable ensuing slaughter? Will the
United Nations once again send a mission that is from the
start grossly understaffed, under-resourced and ill
equipped?
If we are to be completely honest with ourselves, we
have to admit that both in Srebrenica as well as Rwanda,
it would appear that the protection of the lives of soldiers
was more important than the protection of the lives of
civilians. Although this may appear strange at first sight,
we know why this happened. We congratulate
Ambassador Peter van Walsum of the Netherlands for
candidly explaining the source of the problem:
“It is understandable, but unfortunate, that a
troop-contributing country which suffers heavy
9
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
casualties will inevitably find itself under
pressure from its parliament and its media to
withdraw its contingent. The more this reflex can
be counted on, the greater the likelihood that
precisely such a contingent will be targeted by
parties opposed to the peace operation. We have
no solution for this problem, but it raises a
discomforting question as to the suitability of
democratic countries for peace operations.”
(S/PV.4127, p. 6)
Fortunately, not all democracies behave in this way. In
East Timor, the lives of hundreds of thousands of East
Timorese civilians were also threatened by rogue militia.
Fortunately, in this case the United Nations authorized the
deployment of a well-equipped international force, under
strong leadership and provided with a clear mandate. This
force had the will to robustly execute its mandate. In so
doing, this operation proved that the United Nations could
fulfil its responsibility of preventing the brutalization of
innocent civilians by armed militia.
Clearly, all conflict situations are different. But
none — I repeat, none — provide easy solutions. As
Foreign Minister Lloyd Axworthy of Canada told the
Council last week,
“the protection of civilians requires strengthening
our disposition to intervene with force if
necessary.” (ibid., p. 24)
Minister Axworthy may have been stating the obvious. But
the key implication of what he said is often unmentionable
in the Security Council — to save civilians you need
effective military forces. The question is, where will they
come from and who will pay the costs? In the case of East
Timor, for example, every Australian taxpayer was asked
to pay an additional 1,000 Australian dollars per person.
How many taxpayers in democracies are prepared to do
this?
Even when troops and resources are available, it may
not necessarily mean that civilians will be protected. It is
troubling that Timothy Garton Ash, in a recent article in
The New York Review of Books, has reported a growing
intolerance of all other ethnic groups among the Kosovars.
Ash has also detected what he had called “reverse ethnic
cleansing” taking place in Kosovo “under the very noses
and tank barrels of more than 40,000 international troops”.
Resolution 1291 (2000), which extended the mandate
and authorized the expansion of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUC) in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, exemplifies yet again the difficulties of
reconciling the lofty ideals of today’s debate and the
actual painful decisions made by the Council. MONUC’s
mandate to protect civilians is deliberately couched in
even more conditional language than the mandate given
earlier to the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL). A quick comparison of resolution 1291
(2000) and resolution 1289 (2000), expanding UNAMSIL,
will, we believe, illustrate this point.
In short, we should recognize that protecting
civilians in armed conflict will require hard decisions.
Considerable resources, human and otherwise, have to be
placed at risk. Consistent and coherent policies have to be
worked out. But in this context, is it fair to ask the United
Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations to do
more when it is being starved of resources, especially
from the United Nations major contributors? Is it not
obvious that an underfunded United Nations can do little
to protect civilians?
Our remarks today are not intended to create
pessimism. But we should set realistic expectations for
the civilian populations of the world about what the
international community can and cannot do. On this we
agree with the point made by Minister Axworthy this
morning when he described the work of the Council here
today to promote human security as being work in
progress. Indeed, last week Minister Axworthy also cited
a very moving account given by Philip Gourevitch in his
book of how young, defenceless Hutu girls in a convent
school refused to leave the side of their Tutsi friends,
even though they were ordered to do so by the
genocidaires. The simple question that the rest of the
world will ask of the United Nations in the future is
whether the soldiers will display the same courage and
sacrifice as those Hutu girls, or whether they will be
withdrawn by their parliaments and media at the first hint
of danger.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Japan. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Kobayashi (Japan): Let me start by extending
my appreciation for your initiative, Mr. President, in the
discussions in the Council on the serious and growing
problem of civilians in armed conflict.
10
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
I should also like to join the others who this morning
welcomed Mr. Jakob Kellenberger, the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). I wish
to take this opportunity to express Japan's continuing
support for the worthy work that the ICRC is carrying out
around the globe under his able leadership.
Today, I shall not dwell upon our basic recognition
that the majority of victims in an armed conflict are
civilians — mainly women and children — as this has been
articulated by many others in the previous debates in the
Council; nor shall I comment here on all the interrelated
and valuable recommendations that are about to be adopted
by the Council. Rather, I should like to try to shed some
light on today's theme by discussing how to respond to the
plight of internally displaced persons.
The displacement of civilians is a matter of
international peace and security, since peace, reconciliation
and reconstruction in war-torn communities depend, at least
in part, on their effective reintegration. Moreover, if
unaddressed, internal displacement not only causes internal
instability but may also spill across borders and upset
external and regional stability.
I should like now to express Japan's views on how to
address the issue of internally displaced persons by
stressing the following two basic points.
First, Japan supports the approach taken by Mr.
Francis Deng, Representative of the Secretary-General on
Internally Displaced Persons, which is based on the belief
that sovereignty is responsibility. Under that approach,
through analysis and dialogue with Government and
agencies in the field, the international community would
jointly try to solve the problem. When a given Government
is not in a position to completely fulfil its responsibility —
for political, economic, or other reasons — then the
international community can come in to help, with the
consent and understanding of that Government. Japan
believes that such an approach should be strongly enhanced,
and in this context Japan is considering extending some
financial support to facilitate Mr. Deng's worthy efforts.
My second point pertains to how better to respond to
the issue of persons displaced by armed conflicts. If you
recall, in the Council last January Ambassador Holbrooke,
of the United States, made an eloquent case for the need to
address a displaced population that remains within the
borders of a State wrecked by conflicts. His suggestion that
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) might play a wider role in the response
to the issue of internally displaced persons triggered an
intense debate in the international community on how to
address this pressing subject. The realities in the growing
number of cases of displacement and the activities of
humanitarian agencies both suggest that the protection
aspect of the response towards internally displaced
persons has clearly been weak.
Mrs. Sadako Ogata, the High Commissioner for
Refugees, has responded to Ambassador Holbrooke's
suggestion with a qualified “yes”. According to her, in
such cases where refugees and internally displaced
persons are generated by the same causes, or where
refugees have sought asylum across borders in areas
where there are also internally displaced persons, UNHCR
would be able to utilize its expertise and skills to protect
the displaced persons. This, in our eyes, and in the eyes
of the international community, I believe, would be a very
encouraging sign that the need to protect civilians affected
by armed conflict is meeting with a better response. This
is so because it would mean efficient use of limited
resources, as well as avoiding layers of bureaucracy.
It is also encouraging to know that efforts towards
greater coordination on the humanitarian front are being
made by the United Nations and relevant organizations.
The Inter-Agency Standing Committee, chaired by the
International Red Cross, is pursuing more accountability
in the international response to internally displaced
persons. I shall not go into detail here on the desirable
institutional arrangements that have been under
deliberation, and recently with greater intensity. What
should be kept in mind, however, when undertaking this
exercise is that there is no model method for protecting
civilians caught in an armed conflict. Each conflict has a
different historical and geographical background, and the
pattern of activities by United Nations agencies and other
international bodies differs in each conflict and each post-
conflict situation. Whichever body has the most
value-added expertise, and whichever is well placed in the
field, should be designated as being accountable. A
coherent and comprehensive response by all actors —
including better protection, assistance and economic
recovery for internally displaced persons — needs to be
pursued effectively.
I should like to conclude by expressing the readiness
of my Government to actively take part in the effort by
the international community to seek ways to address the
issue of displacement. When effective methods are
agreed, you can be assured, Mr. President, of Japan's full
support and cooperation.
11
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt)(spoke in Arabic): As the
Security Council resumes its consideration of the report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and the report of the working group that
followed up that report, we wish to reaffirm our position:
the Security Council should not be the only body to
consider this issue or its report. We believe that the report
should also be considered by the General Assembly, with
all its recommendations, so that the Assembly can look into
the general principles therein on reducing human suffering,
including the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We
may recall what the Council has said in the past regarding
the protection of civilians in armed conflict within the
context of full respect for the delicate balance of powers
between the principal organs of the United Nations, as
reflected in the Charter. These include the General
Assembly, other United Nations organs and governmental
and non-governmental bodies outside the United Nations
involved in the protection of civilians.
We welcome and advocate action by the Council, in
accordance with the powers entrusted to it in the United
Nations Charter, in situations where civilians are targeted
or where there is interference with the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. We also strongly condemn the
targeting of civilians in time of war. Egypt calls on all
States parties to a conflict to respect the rights of civilians
and to refrain from using civilians as a means of achieving
political or military goals. Egypt believes that the delivery
of humanitarian assistance to civilians should not be
hampered and that civilians should not be used as human
shields.
We also call for the same standards to be universally
applied. There are rules of international humanitarian law
that apply to all States, large and small. In this context, we
note the Council’s position on issues referred to in the
report before it. First, targeting civilians in armed conflicts
is prohibited, and respecting human rights is a binding
obligation. It is indeed our primary objective to ensure the
implementation and application of that law. The Charter
calls for respect for such legal norms and standards. Failure
to respect these laws can lead to threats to international
peace and security. Certain ideas that have not yet achieved
international consensus are being voiced in certain quarters.
However, we believe we must continue to develop specific
criteria to be used where the violation of legal norms leads
to a threat to international peace and security.
We must never use double standards or favour the
political interests of certain Members of the United
Nations, more specifically, of the permanent members of
the Security Council. We must not favour their interests
over those of the other Members of the United Nations as
a whole. We believe the Council should take into account
the entire issue of powers granted to it under the Charter.
When the Council takes action vis-à-vis certain States that
have violated international norms, it must respect the
restrictions contained in the Charter. It must consider the
situation, then report on the situation and determine
whether the conflict in question is indeed a threat to
international peace and security. Any internal dispute over
a territory should not be regarded ipso facto as a threat to
international peace and security.
We support action by the Council to protect
personnel providing humanitarian and international
assistance. We believe they must be allowed to do their
job. They must have access to areas of conflict.
Organizations involved in the delivery of humanitarian
assistance must also respect the principles of neutrality,
impartiality and humanity. These points are contained in
the guidelines contained in General Assembly resolution
46/182.
Egypt believes that the provision of humanitarian
assistance to civilians in time of war should be carried out
with the consent of or at the request of the countries
concerned. There must be full respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of States
and for their national legislation. Humanitarian assistance
must not be used as a cover for action in support of the
political interests of any particular State or group of
States. When we speak of providing humanitarian
assistance, we are thinking of programmes carried out
under the auspices of the United Nations or the
International Committee of the Red Cross. The consent of
the States parties to the conflict is required. Those States
must then provide protection for the personnel providing
the humanitarian assistance. We do not believe that any
organization should take unilateral decisions to offer
assistance to civilians in any particular State without
obtaining the prior consent of the State concerned.
There are provisions in the Charter on the sovereign
equality, territorial integrity and political independence of
States, and the Council has to take those principles into
account when dealing with issues of security — for
example, in the establishment of temporary secure zones
or safe corridors for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance.
12
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
Another point I would like to make is that when
dealing with humanitarian assistance to civilians in armed
conflict, the international community has to distinguish
between States within whose territories there are
Governments that impose the law and other States where
there is virtually no legitimate Government. The latter case
is of course an exception to the rule. However, one must
always proceed on the basis of consensus.
Internally displaced persons do not constitute a totally
separate category; they are civilians and international
human rights laws and conventions provide appropriate
protection for civilians. So we believe that we need to
ensure respect for these conventions, rather than invent new
norms to protect one particular category of civilians to the
exclusion of others. Protection for displaced persons is the
responsibility of the Governments of the States represented
in the United Nations as a whole.
On the question of preventive diplomacy, fact-finding
missions and so forth, we believe that the Council can carry
out certain actions in order to prevent conflict and reach a
peaceful settlement to a conflict. Chapter VI of the Charter
is relevant here, and of course the consent of the State
concerned is required, because these procedures are in fact
voluntary.
In connection with peacekeeping missions and
operations, and how they are related to the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts, the Security Council must be
cautious in those cases where it gives a mandate to a
peacekeeping operation to protect civilians against any
dangers threatening them in armed conflicts. When the
Council takes such a decision, it must also take into
account the fact that, in considering each case individually,
it is setting a precedent for other, similar cases. Double
standards and selective application of such standards should
be avoided.
We also believe that human, technical and other
resources must be made available so that any
responsibilities given to peacekeeping operations can in fact
be fulfilled. Perhaps I could just give one rather glaring
example, that of the tragic events of Srebrenica, which
should never have been allowed to recur.
In concluding, I should like to thank you very much
indeed, Mr. President, for all the work that you have done
in promoting the activities of this Organization. Canadian
diplomacy has always had an important role to play in
connection with the United Nations. You have also done
your utmost to ensure respect for the law. I would also note
the excellent relations, based on mutual respect, between
Egypt and Canada. Also, at an individual level, you
yourself have excellent relations with your Egyptian
counterpart.
The President: I thank the representative of Egypt
for his kind words addressed to me.
In accordance with the decision taken earlier in the
meeting, I invite the Permanent Observer of Switzerland
to the United Nations to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would first of all like to thank you, Mr. Minister, and the
Canadian presidency for having organized this debate,
thus giving us the opportunity to express our views on an
issue of crucial importance. I welcome the participation
of the President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) in this morning’s debate, and I wish to pay
tribute to the tireless efforts of the ICRC on behalf of the
victims of armed conflicts throughout the world.
Switzerland welcomes the draft resolution submitted
to the Security Council for consideration, which describes
the initiatives that the Council and the entire international
community could undertake in order to improve the
protection of civilian populations in armed conflicts.
In earlier statements, I have had the opportunity to
affirm my country’s priorities for action in the
humanitarian field, such as respect for international
humanitarian law, the protection of civilian populations,
unimpeded access to victims of conflict and the security
of humanitarian personnel. I will therefore confine myself
today to three specific points that I believe to be of major
importance and deserving of in-depth consideration.
First, the question of the protection of civilian
populations in armed conflict compels us to consider the
current evolution of these conflicts throughout the world.
The proliferation of complex and prolonged emergency
situations, as seen recently in Somalia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Angola, Burundi, Sierra Leone,
Afghanistan and many other countries challenges the
bases on which human rights and international
humanitarian law instruments have been developed.
Respect for the provisions of these legal instruments
is broadly based on the responsibility of States; but we
see that non-State armed actors — armed groups, private
militia — tend to be increasing. It is deeply disturbing to
13
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
see that in the most recent internal conflicts, civilians not
only are the victims, but are becoming targets for the
warring parties. Many studies have been made of this
situation, including very recently in the excellent report of
the Secretary-General on the millennium.
It is therefore important to ensure respect for the rule
of law and for humanitarian principles by non-State armed
actors. We are obviously aware of the concrete problems
that this poses. Suffice it to mention the question of
recognition of these actors as subjects of international law
or the question of the legitimacy accorded them by
involving them in a political dialogue. Yet it must be noted
that armed groups often have considerable power over the
territory under their control. As military entities, they may
also be called upon to ensure protection of the civilian
population and to facilitate humanitarian operations in the
areas under their control. They are also actors who must be
taken into account if peace negotiations are to begin.
As we reflect on these issues, we must necessarily be
guided by common article 3 of the Geneva Conventions,
which enshrines the minimum rules of conduct that apply
to all of the parties to a conflict and which admit no
derogation.
The second priority also falls within the framework of
the human security strategy. In addition to what should be
a continuing struggle to eliminate anti-personnel mines and
to strengthen victim assistance programmes, the question of
small arms and light weapons must be at the forefront of
our concerns. My delegation believes that it is urgent to
establish stricter control over these weapons and their
transfer, which would involve preventive and regulatory
measures alike. Our agenda in this field must include the
marking of small arms and light weapons, measures to
monitor their trade and the development of codes of
conduct and actions to reduce the number of these weapons
already in circulation in areas of conflict.
The Security Council, as the organ with primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security, can also contribute to these efforts and provide an
impetus for all partners concerned to do likewise.
Lastly, I wish to mention here the need more closely
to involve the economic actors, and in particular the private
sector, in the search for lasting solutions to armed conflict.
Recent discussions on Angola and Sierra Leone have made
this clear. We have reason more systematically than in the
past to try to achieve cooperation among representatives of
the humanitarian community, the States concerned and the
economic actors.
Finally, the development of, and respect for, codes
of conduct and thorough work within the framework of
the global covenant proposed by the Secretary-General
could also yield the innovative solutions that we urgently
need.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Bahrain. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): Since this
is the first time I am addressing the Security Council this
month, I should like, Sir, to express to you our
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council. I should like also to express my thanks and
appreciation to you for holding this important meeting on
a very important subject: the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
Today we cannot but devote greater attention to the
suffering of unarmed civilians in situations of armed
conflict. Civilians are terrorized, brutalized, tortured, and
murdered at the hands of parties to conflicts, despite the
fact that the inadmissibility of attacking civilians is
enshrined in international humanitarian law and in human
rights law.
The situation calls for immediate and prompt action
that is not restricted to the agreements and rules
governing this issue but also extends to working towards
ensuring greater respect of these agreements and rules by
the parties to a conflict.
While we must deal with the root causes of armed
conflict in a drastic and comprehensive manner in order
to provide long-term protection for civilians through the
promotion of economic growth, the elimination of
poverty, the realization of sustainable development and
national reconciliation, we must also take immediate
measures to force the combatants to show greater respect
for the rights of civilians in armed conflict. Dealing with
any armed conflict in a comprehensive manner requires
a long period of time, during which civilians should not
be kept without protection.
At previous open meetings held by the Security
Council on the issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, there was unanimous agreement on
condemning the targeting of civilians in armed conflict
14
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
and attacks against targets that are subject to the protection
of international law. At those meetings it was stressed that
it was of the utmost importance to implement appropriate
protective measures.
On 17 September 1999, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1265 (1999), which deals with two major aspects
of the problem. The first one relates to encouraging the
parties to a conflict to respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law, human rights law and
refugee law, in particular those contained in the Hague
Conventions of 1899 and 1907, and in the 1949 Geneva
Conventions and their 1977 Additional Protocols.
The resolution also stresses the issue of responsibility,
so that the phenomenon of impunity can be dealt with,
thereby ensuring that those responsible for genocide, crimes
against humanity and other serious violations of
international humanitarian law are brought to justice. It
stresses also that it is extremely important to guarantee
unhindered access of humanitarian assistance personnel to
civilians in armed conflict, and to ensure the safety,
security and freedom of movement of United Nations
personnel.
Here we would like to emphasize the importance of
this aspect, bearing in mind recent incidents in which
parties to a conflict launched attacks and used force against
United Nations personnel and against other personnel from
international humanitarian organizations.
The second aspect of the problem that is dealt with in
that same resolution concerns the role of the Security
Council and the United Nations in the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. In this regard, we believe that
greater importance should be attached to the issue of the
excessive stockpiling of small arms and light weapons, in
view of their negative effects and the destabilization they
cause, and that we should do our utmost to prevent the use
of these weapons and their proliferation. In this regard, I
would like to stress that the States exporting such weapons
bear the greatest responsibility.
As for the recommendations contained in the report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict — many of which will be adopted by the
Security Council at the end of this meeting in the form of
a draft resolution — they contain many positive measures
that could improve the situation of civilians in armed
conflict. However, those measures should be implemented
in a manner consistent with the purposes and principles of
the United Nations, as set out in the Charter. I say this
because if certain measures are applied without taking
into account the special characteristics of each situation,
or without due regard to the principle of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States, they may harm not only
individuals, but also States. Of course, harm to States
results in harm to individuals, since individuals make up
States. Such an outcome would be undesirable, and we
therefore believe that our objective should always be to
ensure full protection for civilians and, at the same time,
to preserve the principles on which the United Nations
was established.
I should like to refer to one more important issue
with regard to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. When efforts to provide such protection fail,
there is always the possibility that such civilians,
particularly refugees, may, willingly or unwillingly,
become participants in the fighting on one side or the
other, thereby contributing, deliberately or otherwise, to
the conflagration and further complicating and
perpetuating the conflict, with undesirable consequences.
It is clear, therefore, that the protection of civilians in
armed conflict is an imperative for all of us.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Azerbaijan. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Kouliev (Azerbaijan) (spoke in Russian): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of Georgia, Uzbekistan,
Ukraine, Azerbaijan and the Republic of Moldova on the
question of civilians in armed conflict.
At the outset, I should like to thank the members of
the Security Council for the unflagging attention that they
have been giving to the issue of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. This is not merely an acute problem of
life today, but a priority for the international community,
especially the Security Council. I should also like to thank
the delegation of Canada for taking the initiative of
holding a debate on this item in the Security Council.
Your delegation's efforts, Sir, are designed to give real
content to the concept of human security and to make it
concrete through practical actions.
The States in our group are grateful to the Secretary-
General for his report on this issue, contained in
document S/1999/957, which includes specific
recommendations as to how the Security Council, acting
within its mandate, could enhance the level of physical
and legal protection for civilians in armed conflict.
15
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
Our debate today can be seen as an integral part of the
ongoing process within the Security Council to work out
comprehensive approaches to the settlement of conflict
situations that will not only enable us to put an end to
violence and reduce to a minimum the suffering of the
civilian population, but help in the search for stable and
lasting solutions to the conflicts themselves.
As we see it, there are at least two aspects to this
issue, so we must take an approach that is appropriate for
each one. The first aspect relates to ensuring the physical
protection of the civilian population, the consideration of
which is among the responsibilities of the Security Council.
The second aspect is more general. A unique mechanism
exists, consisting of various elements ranging from the body
of international humanitarian law to the activities of various
humanitarian organizations that try to protect the rights of
civilians in armed conflicts and to provide them with
assistance.
During earlier meetings of the Council focusing on
this issue, almost all the speakers agreed that in armed
conflict today there is an increasing tendency for civilians
to be deliberately and arbitrarily targeted for attack,
subjected to violence and killed. We are greatly concerned
by the fact that genocide, ethnic cleansing and other gross
violations of human rights have not only become linked to
modern armed conflicts, but, in manner of speaking, have
developed into just another way of waging war.
With regard to this burning issue, some of the
countries in our group can speak not merely on the basis of
hearsay, but from experience of the tragic consequences of
such actions. The States in our group would like to
emphasize that the civilian population must never be
targeted in armed conflict, regardless of their political,
ideological, racial, ethnic or religious nature or for any
other reasons. Obviously, unless there is an appropriate
response to such violence against civilians, those negative
tendencies will continue to develop and may even become
irreversible, with the result that more and more people will
be dragged into the conflict, the area of the conflict will
grow increasingly larger and peace and stability will be
threatened, which in turn will provide fertile ground for the
emergence or strengthening of ethnic hatred.
Of particular concern is the situation of internally
displaced persons. Today, there are over 20 million people
in this category, which needs sufficient attention on the part
of the international community. During earlier meetings of
the Council on this issue, Mr. Olara Otunnu, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict, drew our attention to the fact that the
most vulnerable group of the population is displaced
persons.
In this connection, the States in our group regard as
extremely important the work being done by Mr. Francis
Deng, Representative of the Secretary-General on
Internally Displaced Persons. We would also like to note
how much we appreciate the work done by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner on Refugees,
headed by Mrs. Sadako Ogata. We also appreciate the
work done by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, headed by Mr. Sergio Vieira
de Mello.
Attention must also be given to the problem of the
return of refugees and other displaced persons to their
former homes when the territory is not controlled by the
legitimate Government. We are speaking about physical
and legal protection for those persons. Armed conflict
which has not been completely resolved can flare up
again with renewed force, giving rise to a new wave of
violence against civilians and bringing all prior
peacemaking efforts to nothing.
We would also note the special link of modern
armed conflict with aggressive separatism and religious
extremism. These negative phenomena today are one of
the main challenges of the twenty-first century. Our group
of countries regards them as one of the root causes of
bloodshed and continuing military conflicts that directly
threaten the lives of the civilian population, regardless of
their racial, ethnic or religious identity.
The countries of our group believe that today one
particularly crucial issue is coordinating efforts by the
world community as it seeks legal mechanisms and
instruments for combatting terrorism. Our countries
strongly support the initiative of Uzbekistan — made
public at the Istanbul summit of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe in 1999 — on the
establishment of an international centre to combat
terrorism.
Another issue of particular concern involves the
illicit supplying of weapons to areas of conflict. We must
step up our efforts to put an end to this. Halting the flow
of weapons, including small arms and light weapons, into
areas of chronic instability can be one of the main
elements of a strategy to combat acts of violence against
civilians and humanitarian personnel. In this context, we
cannot fail to be deeply disturbed over violations of arms
16
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
embargoes imposed by the Council. We strongly advocate
strengthening the effectiveness of such embargoes. At the
same time, it is quite clear that unless we solve the question
of how to prevent and limit the uncontrolled proliferation
of weapons, it will be difficult to settle conflicts and ensure
security for civilians. Here we can only agree with the
recommendations of the Secretary-General that arms-
exporting countries should at least exercise restraint,
especially when exporting weapons to areas of conflict or
tension.
The States belonging to our group believe that the best
way of protecting civilians in armed conflicts is to
effectively prevent conflict. The root cause of humanitarian
crises must be removed by using inter-ethnic reconciliation,
confidence-building measures and economic development
and by supporting national stability.
We also believe that regardless of where and when
conflict erupts, it is necessary to urge the parties involved
to put an end to the conflicts as quickly as possible by
peaceful means. They should also strictly comply with the
norms of international law, and insofar as they can, they
should provide protection and assistance to civilians. They
should not allow any kind of violent attacks on civilians,
and they should not allow any interference with the delivery
of humanitarian assistance.
In conclusion, I would like to stress the importance of
efforts to achieve consensus in the United Nations, on the
basis of which one can integrate, in a balanced way, the
work being done by the General Assembly, the Security
Council, the Economic and Social Council, the specialized
agencies and other international participants to develop the
best possible conceptual framework for ensuring more
scrupulous respect for the norms of international law, on
the one hand, and, on the other hand, to move beyond the
provision of humanitarian assistance into the area of
organization-building and socio-economic development.
It is our hope that the Security Council, once it adopts
the important draft resolution on this item today, will very
carefully monitor the protection of civilians and react
appropriately to all cases where the lives and security of
peaceful people are threatened.
The President: I thank the representative of
Azerbaijan for his kind words addressed to the Canadian
delegation.
The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Australia, whom I invite to take a seat at the Council
table and make her statement.
Ms. Wensley (Australia): Today's debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict is a welcome
opportunity to consider more fully, and to hear the
considered views of a substantial number of Member
States — including, importantly, non-Council members —
on the issues and recommendations raised in the
Secretary-General's report of September 1999.
It was under Canadian leadership a little over a year
ago that Council attention was refocused on the issue of
protection of civilians. We want to commend Canada for
its initiative in holding this follow-up meeting and for its
firm commitment to pursuing this very specific aspect and
dimension of the more general and, I would say, still-
evolving concept of human security.
The Secretary-General's report and also the
statements we have heard from others today underline that
strengthening protection for civilians requires a multi-
dimensional approach, addressing legal and physical
assurances, conflict prevention and post-conflict peace-
building activities.
It is clear that Member States, the United Nations
and regional bodies must all focus more attention on ways
of improving implementation and enforcement of existing
humanitarian and human rights laws and norms, including
the Geneva Conventions — particularly the fourth — and
the 1977 Additional Protocols, and of promoting
observance of these instruments at all levels. This means
support for efforts to develop consistent national laws. It
also means support for efforts to develop national
institutions to disseminate laws of armed conflict through
education and training, both of armed forces and of
civilian administration, and for monitoring and
enforcement of laws.
Strengthening the legal protections for civilians also
involves ensuring adequate recourse to justice where
violations have taken place. We have heard many
speakers address this issue, but it is certainly vital that we
have effective institutions to bring to justice perpetrators
of crimes against humanity. It is for this reason that
Australia welcomed the establishment of the special
tribunals and views the International Criminal Court as a
particularly powerful instrument in this regard. It
reinforces the obligations of States to investigate and to
prosecute those responsible for major violations; and,
17
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
where no State is able or willing genuinely to do so, it
provides a mechanism for the investigation and prosecution
of crimes.
In our view, more emphasis needs to be placed on
developing and implementing concrete measures to improve
the physical security of civilians caught in conflict
situations, with particular attention to be given to the
vulnerable groups of women, children and displaced
persons. Those measures should include greater use of
preventive action, increased use of the specific mechanisms
for the protection of civilians provided for in international
humanitarian law instruments, increased use of United
Nations Charter provisions to investigate conflict situations
and, as a last resort, sanctions targeting delinquent parties,
but — as we discussed earlier this week in another equally
welcome open debate — such measures should be tailored
to minimize adverse impact on the civilian population.
Another important component is the sustained use of
political and diplomatic pressure to ensure that parties
guarantee access for civilians to humanitarian assistance
and necessary protection for United Nations and related
personnel, the International Committee of the Red Cross,
and humanitarian relief workers. Although humanitarian
relief workers are entitled to the same protection as
civilians, their operations — we have all acknowledged —
make them especially vulnerable to attack in conflict
situations. We look forward to the Secretary-General’s
comprehensive report on the safety and security situation of
humanitarian personnel, when it is submitted during the
fifty-fifth session of the General Assembly, and beyond that
to further international cooperation in enhancing the
protection of those humanitarian workers who are not
specifically protected under current international
humanitarian law instruments or under the Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel.
There is also scope for the international community to
improve the physical security of civilians through its
peacekeeping activities. Australia supports the
Secretary-General’s recommendations to include explicit
provisions for the protection of civilians within United
Nations peacekeeping mandates where warranted and where
the United Nations missions are provided with the resources
to fulfil those responsibilities. In this context, it is
especially important that United Nations peacekeeping
mandates be clearly and realistically defined, in terms of
both responsibilities and objectives. Where peace
enforcement powers are entrusted to United Nations
operations, they must be backed up with the necessary
resources.
The International Force in East Timor (INTERFET)
demonstrated that a well-equipped, mobile force can have
an immediate, positive impact on the physical security of
civilian populations, as well as perform a critical, longer-
term deterrence function. INTERFET benefitted from a
robust mandate that left no question as to its authority to
enforce peace if required, and from strong support from
the international community.
The capacity for rapid deployment and force
projection are essential to peacekeepers’ ability to
stabilize conflict situations and to extend protection to
civilians. Australia considers that the recent report of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations contains
a number of useful ideas and suggestions on how the
United Nations capacities in these areas might be
improved, and we look forward to opportunities to
consider those ideas and suggestions further.
But effectively maintaining peace — and in so doing
guaranteeing the security of civilians — also requires
confidence-building measures at the grassroots level to
defuse tension and confrontation and to lay the
groundwork for political reconciliation. Here, we believe
Australia’s experience in the Peace Monitoring Group in
Bougainville, in company with other South Pacific
countries, offers some lessons. The role of the Peace
Monitoring Group has largely been one of building
confidence between parties and ensuring continued
commitment to peaceful settlement of the dispute.
Australia supported the provisions of the draft
resolution before the Council today on the protection of
civilians. Its welcome adoption will represent another
important step in the Council’s ongoing efforts to enhance
international security, not only in the broad geopolitical
sense but in a very practical way that can benefit people
right down to the village level. That is to say, to benefit
the ordinary citizens and civilians whose safety and well
being is the subject of today’s open debate.
The President: I thank the representative of
Australia for her kind words addressed to my delegation.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Colombia. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to express its appreciation to your
country, Canada, and to you in particular, Ambassador
18
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
Fowler, for your dedication and your dynamism during the
Council’s intensive work this month.
Likewise, we want to thank the members of the
Council for giving us this opportunity to participate in this
important debate. The Council has on various occasions
drawn attention to the difficult and often distressing
situation of civilians in armed conflict. We attach great
importance to the recommendations made by the Secretary-
General to strengthen the physical and legal protection of
civilians in armed conflict, and we believe that the scope of
those recommendations should be examined exhaustively by
the General Assembly.
Actions motivated by political, ethnic or religious
hatred often disregard fundamental principles of humanity
and are therefore challenges to individual conscience and to
the collective feelings of nations. The millions of persons
caught against their will in the crossfire of current armed
conflicts are rightly a source of concern for the
international community. As we were reminded last year by
the campaign of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, even wars have limits. The Committee’s
humanitarian work deserves our appreciation and support.
My country joins others who have spoken in this
debate to reject and condemn the use of prohibited methods
of combat in internal conflicts, particularly the actions of
some non-State actors against civilian populations — such
as the taking of hostages for the purpose of extortion,
indiscriminate attacks against civilians and civilian
installations and the use of hunger as an instrument of war.
But will the outcry of the international community be
heard?
Among the recommendations for the protection of
civilians that are before the Council, we wish to underscore
a few that we consider indispensable to preventing future
conflicts and sparing civilian populations further suffering.
With regard to small arms and light weapons, we
believe that the Security Council must adopt a more
forceful attitude to that illegal traffic, when considering
current armed conflicts. This phenomenon is linked to
transnational criminal organizations which use money
laundering as a means to internationalize violence. The
availability of these weapons in areas of conflict fuels a
spirit of discord and is a direct cause of the loss of many
civilian lives. For that reason, my country has been
advocating stricter control of the international arms trade in
the framework of preparations for next year’s conference.
With regard to the recruitment of minors, our
delegation believes that under no circumstances should
children participate in war. We are pleased to note the
agreement reached at the beginning of the year regarding
the protocol on the participation of children in armed
conflict. The Government of Colombia categorically ruled
that no person younger than 18 years of age can serve in
the national armed forces and encourages other countries
to adopt the same age limit for recruitment. We also
condemn the use of minors in the ranks of irregular
armed groups in all parts of the world, and we appeal for
a united attitude of rejection of this practice.
We underscore the constructive approach of
promoting confidence-building measures among the
parties involved in internal conflicts, with the active
participation of civilian society in this process. This is an
approach that is useful either at the beginning of conflicts
or in the peace-building stage. We hope that it will be
possible soon to have the handbook of good conduct in
the field, the publication of which has been announced.
Regarding coercive measures against massive and
ongoing abuses, the Secretary-General presented to the
Council several criteria for the adoption of coercive
measures in cases of internal conflicts that present grave
violations of human rights and international humanitarian
law. We believe that the United Nations must act with
prudence and extreme care in this field in order not to
undermine principles of international law that are firmly
established, and without which we might be cast into
great confusion. We express our strong preference for
examining situations carefully on a case-by-case basis and
to use procedures for cooperation among States before
resorting to sanctions mechanisms.
On 9 April 2000, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of the non-aligned countries, meeting in Cartagena at the
thirteenth Ministerial Conference of the Non-Aligned
Movement, addressed the question of the erosion of
respect for the norms and principles of international
humanitarian law and the question of the considerable
increase in the number of refugees and displaced persons
caused by conflict situations. On that occasion, among the
various measures adopted, the Ministers appealed to the
parties to a conflict to respect international humanitarian
law and human rights law and to ensure the safety,
security and protection of humanitarian personnel. They
also advocated greater international financial efforts to
help the victims of humanitarian emergencies and
reaffirmed the distinction that must be made — a vital
one — among actions of a humanitarian nature,
19
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
peacekeeping or peacemaking operations and operational
activities for development.
My country agrees with what was expressed by the
Ministers of the Non-Aligned Movement. It welcomes the
measures to be adopted by the Security Council today and
reiterates that other organs of the United Nations should
also broadly consider the various means of strengthening
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The President: I thank the representative of Colombia
for his kind words addressed to my delegation.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of New Zealand, whom I welcome back to
the Council. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Powles (New Zealand): Exactly one week after
the Secretary-General presented his report of 8 September
1999 on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, the
Security Council authorized the deployment of a
multinational force to East Timor to restore peace and
security. In the days leading up to this decision the media
had conveyed shocking images of violence against civilians
and their large-scale dislocation by the militias in a pattern
of reprisal following the United Nations-conducted popular
consultation. Members of the Council, under the leadership
of Ambassador Andjaba of Namibia, travelled to Dili to
assess the situation at first hand and to report to the
Council.
The speed and effectiveness of the Council’s response
in the case of East Timor was exemplary and sets a
benchmark for the future discharge by the Council of its
key role in combating the deliberate targeting of civilians.
New Zealand, for its part, along with many other countries
represented in this Chamber, contributed promptly to the
multinational force authorized by the Council and continues
to participate in the successor United Nations peacekeeping
operation through what is our largest deployment overseas
in nearly 50 years.
In the interval since the Secretary-General’s report on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict we have also
been reminded of our failures. Last Friday we heard Mr.
Ingvar Carlsson, former Prime Minister of Sweden, brief
the Council on the findings of the Independent Inquiry into
the failure of the international community to prevent the
systematic slaughter of some 800,000 people in Rwanda in
1994. And the Secretary-General himself provided last
November his own report on the fall of Srebrenica.
We welcome the fact that the Council has taken the
initiative, through the establishment of its informal
Working Group, to take the matter of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict yet a stage further in
accordance with its responsibilities under the Charter, and
we strongly endorse action on today’s draft resolution. By
this draft resolution the Council clearly indicates that it
intends to keep the question firmly at the fore of its
agenda.
When heads of State or Government gather here in
New York in early September for the Millennium
Summit, we believe the international community will be
presented with an unparalleled opportunity to make
further progress collectively. The Secretary-General’s
millennium report offers valuable guidance on the
protection of the vulnerable. The Secretary-General notes
in particular the need to reassert the centrality of
international humanitarian and human rights law.
I think it is generally agreed that current
humanitarian law includes all the necessary principles and
basic rules to guide us. There is some further work to be
done in specific areas, but the fundamental principles are
well established and incontrovertible.
In the last few months the international norms have
been further developed in the child soldiers optional
protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Children are one of the most vulnerable groups in any
society. As the Secretary-General and others have noted,
they are often among the worst affected in a conflict
situation. They will also bear the scars of conflict into
their adult years, not just through injury and trauma, but
through lost opportunities to gain an education and to
grow up in normal social surroundings. This can lead to
the perpetuation of a culture of conflict. It is crucial that
special measures be taken to protect children from the
effects of armed conflict, and to prevent them from
participating.
The optional protocol’s focus on the demobilization,
rehabilitation and reintegration of child soldiers
recognizes that, in tandem with legal safeguards, practical
action is required to protect children from the effects of
conflict. The recent appointment of child protection
advisers in United Nations peacekeeping missions in
Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is a welcome development in this regard.
As the Secretary-General has pointed out, the
problem of protection of civilians lies not so much in the
20
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
absence of law as in the refusal of belligerents throughout
the world to respect that law. The most urgent need is to
create a “climate of compliance” with international law. At
present the lack of effective enforcement mechanisms
means that an essential component is missing. We hope that
this will change in the near future with the establishment of
a permanent International Criminal Court.
The recent experience of the International Criminal
Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda illustrates
the potential of the International Criminal Court. Over the
last year there have been a number of arrests and
convictions in both Tribunals. These confirm that
international criminal tribunals can and do work. However,
their importance goes beyond dealing with past events in
those particular countries. They serve notice that the
international community is serious in its resolve to bring
perpetrators of atrocities against civilians to justice and to
put an end to the climate of impunity. We look forward to
the outcome of the Indonesian Government's investigation
into violations of human rights in East Timor and to the
holding of those responsible for such violations fully
accountable under the law.
New Zealand is firmly committed to ratification of the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. It will
shortly introduce legislation to Parliament to implement
various obligations contained in the Statute, and New
Zealand hopes to be in a position to ratify the Statute
within the next few months, once that legislation has been
passed.
At the same time, my Government has decided to
create new offences of genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes. There will be universal jurisdiction for
these offences which will allow the prosecution in a New
Zealand court of a person who is not a New Zealand
national and who did not commit the offence in New
Zealand. It is intended that these offences will come into
force on the passage of the legislation, which will mean
that New Zealand will be in a position to institute
prosecutions in its courts from an early date. This is
particularly important in the period before the International
Criminal Court comes into existence.
New Zealand urges other countries to accelerate their
ratification processes so that the International Criminal
Court can be established in the near future. This would
seem a most appropriate way to signal that the new
millennium is also the beginning of a new phase in
international criminal justice.
New Zealand also strongly supports the extension of
the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel to cover a broader range of
personnel and a greater variety of United Nations
missions. We saw the danger that some of those working
with the United Nations came under in East Timor.
Abduction and murder of humanitarian workers takes
place too regularly in arenas such as Chechnya. The
targeting of these dedicated people, who are often
working in extremely difficult circumstances to bring
relief to the civilian population, is cynical and brutal, and
we should do all in our power to have it stopped. We
look forward to the report of the Secretary-General, due
in May 2000, that will include recommendations
addressing the scope of legal protection under the
Convention. That report will set the tone for future debate
on the topic and act as a fresh stimulus towards concrete
action on expansion of the Convention's scope.
The violation of the rights and freedoms of internally
displaced persons is not necessarily separately covered in
international law. Nevertheless, such people are of course
covered by international human rights law. States have no
excuse for not following these principles and the legal
guidance based on them, contained in the Guiding
Principles on Internal Displacement.
Finally, the importance of the separation of
combatants and other armed elements from civilians in
refugee camps has been starkly demonstrated on
numerous occasions, including in the Great Lakes region
of Africa and in Timor. Safety and humanitarian relief
cannot be assured without it, and arrangements for
repatriation can be seriously hampered when militias exert
power over displaced people. Coupled with this is the
need to ensure access for civilian populations to sources
of humanitarian assistance. The diversion or withholding
of relief supplies as a means to political ends is contrary
to the principles of humanity and should attract
appropriate sanctions.
We are grateful for the opportunity to have spoken
on these important matters in the Security Council today,
and we look forward to the Council's continuing to carry
out its key leadership role.
The President: I thank the representative of New
Zealand for his kind words addressed to me.
The final speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Indonesia. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
21
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): My delegation wishes to
extend its congratulations to you and the delegation of
Canada on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of April. We remain
confident that under your able guidance, the issue before us
will be brought to a successful conclusion. May I also
extend our felicitations to your predecessor, Ambassador
Anwarul Karim Chowdhury of Bangladesh, for his skilful
stewardship of the Council's activities last month. We
would also like to join other delegations in expressing our
appreciation to the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and
to the President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Mr. Jakob Kellenberger, for their statements earlier
this morning.
It is one of the tragic ironies of the contemporary
world that despite the adoption of numerous conventions on
international humanitarian and human rights law during the
past five decades, which uphold the rights of civilians and
the obligations of combatants during conflict situations,
civilians have become the targets of brutality, terror and
indiscriminate killing. It is particularly unconscionable that
women and children are also victims of atrocities. Such dire
situations call for a multifaceted approach that would
provide legal and physical protection to civilians during
hostilities.
The report of the Secretary-General contained in
document S/1999/957 enumerates a number of measures to
strengthen both these aspects of protection. Their adoption
and implementation would compel the parties to a conflict
to respect the rights guaranteed to civilians under
international law and conventions. Despite the coming into
force of a comprehensive framework of international
humanitarian and human rights law, the rights of civilians
have often been violated. Hence, their implementation is of
utmost importance in ensuring the safety and security of the
civilians, which are their inherent rights.
In those endeavours, it is equally important to
acknowledge that international law does not take
precedence over national law and legislation, while a
balance must be sought to harmonize the sacrosanct
principle of national sovereignty with the provisions of the
United Nations Charter. It follows that any action or
intervention must necessarily be based on the consent of the
States concerned, rather than unilateral imposition.
Indonesia is gratified to note that in some of the conflict
areas dealt with by the Council, respect for sovereignty and
territorial integrity was reaffirmed. At the same time,
Indonesia is also saddened to learn that an absence of
respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity remains
obvious in a country which now continues to experience
internal conflicts.
Our attention is also drawn to the need for
monitoring, addressing and understanding the root causes
and implications of conflicts in order to facilitate the
consideration of options and to prevent the outbreak of
violence. As peace and stability and socio-economic
development are interlinked, close cooperation and
coordination between the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council would
facilitate a comprehensive approach to these multifaceted
issues. In this context, it is pertinent to note the
communication from the President of the Security Council
addressed to the President of the General Assembly,
contained in document S/2000/119 of 14 February 2000,
which sought the Assembly's views on the strengthening
of the Organization's capacity to plan and deploy rapidly
and the modalities to mobilize international support for
security forces from Member States.
Finally, Indonesia, while regretting the lack of
consultations with the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, welcomes the Secretary-
General's Bulletin on the guidelines on compliance with
international humanitarian law by United Nations
peacekeepers. We believe that such guidelines can help
promote not only the safety and security of the United
Nations peace troopers but also the safety and security of
the civilians.
In sum, we agree that the plight of civilians in
armed conflicts can no longer be neglected and can be
dealt with only within a comprehensive framework of
action. Let me express Indonesia's unequivocal support
for the role of the United Nations in humanitarian
activities and for the Organization's consistent
commitment in upholding international humanitarian and
human rights law.
The President: I thank the representative of
Indonesia for the kind words he addressed to me.
It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/2000/335) before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall
put the draft resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
22
Security Council 4130th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-fifth year 19 April 2000
In favour:
Argentina, Bangladesh, Canada, China, France,
Jamaica, Malaysia, Mali, Namibia, Netherlands,
Russian Federation, Tunisia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1296 (2000).
There are no further speakers on my list.
The Security Council, having offered its President
great flexibility and generous support, has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.
23


United Nations S/PV.4506 (Resumption 2)
Security Council
Fifty-seventh year
4506th meeting
Thursday, 4 April 2002, 7 p.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.
02-31733 (E)
*0231733*
President: Mr. Lavrov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Russian Federation)
Members: Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Tafrov
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Belinga-Eboutou
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wang Yingfan
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Rivas
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Levitte
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fall
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ryan
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Bhuckory
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Aguilar Zínser
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Kolby
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mahbubani
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wehbe
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . Sir Jeremy Greenstock
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Negroponte
Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian Question
Letter dated 1 April 2002 from the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2002/336)
Letter dated 2 April 2002 from the Permanent Representative of South Africa
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2002/342)
2
S/PV.4506 (Resumption 2)
The meeting resumed at 7 p.m.
The President (spoke in Russian): Members of
the Council have before them document S/2002/347,
which contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in
the course of the Council’s prior consultations.
Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Allow me, Mr. President, to express our great
appreciation for all the efforts that you and the other
members of the Council have made to unify the voice
of the Council before the challenges faced by our
region. The Council has acted, in view of the escalation
of the Israeli aggression against the Palestinian people
and Israel’s occupation of the cities of Ramallah,
Tulkarm, Qalqilyah, Bethlehem, Nablus and Jenin. In
view of Israel’s violation of humanitarian law and the
Fourth Geneva Convention, the position we shall be
adopting by supporting the draft resolution before us is
an expression of our firm support and our constant call
for the establishment of an independent Palestinian
State with East Jerusalem as its capital.
When the Arab Group submitted the draft
resolution, its objective was to call upon the
international community to understand the trials and
sufferings of the Palestinian people, the oppression
they are suffering at the hands of the Israeli occupation
forces. Syria’s position in supporting the draft
resolution reflects our genuine desire to see the
Security Council assume its role effectively, and once
again affirms the importance of unity in the work of the
Council and of unanimous action to address anything
that would endanger international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of Israel has asked for the floor, and I
call upon him now.
Mr. Lancry (Israel): At the outset, I would like
to express my profound gratitude for the presence of
His Excellency Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his
highly significant contribution to the proceedings of
the Security Council in its recent discussions.
Today’s draft resolution comes after this
morning’s important statement by President Bush, in
which he announced that Secretary of State Powell
would be travelling to the region to work for the
implementation of resolution 1402 (2002). For its part,
Israel is willing, in full cooperation with General Zinni
and now with Secretary Powell, to engage in steps,
together with reciprocal Palestinian actions, to achieve
an immediate and meaningful ceasefire, the withdrawal
of the Israeli troops, the implementation of Tenet and
Mitchell and an end to all acts of terrorism and
incitement, in accordance with resolutions 1397 (2002)
and 1402 (2002).
In President Bush’s highly valuable statement
today, he again articulated his vision for peace in the
Middle East, including the end of terrorism and
incitement, the withdrawal of Israeli forces and the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State,
living side by side in peace and security, with Israel.
The President indicated to both sides what steps should
be taken to bring about meaningful and peaceful
coexistence, including dignity and hope for all.
Israel is giving President Bush’s statement the
careful attention it is due. We will reassess the situation
in the light of its major operative parts, concerning
“an immediate and meaningful ceasefire; an
end to terror and violence and incitement;
withdrawal of Israeli troops from Palestinian
cities, including Ramallah; implementation of the
already agreed upon Tenet and Mitchell plans”.
We further support the forthcoming mission of
Secretary Powell to the region. The presence of
Secretary Powell is a powerful demonstration of the
American commitment to ending the violence and
bringing peace to the region. Israel pledges to spare no
effort to cooperate fully with Secretary Powell to make
his mission a success, and to bring about a genuine and
meaningful ceasefire that will pave the way for a return
to the negotiating process.
I do not believe that anything must be added to
the President’s statement with regard to the Palestinian
terrorism and to the Palestinian leader, Chairman
Arafat. I do wish, however, to add to President Bush’s
expressed concern regarding the continuing assaults by
Hizbullah along Israel’s northern border. Hizbullah’s
actions are a clear and unambiguous violation of the
Blue Line, international law and the will of the
Security Council. That fact has been brought to the
Council’s attention repeatedly in letters I have
addressed to the Secretary-General, in numerous
reports of the Secretary-General and in his most recent
briefing to the Council just a few days ago.
In this regard, I would like to refer briefly to the
statement delivered yesterday by the Permanent
Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. Although
3
S/PV.4506 (Resumption 2)
we do not always agree with the statements of the
Syrian representative, either in their form or in their
essence, we were, of course, attentive to the message
he delivered yesterday.
I will not respond here to those aspects of his
statement that were filled with hatred and distortions.
But one aspect of the statement deserves to be
addressed at this time of rising tensions along the Blue
Line. That is the Syrian representative’s allegation of
Israeli contempt for United Nations resolutions. I feel
obligated to recall that despite Israel’s full and
confirmed implementation of Security Council
resolution 425 (1978), in full accordance with the will
of the Council, Syria continues to exhibit total
disregard for that resolution. Through its overwhelming
control of Lebanon and its continued support for
Hizbullah, violations of the Blue Line now occur on a
regular basis in direct violation of resolution 425
(1978) and subsequent resolutions.
Today, these dangerous and illegitimate attacks
continued for the sixth consecutive day, with the firing
of anti-tank, anti-aircraft and Katyusha rockets at
civilian and military targets in northern Israel. In
addition, three unarmed United Nations observers and
two peacekeepers were injured by Hizbullah forces in
southern Lebanon. The observers, citizens of Ireland,
Norway and France, were beaten up by Hizbullah
gunmen and had to be evacuated to hospitals in
northern Israel.
Ironically, it is a member of the Security Council
that is defying the consensus reflected in resolution
425 (1978) with impunity and is enabling such
reprehensible attacks to occur. In this respect, we are
obliged to deplore not only the violations of the Blue
Line and of resolution 425 (1978), which continue even
as we speak, but even more the fact that a State
Member of the United Nations that is also a member of
the Security Council is deliberately thwarting the
implementation of a resolution of a body of which it
itself is a member. Yes, Israel realizes that Member
States should respect Security Council resolutions, but
I do not believe it is superfluous to remind the Syrian
representative that this applies to Syria as well.
The situation along the Blue Line poses the threat
of regional stability being undermined, owing to
Hizbullah’s clear intent to escalate current hostilities
into a broader confrontation. It is imperative that the
Council act immediately to force the Governments of
Iran, Syria and Lebanon to halt the illegal terrorist
activities of Hizbullah.
We are at a crucial moment for our region, but
once again, because of the resolve and the leadership of
the President of the United States and the contribution
of the international community, we again have cause
for hope.
The President (spoke in Russian): The
Permanent Observer of Palestine has asked for the
floor, and I call on him now.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I
wish at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for your
efforts. Our thanks go also to all the other members of
the Council. I also wish to reiterate our heartfelt thanks
and appreciation to the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, for his constant, tireless efforts to put an end to
the tragedy in the Middle East.
The Council is about to adopt yet another very
important draft resolution by consensus. I would like to
say here that we appreciate very much the position of
our sister country, Syria, reflected in its willingness to
support the draft resolution and to cooperate with all
international efforts for the reasons set out a few
moments ago by the Permanent Representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
The Security Council has important assets,
embodied in resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1397 (2002)
and in today’s draft resolution. Let us benefit from
those assets in order to help the peace efforts in the
region. Let us start with the first step called for in the
draft resolution: the implementation of resolution 1402
(2002) without delay.
I also wish to refer to the important statement
made by President Bush today, which is now being
studied by President Arafat and the rest of the
Palestinian leadership, who are experiencing difficult
circumstances, of which I am sure all members are
aware. Of course, we greatly value what the statement
reflects in terms of the readiness of the United States to
be deeply involved in the peace efforts at the highest
level. We also fully appreciate the new step in response
to the political and security situation.
We have noted that the statement calls on Israel to
put an end to military operations and to withdraw from
Palestinian cities, including Ramallah. We have also
noted that the statement calls for an immediate
ceasefire and for the implementation of the Tenet plan
4
S/PV.4506 (Resumption 2)
and the Mitchell recommendations as they stand. We
have also noted the call to put an end to the settlements
and to combat terrorism, including the infrastructure of
terrorism networks.
We have also taken note of the call for an end to
the occupation and for Israel’s withdrawal to the
borders in accordance with Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). This is based
on a vision of two States, Israel and a politically and
economically viable Palestine.
All of that is definitely positive. It goes without
saying that we have reservations concerning the
unjustified criticism addressed to President Arafat, the
elected President of the Palestinians and the symbol of
Palestinian identity.
We believe that we need to overcome the
legitimate fears of the Palestinian side so that we can
all move forward as rapidly as possible towards the
implementation of agreements and can put an end to
the ongoing tragedy in order to establish a
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East.
Whatever the circumstances, we, of course, welcome
the visit of Mr. Powell to the region. I can assure the
Council that President Arafat is entirely willing to
cooperate with Mr. Powell to ensure the success of his
mission in order to put an end to the ongoing tragedy
and to return to the path of peace.
I thank all friendly countries, our Arab brothers,
the Non-Aligned Movement, the members of the
Security Council and particularly the States that have
sent special envoys to the Middle East.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
Permanent Observer of Palestine for his kind words
addressed to the members of the Security Council.
Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): We are moments away from the Council’s
adoption of a very important draft resolution. We shall
vote in favour of the draft resolution for reasons of
unanimity and the unity of the Council. We are doing
this with a view to halting Israeli aggression against the
Palestinian people.
We have no intention whatever of transforming
this meeting into an occasion to indulge in rhetoric, as
the Israeli representative would wish. The Syrian
record is well known to all members of the Council and
of the Organization, and that record is an honourable
one. When Syria succeeded in being elected to the
Security Council it was with a majority vote of 160
Members. The members of the Council are well aware
of the considerable contributions made by Syria in
dealing with the various problems before the Council
relating to the maintenance of international peace and
security. I have no need to respond to the allegations
and false claims made by the Israeli representative, and
I do not intend to turn this meeting into a competition
in polemics.
Resolution 425 (1978) has not been implemented
in full. The implementation that has taken place
occurred with resistance. Yet even now there are daily
aerial violations aimed at terrifying the citizens of
Lebanon. When there is resistance to that, everything is
topsy-turvy. We are not here this evening to repeat that
Israel has not implemented all relevant resolutions —
particularly those of the Security Council. We are here
to adopt another draft resolution because Israel has not
implemented the two most recently adopted
resolutions.
The President (spoke in Russian): I welcome the
presence among us of the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, and I give him the floor.
The Secretary-General: The situation in the
Middle East — between Israel and Palestine and across
the Blue Line — continues to deteriorate. All parties
risk making serious miscalculations about the effect
that their actions will have on one another. Such
miscalculations can all too easily draw the region into
greater and greater danger, whether intended or not.
My purpose in addressing the Security Council
today is to call on all members of the international
community to consider urgently how best to intercede
with the parties to persuade them to draw back from
their present course.
In the Palestinian-Israeli arena, Security Council
resolution 1402 (2002) provides the elements needed to
begin to de-escalate the present crisis, and resolution
1397 (2002) provides the framework for a permanent
settlement. We all need to intensify our efforts to see
that those resolutions are implemented without further
delay.
Israeli actions since the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1402 (2002) do not bode well for
stabilizing the situation and renewing political talks.
On the contrary, the Government of Israel appears to be
moving in the opposite direction to that prescribed by
5
S/PV.4506 (Resumption 2)
resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002) — a sure path
to further escalation. Israel has justified its acts as self-
defence and counter-terrorist measures. However, we
need to be very clear that self-defence is not a blank
cheque. It is important to understand that responding to
terrorism does not in any way free Israel from its
obligations under international law; nor does it justify
creating a human rights and humanitarian crisis within
the occupied Palestinian territory. There is an urgent
need to comply with all provisions of international law,
particularly those that ban indiscriminate and
disproportionate use of force as well as the humiliating
treatment of a civilian population.
Forcing Chairman Arafat into exile would be
reckless. He is the legitimate representative of the
Palestinian people and his exile would only lead to
even more violence and chaos. Deportation is
specifically prohibited by the Fourth Geneva
Convention. It would be a miscalculation of
monumental proportions to believe that removing
Chairman Arafat from the political scene and
dismantling the Palestinian Authority would create
conditions where Israel can achieve security for itself.
I understand the bitterness, anger and disillusion
felt by Israelis. But, the military route taken by the
Government of Israel will not pacify the Palestinians.
Nor do I see how this approach can bring peace and
security to Israel. Only a just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement can do so. If we have
learned anything from history, it is that it is a grave
mistake for the more powerful party to believe that
power alone will ultimately subdue the weaker party. In
fact, what we are witnessing is an increase in the
resolve and unity of the Palestinians, as well as
increasing public anger across the Arab and Islamic
world and beyond.
I am not arguing that the spiralling violence is to
be blamed on one party alone. The Palestinian
Authority seems to believe that failing to act against
terrorism and inducing turmoil, chaos and instability
will cause the Government and people of Israel to
buckle. They will not. As we are seeing, this approach
is only spurring on the Israeli Government in its
present course; it also unites the Israeli public behind
the military option. We should not forget that it was not
so long ago that this same Israeli public was supportive
of peace efforts by a large majority.
Under direct assault from the Israeli military,
Chairman Arafat and the Palestinian security services
are seriously limited in their ability to contain
terrorism. However, even now, Chairman Arafat has
the capacity to exercise political leadership — to set
the course for the future of his people. Terrorism is
never justified. The Palestinian leadership must
acknowledge this and the Palestinian public must
accept this.
I would like to take this opportunity to call on the
Government of Israel to give the “quartet” full access
to the compound of Chairman Arafat and to the
Chairman himself. Together with General Zinni’s
mission, the “quartet” arrangement could be used as an
effective instrument to pursue implementation of 1402
(2002).
There have been persistent reports about
limitations placed on access by humanitarian and
medical workers to those Palestinians in urgent need of
assistance. It is imperative that humanitarian workers
and agencies such as the International Committee of
the Red Cross, the Red Crescent Society and the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East be granted full access to
persons in those affected areas.
There is plenty of reason for pessimism. But there
is at least one recent positive development. The
promise represented by the Arab League’s Beirut
Summit marked a significant turning point. We need to
ensure that the Saudi initiative, endorsed by the Arab
League, does not founder. Let us hold onto and nourish
that vision amid the encircling gloom and the worrying
rise in regional tension.
Here, I would like to express very serious
concern over events along the Blue Line. I recalled in
the Council recently that Israel’s withdrawal from
Lebanon was in compliance with resolutions 425
(1978) and 426 (1978), and was recognized as such by
the Council itself. We must make sure that all sides
respect the Blue Line. Escalation along the Blue Line
could have serious consequences for peace and security
in the region — beyond Israel and Lebanon — as we
know from the past. There seem to be efforts coming
from Lebanese territory to deliberately create
instability along the Blue Line.
In addition to recent attacks by Hizbullah across
the Blue Line, this morning Hizbullah elements
6
S/PV.4506 (Resumption 2)
assaulted a patrol of military observers from the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL).
It needs to be made clear to Hizbullah and others
who may be involved that attacks across the Blue
Line — whether into northern Israel or into occupied
Syrian territory — are violations of Security Council
resolutions, and are not acceptable. I strongly urge
those with influence to ensure adherence to the Council
resolutions on this subject. The Government of
Lebanon will be aware that it is responsible for any
hostile actions undertaken from its territory.
In this connection, I have been in contact over the
last 24 hours with leaders in the region. Also, my
Personal Representative in Lebanon, Mr. De Mistura,
and the Force Commander of UNIFIL, yesterday met
with Council members who have representatives in
Beirut, as well as with the Lebanese leadership, about
the situation.
Let me conclude by saying that the building
blocks of peace, once broken down, are not easily
rebuilt. Recent events have had a further, severely
corrosive, effect on mutual confidence. On both sides,
bitterness and despair are at an all-time high. We all
need to cling to the conviction that, in the end, however
long it takes, there will one day have to be a peaceful
settlement of this conflict.
Third-party mediation is needed more than ever,
as the parties are unable on their own to find a way out
of the present situation. In this connection, I strongly
welcome President Bush’s decision to send Secretary
Powell to the region.
The road back to the negotiating table will not be
easy or smooth. But all sides can take the first steps by
exercising maximum restraint so as to reverse the
current dangerous deterioration of the situation.
Resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002), taken
together, provide the vision for a permanent settlement
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the immediate
security and political steps needed to move beyond the
present crisis. Our efforts need to focus on
implementing those resolutions.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
It is my understanding that the Security Council
is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/2002/347) before it. Unless I hear any objection, I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by a show of hands.
In favour:
Bulgaria, Cameroon, China, Colombia, France,
Guinea, Ireland, Mauritius, Mexico, Norway,
Russian Federation, Singapore, Syrian Arab
Republic, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
The President (spoke in Russian): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1403 (2002).
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 7.35 p.m.
