United Nations S/PV.4720
Security Council
Fifty-eighth year
4720th meeting
Tuesday, 18 March 2003, 10 a.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.
03-28391 (E)
*0328391*
President: Mr. Fall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Guinea)
Members: Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Miranda
Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Tafrov
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ngoubeyou
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Valdés
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wang Yingfan
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. De La Sablière
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Pleuger
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Aguilar Zinser
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Akram
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Konuzin
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Arias
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wehbe
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . Sir Jeremy Greenstock
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Negroponte
Agenda
Proliferation of small arms and light weapons and mercenary activities: threats to
peace and security in West Africa.
2
S/PV.4720
The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Proliferation of small arms and light weapons and
mercenary activities: threats to peace and security in
West Africa
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations and the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Benin,
Burkina Faso, Gambia, Liberia, Mali, Niger, Nigeria,
Senegal, Sierra Leone and Togo to participate in our
discussion.
On behalf of the Security Council, I extend a
warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Pierre Osho,
Minister of State for Defence of Benin, His Excellency
Mr. Jean-De-Dieu Somda, Minister assigned to the
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso in charge
of Regional Cooperation, His Excellency Mr.
Baboucarr-Blaise Ismaila Jagne, Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs of Gambia, His Excellency Mr. Monie
Captan, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Liberia, His
Excellency Mr. Cheick Tidiane Gadio, Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Senegal, His Excellency Mr. Roland
Y. Kpotsra, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Togo, and
Her Excellency Ms. Diallo Mbodji Senn, Minister of
Labour and Vocational Training of Mali. I invite all the
aforementioned Ministers to take the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.
I also invite the representatives of Niger, Nigeria
and Sierra Leone to take the seats reserved for them at
the side of the Council Chamber.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations and rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite His
Excellency Mr. Said Djinnit, Interim Commissioner for
Peace, Security and Political Affairs of the African
Union, to take a seat at the Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations and rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite His
Excellency Mr. Nana Effah-Apenteng, representative of
the current Chairman of the Economic Community of
West African States, to take a seat reserved for him at
the side of the Council Chamber.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations and rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite His
Excellency Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Executive
Secretary of the Economic Community of West African
States to take a seat at the Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations and rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr.
Ibrahima Sall, Regional Director, Programme for
Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development, to take a seat at the Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on the agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Before opening the floor, I wish to request all
participants to limit their statements to no more than
seven minutes, in order to enable the Council to work
efficiently within its timetable. I thank you for your
understanding and cooperation.
I welcome the presence among us of the
Secretary-General. Before giving him the floor, I
would like to express my deep thanks to the Ministers
and their representatives, the representative of Interim
Chairperson of the Commission of the African Union,
the Executive Secretary of the Economic Community
of West African States and the Regional Director of the
Programme for Cooperation and Assistance for
Security and Development. Despite of their heavy
workload, these people agreed to come to participate in
this important workshop, which is being held in
particularly difficult circumstances, with greater
Security Council activity due to current concerns, in
particular the Iraqi crisis. I am convinced that in spite
of those challenges, our work will proceed in a spirit of
calm and cooperation.
I give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: I would like to thank
the Security Council for focusing its attention, even at
this critical moment when all our minds are on Iraq, on
a subject which is of great importance to the welfare
and well-being of millions of people in another region
of the world, namely West Africa.
3
S/PV.4720
The uncontrolled proliferation of small arms and
light weapons and the use of mercenaries sustain
conflict, exacerbate violence, fuel crime and terrorism,
promote cultures of violence, violate international
humanitarian law and impede political, economic and
social development.
The easy availability of small arms and light
weapons is strongly linked with the dramatic rise in the
victimization of women and children and with the
phenomenon of child soldiers. Light automatic
weapons can be carried and fired by children as young
as nine or ten. This link is particularly evident in West
Africa, where the conflicts in Liberia, Sierra Leone and
now Côte d’Ivoire have been fuelled in no small part
by an unregulated trade in small arms — often paid for
with the proceeds from the illicit exploitation of natural
resources.
The flood of arms in the region has been
accompanied by — and, indeed, has facilitated — a
rise in the activities of mercenaries. Armed men from
within the subregion and beyond have moved across
borders: a large force of fighters, unemployed but
armed and willing to fight for whomever will pay them
most. This supply side of the mercenary problem is
closely linked, in turn, to the failure to adequately fund
and implement disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes and to the failure to provide
enough assistance to countries such as Liberia and
Guinea-Bissau in restructuring their armed forces as
part of post-conflict peace-building arrangements. The
result in Liberia, for example, is that tens of thousands
of former combatants face little or no prospect of
gainful employment, leaving them more susceptible to
recruitment as combatants once again.
The actions of unscrupulous and predatory arms
merchants also bear special mention. Their lack of
restraint in the sale and transfer of their products to
zones of tension in West Africa and beyond directly
translates into more unnecessary suffering and
instability.
The problem is easy to diagnose. The more
complex challenge is to mount an effective response.
Fortunately, the international community and the
countries concerned are not without tools with which to
fight back.
Legal instruments and other international
agreements offer one such avenue.
The Programme of Action on Small Arms,
adopted by the international community in 2001, offers
a blueprint for action at all levels, including such steps
as increased cooperation with Interpol and the World
Customs Organization.
The International Convention against the
Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of
Mercenaries came into force in October 2001; I urge all
West African countries to join Mauritania, Mali,
Senegal and Togo in ratifying this vital instrument.
This Council has demanded that countries in the
Mano River Union cease military support for armed
groups in neighbouring countries and refrain from any
actions that might contribute to destabilization of the
situation on their borders. The Council has also
imposed arms embargoes, another essential step.
The heads of State of the Economic Community
of West African States, for their part, have agreed to
work more intensively towards making the region a
child-soldier-free zone and have put in place a
moratorium on the import, export and manufacture of
small arms in the region. To support the moratorium,
the United Nations Development Programme has been
helping the countries involved to strengthen controls at
border posts, to establish arms registers, to build up the
capacity of national monitoring commissions and to
carry out collections and destructions of illicit arms.
This is just one example of the many steps that
are being taken by the United Nations system at the
operational level and on the ground. The United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone and the United
Nations peace-building office in Liberia are helping
those countries address not only questions of small
arms but the full range of post-conflict reconstruction
and development tasks. The United Nations is also
leading peace-building efforts in Guinea-Bissau. And
of course, the economic and social development efforts
being carried out by the entire United Nations
system — to improve education and health, to create
jobs, to promote good governance and respect for
human rights — will necessarily have a supportive
impact on efforts to demilitarize the societies involved.
Unless adequately addressed, the proliferation of
small arms and mercenaries will continue to pose a
severe threat to the region’s hopes of attaining durable
peace and security. Spillover effects from one country
to the next have been all too common, underscoring the
need for regional cooperation and a comprehensive
4
S/PV.4720
approach. The Council’s own panels of experts on
Sierra Leone and Liberia have reported as much and
offered a range of valuable recommendations.
I urge you all to do your utmost to bring the
countries of the region to build up the capacity to
address this issue. I urge the countries involved, and in
particular the leaders, to focus more intently on this
very real and very present threat to peace.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his kind words addressed to me.
The first speaker inscribed on my list is Mr. Said
Djinnit, Interim Commissioner for Peace, Security and
Political Affairs of the African Union.
Mr. Djinnit (spoke in French): I would first like
to present the apologies of Mr. Amara Essy, the Interim
Chairperson of the Commission of the African Union,
who was not able to attend this meeting in New York
due to other pressing engagements on the continent. He
has entrusted me with representing him in this meeting
and with transmitting his greetings to the participants.
Mr. President, I would like to congratulate your
country, Guinea, on its assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of March, at this
crucial moment in which great stakes are the focus of
the entire international community, putting the Security
Council to the test.
Finally, I wish to express our appreciation for
having kept all the African questions on the Council
agenda, despite a strong temptation to marginalize
them in favour of more burning current events. Thank
you for having kept the world’s conscience focused on
the critical problems of the African continent.
For many years, the dangerous phenomenon of
mercenaries and the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons have been the focus of African leaders’
concerns. Because they are intrinsically linked to all
acts of political destabilization, serious banditry and
cross-border crime, these phenomena have
compromised all efforts for sustainable development on
the continent and have ushered in massive violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law. It is
worth noting that the massive proliferation of small
arms and light weapons has coincided with the
emergence of non-State actors that have become key
parties in most African conflicts.
West Africa in particular has paid a heavy debt in
this crisis, and it is very natural that the leaders of this
region have spearheaded the fight against the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. The
ECOWAS Moratorium on the Importation, Exportation
and Manufacture of Lights Weapons, adopted in 1998,
and the code of conduct for its implementation, which
followed a year later, demonstrates the resolve of West
African countries to promote sustainable solutions to
conflicts that ravage the region. The other African
regions will follow the example of West Africa and the
continent will ultimately build on those gains by
adopting the Bamako Declaration on the Illicit
Proliferation, Circulation and Trafficking of Small
Arms and Light Weapons, which was a source of
inspiration for the United Nations Plan of Action
adopted in July 2001, despite the substantial
differences — it must be emphasized — between the
two documents, particularly on the terms of transfer of
weapons to non-State actors.
Furthermore, this traffic in light weapons fuels
cross-border crime and terrorism, which, particularly
since 11 September 2001, has been the focus of
collective and concerted action by the international
community. Africa was also aware of risks and had
adopted, in July 1999, a Convention on the Prevention
and Combating of Terrorism. That was later
supplemented by a plan of action drafted by a high
level intergovernmental meeting in Algiers that brings
together the crucial elements of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001) and the modalities for the
implementation of the Convention.
Regarding mercenarism specifically, I wish to
point out that the Organization of African Unity
articulated a prescriptive response in the form of a
Convention for the Elimination of Mercenarism in
Africa, which was adopted in 1977 and entered into
force on 22 April 1985. This phenomenon, which held
sway in Africa in the 1970s and 1980s, has re-emerged
in West Africa as a result of instability, areas of tension
and the availability of small arms. In recent years it has
been aggravated by the activities of private
corporations specializing in providing security services
to multinational corporations in high-risk mining areas
and to Governments confronted with armed rebellion.
It cannot be denied that the proliferation of light
weapons, combined with the activity of mercenaries,
constitutes a factor of political and social instability
and is an obstacle to the economic development efforts
of our States. The essential question is why, despite the
5
S/PV.4720
existence of a significant amount of legislation, these
scourges continue to persist on our continent.
It is worth noting first that the best conventions
and programmes will not be effective as long as
sufficient political will does not exist on the part of the
signatory States to implement the provisions contained
therein.
Over and above political will, States must endow
themselves with the necessary mechanisms and means
to implement their collective decisions. Thus, a
moratorium on the import, export and manufacture of
weapons can only work if there is a follow-up and
monitoring mechanism that is truly independent and
has the necessary means that will allow it to identify
and cite violators. In addition, there must be a
sanctions regime against noncompliant parties, whose
principle is envisaged in the charter of the African
Union. Efforts under way to set up the African Peer
Review Mechanism should help in the implementation
of the decisions and commitments of States members
of the African Union.
Finally, it must be recalled that while the ready
availability of weapons and the use of mercenaries
aggravate conflict situations within a State increase the
risks of explosion of already fragile inter-State
relations and add to war atrocities, the underlying
causes of tensions and conflicts that tear our societies
apart and poison inter-State relations can be found in
most cases in the weakness of the democratic culture,
discrimination against minorities, lack of respect for
rights and freedoms and the marginalization of entire
strata of populations. In other words, the challenge of
good governance is at the core of our quest for peace
and security in Africa.
Those were the comments I wished to make, and I
express my wishes for the full success of this meeting.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Interim Commissioner for Peace, Security and Political
Affairs of the African Union for his encouraging words
addressed to my country.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is His
Excellency Mr. Nana Effah-Apenteng, representative of
the current Chairman of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS). I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Effah-Apenteng (Economic Community of
West African States): I wish to join previous speakers
in congratulating the sister Republic of Guinea on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month.
I wish to make a few remarks on behalf of my
Minister, the Honourable Hackman Owusu-Agyemang,
who is unable to be here. In his absence, he has
requested me to bring to the members of the Council
greetings from the President of the Republic of Ghana
and current Chairman of ECOWAS, His Excellency
Mr. John Agyekum Kufuor, who has expressed his
confidence in this workshop and hopes that it will
propose measures that will assist in curbing the menace
of the illegal flow of small arms and light weapons, as
well as the rising phenomenon of mercenaries and
private armies in the West African subregion.
I wish to commend the organizers of this
workshop for the appropriateness of the topic,
considering the conflict situations in the West African
subregion and the very relevant objectives of this
workshop.
Although the issue of the proliferation of and the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons is a global
problem, we in West Africa have cause to be more
concerned about it because of the havoc that the use of
these weapons has caused to lives and property in the
subregion.
It is sad to observe that, of the 500 million light
weapons believed to be in circulation worldwide, as
many as 30 million are projected to be in use in Africa,
with as many as 8 million in West Africa alone. From
the Horn of Africa, via Sudan and straight through
Central Africa to Angola, half a continent has suffered
from conflicts that influence each other and are
facilitated by the proliferation of small arms and the
phenomenon of mercenaries. Parts of West Africa, with
Liberia, Sierra Leone and, of late, Côte d’Ivoire as
examples, are following the same pattern. Over the past
decade alone, the use of small and light arms has
claimed more than 20 million victims in Africa, many
of whom have been civilians, women and children. An
estimated 2 million children have been killed, 5 million
people have been handicapped, 12 million have been
left without shelter and as many as 17 million have
been either displaced or rendered refugees. Africa also
accounts for approximately 300,000 child soldiers and
10,000 mercenaries, with dire implications for the
entire continent — especially for West Africa, with its
rising number of conflict situations.
6
S/PV.4720
It was in recognition of the enormous scope of
this problem that a Moratorium on the Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Light Weapons in
West Africa was declared and signed by the heads of
State and Government of ECOWAS in October 1998.
The Moratorium was intended to serve as a coordinated
and sustainable regional approach to controlling the
illicit proliferation of small arms in West Africa. It was
extended for another three years in October 2001 and is
due for renewal again in November 2004.
An action plan adopted in March 1999 by
ECOWAS Ministers of Foreign Affairs and a code of
conduct adopted in December 1999 by ECOWAS heads
of State and Government are both designed to
encourage and promote the effective application of the
Moratorium through transparent, concerted efforts at
both the national and international levels. A
Programme for Coordination and Assistance for
Security and Development was similarly established as
the framework for the implementation of measures
associated with the Moratorium. ECOWAS member
States are also signatories to several other international
legal instruments designed to combat the illicit
proliferation, circulation and trafficking of small arms
and light weapons, as well as the phenomenon of
mercenaries in the world.
Recent allegations of cross-border attacks by non-
State actors, a spate of organized crime and other
transborder criminality in the subregion underscore the
timeliness of today’s meeting. As we discuss the
problems posed by the proliferation of small and light
weapons, it is important that we be duly cognizant of
the implications of the activities of individual weapons
retailers and that we recommend sanctions where they
violate the Moratorium and related international legal
instruments. We should also examine ways of ensuring
the increased participation of civil society groups and
of non-governmental organizations in this effort.
Furthermore, it may be worth considering whether
there are any potential advantages to be derived from
revising the Moratorium and making it a permanent
instrument.
I cannot conclude my statement without drawing
attention to the upsurge in the activities of mercenaries
and private armies in conflict situations in West Africa.
Like the proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
mercenaries and private armies pose grave dangers to
the stability of the subregion. The rate at which armed
West African civilians are being recruited from one
conflict area to another to fight for whoever is ready to
engage their services has assumed alarming proportions
in recent years.
No single country in the subregion can escape the
consequences of the proliferation of weapons and of
the increased resort to the use of mercenaries and
private armies. Whether supportive or unsupportive of
any of the conflicts in the region, each country in West
Africa must come to terms with the problems of
refugee flows, the militarization of borders and refugee
camps, as well as cross-border crimes, including arms
trafficking — all of which have dire implications for
political stability and socio-economic development. It
is only through our concerted efforts and the support of
the international community that those problems can be
overcome. I trust that this workshop will result in the
formulation of appropriate recommendations to unite
us in our common fight against the spread of small
arms and light weapons and the phenomenon of
mercenaries and private armies.
I thank members for their attention. It is my wish
that the deliberations of this meeting will be very
fruitful.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of the current Chairman of the Economic
Community of West African States for the kind words
he addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is His
Excellency Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Executive
Secretary of the Economic Community of West African
States.
Mr. Chambas (Economic Community of West
African States): On behalf of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), I wish
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of this body of the United Nations at this
critical time, when the Security Council is faced with
the challenge of taking decisions that will ensure
lasting peace and international security. I am confident
that, with your wealth of experience, coupled with the
famed traditional African wisdom, you will steer the
proceedings of the Council in a fair and judicious
manner.
I wish to thank the organizers of this consultative
meeting, the Security Council and the Republic of
Guinea for inviting me to share the concerns and the
experiences of ECOWAS in the campaign against the
7
S/PV.4720
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and the
growing activities of mercenaries and mercenary
companies — which others call private military
companies — that have deeply affected the political
stability of Africa, in particular West Africa.
It is not surprising that a Guinean presidency of
the Security Council has decided to include among its
peace and security concerns the theme “Proliferation of
small arms and light weapons and use of mercenaries:
threats to peace and security in West Africa”. As I
understand, there are at least two reasons for this. First,
Guinea is the West African country that has carried the
greatest burden of the consequences of internal
conflicts of its neighbours, and the issue of refugees is
but one aspect of this phenomenon. Secondly, it is this
same West African country that suffered a bloody
mercenary attack as far back as 1970. Indeed, other
West African States were later to suffer a similar fate.
Consequently, our subregion became noted for its
instability, characterized by the proliferation of small
arms and by the phenomenon of mercenaries.
The primary objective of the Economic
Community of West African States is to ensure
economic integration and development in West Africa.
However, the inextricable link between development
and peace and stability has meant an increasingly
greater role for ECOWAS in conflict management and
prevention. In many parts of Africa, the uncontrolled
proliferation of small arms — their number is
estimated to be as high as 100 million — has posed a
major threat to development, to political and economic
stability, to civil liberties and to human lives. The
growing number, intensity and duration of conflicts in
Africa — most particularly in the Great Lakes region
and in the Mano River Union basin — are a result of
bad governance, economic failure and the easy
availability of arms and mercenaries. It is estimated
that there are 8 million small arms within West Africa,
and scores of mercenary activities continue to take
place.
Mercenary activities are deplored the world over
and have been consistently condemned by our global
Organization. At every opportunity, West African
leaders have joined in the condemnation of the use in
internal conflicts of foreign soldiers who are available
only for hire in internal conflicts. In the 1990s,
mercenary activities increased, all of them in
contravention of the Convention for the Elimination of
Mercenarism in Africa, adopted by the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), later the African Union (AU),
and of resolutions of the United Nations that clearly
condemn the hire and use of mercenaries in every form.
Strangely enough, in our subregion, a unique type
of mercenary is emerging that is not the usual type.
Over the past decade, the Mano River Union States
have been besieged by rebel activities. The conflicts in
Liberia, in Sierra Leone, in Guinea-Bissau to some
extent and now, we see, in Côte d’Ivoire have been
fought between Government and rebel factions. These
rebel factions have been found to be involved in
virtually all the conflicts in the Mano River Union
States. They have taken on the semblance of
mercenaries who have no loyalty to any particular
authority and who are always available for hire; but
then their motives are sometimes not easily discernible,
since they can resort to random plundering and
destruction of property, as we now see in the western
part of Côte d’Ivoire.
Whatever may be the nature and type of
mercenary activity that is confronted, there is a need
for global action targeted at eliminating the practice
and usefulness of mercenaries. ECOWAS heads of
State and Government have committed themselves to
ensuring that individual States take all necessary
measures to disallow the use of their territories as a
base for rebel or mercenary activities.
After the end of the cold war, the West African
region, with a population of 250 million people, is
indeed saturated with all types of small arms and light
weapons. These weapons, which are easy to use due to
advancements in technology and easy to move about
because of our porous borders, need greater attention
from the international community. Small arms, which
are defined as weapons of mass destruction by some
experts, are aggravating local, communal, national and
regional conflicts. All over Africa, small arms
proliferation has led to the death of millions of people.
In the Sudan, over 2 million have been killed since
1982; in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
another 2 million have also reportedly been killed since
1996. In West Africa, nearly half a million people have
died in the last decade from the misuse of small arms,
or these “tools of death”, as the International Action
Network (IANSA) describes them.
As a result of numerous conflicts, death and
destruction, West African leaders initiated a “security
first” approach to ending conflicts. This led to the
8
S/PV.4720
adoption in 1998 of a Moratorium on the Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Light Weapons. This
is a bold and ambitious step in the management of licit
and illicit small arms. The Moratorium is a confidence-
building mechanism. Its imposition is a voluntary act
backed by the joint political will of our heads of State
and Government to deal with small arms proliferation.
The Moratorium requires member States to put in
place effective measures to: first, control the import,
export and manufacture of light weapons; secondly,
register and control the movement and use of
legitimate arms stocks; thirdly, detect and destroy all
illicit and surplus weapons; and fourthly, permit
exemptions to the Moratorium only in accordance with
strict criteria.
The Moratorium has led to the establishment of
focal points or national commissions in member States
for the control of small arms, as recommended by the
Code of Conduct, adopted by the heads of State in
December 1999, for the implementation of this
Moratorium. An important aspect of the Code is article
8, which concerns the establishment of a peacekeeping
arms register in all peacekeeping operations within
West Africa. Indeed, the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), through its regional Programme
for Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development (PCASED), is in the process of
establishing with us this register next month in Côte
d’Ivoire with the peacekeeping force that has been
deployed there. The register is to keep a check on the
nature and quantity of small arms used in the ECOWAS
mission in Côte d’Ivoire.
The implementation of the ECOWAS Moratorium
has been subjected to several evaluation exercises. The
last major evaluation of its implementation — its
general compliance with and effectiveness in member
States — was carried out between September and
December 2002.
I must not fail to mention that political will for
the continuation of the Moratorium has never wavered,
as member States of ECOWAS renewed it in October
2001 for another three years. There is yet again a
strong indication that the Moratorium will eventually
become a permanent strategy for the control of the
movement of small arms within our subregion.
May I also use this opportunity to remind
members of Security Council resolution 1209 (1998),
which commended ECOWAS on the adoption of the
Moratorium. The UNDP, as I have indicated, has
supported ECOWAS, through PCASED, in
backstopping the Moratorium since March 1999. We
seize this opportunity to thank the United Nations and
the Governments of the United Kingdom, France,
Japan, Sweden, Canada, Norway, Switzerland and the
Netherlands for the technical and financial support
extended for the implementation of the Moratorium.
ECOWAS remains engaged with the international
community over the twin devils of our time, small arms
and mercenary activities. We call upon the
international community to implement the letter and
spirit of the United Nations Programme of Action and
provide necessary resources to enable the ECOWAS
secretariat to implement the ECOWAS Moratorium in
all its ramifications.
Our community is committed towards ensuring
widespread peace and security in the subregion. To this
end, the ECOWAS heads of State, at their meeting in
January this year, recognizing the gravity of the
proliferation of small arms, its linkage to the
continuing instability across our subregion and the
activities of mercenaries and cross-border crimes,
recommended the establishment of a small arms unit
within the ECOWAS secretariat to strengthen our
capacity to reduce, manage and eliminate small arms
and to enhance human security as a means of
facilitating the harmonious development of our
countries.
I am appealing to the Security Council and the
international community at large to support effective
implementation of the Moratorium and to facilitate the
establishment of a well-resourced small arms unit of
the ECOWAS secretariat.
I look forward to fruitful and interactive
discussions at this forum and once again wish you a
successful tenure as President of the United Nations
Security Council.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Executive Secretary of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) for his kind words
addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is Mr. Ibrahima Sall,
the Regional Director of the Programme for
Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development (PCASED).
9
S/PV.4720
Mr. Sall (spoke in French): First of all, on behalf
of Mr. Abdoulie Janneh, UNDP Director of the African
Bureau, who is present here, I would like to
congratulate Guinea on its presidency of the Council
and to thank it for the very important initiative it is
taking at this extremely important time, when the
subject of weapons of mass destruction holds the
attention of the international community.
We are going to give the Council a Power-Point
presentation on the projection screen in this Chamber,
and we will try to remain within the given time limits,
bearing in mind the fact that later discussions will
make it possible to go into further detail for those who
wish so.
The point of our statement is to demonstrate
UNDP’s role in the fight against the proliferation of
weapons in West Africa through PCASED. First, we
would like to give Council members an idea of the
range of proliferation of arms in West Africa, and then
show how the Programme has been set up as a response
to arms proliferation, before looking at measures on
how to combat this proliferation in West Africa.
The situation of arms proliferation in West Africa
today is extremely worrying, which has made this
subregion one of the least stable in the world — first of
all, because of the number and impact of coups
d’état — 72 coups d’état took place between 1972 and
1980, of which 50 per cent were successful — with
very typical examples. There is one country, for
instance, where there were five attempted coups d’état
in four years, with one of them alone creating
approximately 250,000 refugees. Also, as we have
stressed, there has been mercenary activity, a gearing
down of trouble-spots that destabilize the subregion, 12
years of war in Liberia, 10 years in Sierra Leone, a
revolt in Casamance which lasted for 20 years, and so
forth.
Hence, the situation is explosive. There are more
than 10 million arms in West Africa and, according to
the most recent estimate, between 90 and 100 million
persons are enduring this situation in the rest of Africa.
Furthermore, 50 per cent of these weapons are used by
organized criminal groups, and 80 per cent of the
victims are the most impoverished — women, children
and the elderly.
A very dark picture has emerged in the course of
about 10 years: 2 million children have been killed; 5
million persons have been handicapped; 12 million
children have been made homeless; 300,000 children
have acted as combatants and over 10,000 mercenaries
have emerged. All this points to the intensity,
irreversibility and frequency of armed conflicts. Those
conflicts have both direct and indirect effects on human
security. It is in that context, therefore, that the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) justified the
rationality of the Programme in its 2002 mission
statement.
I have not mentioned the specific situation in
Nigeria, where, although there is no domestic rebellion
there is nevertheless a great deal of insecurity. That
insecurity could result in attacks on the civilian
population, which will be the subject of the following
images.
An image was projected on screen.
This is an image of the results of an attack with a
Kalashnikov rifle, which is a weapon of war. That
attack took place at a location where we had gone to
establish a national commission to combat the
proliferation of weapons. We came across this incident
involving a vehicle being used to transfer funds that
was attacked by Kalashnikov or AK-40 fire. It is pretty
cheap to buy a Kalashnikov: one can find such a
weapon on the market today for $30. The toll in this
case was certainly terrible: a bullet in the abdomen, a
lost eye and another bullet in the head. This level of
insecurity is the daily fare in the region. It is therefore
important to ask what the response of the Programme
has been.
First of all, the response of the Programme set up
by UNDP is based on the concept of human security. It
involves extending the concept of human security not
only to people and goods but also to economic and
social rights. The link between development and
security, as well as the security paradigm itself, are
also part of that response.
Another element that I believe is important has to
do with the fact that the Programme for Coordination
and Assistance for Security and Development is a
typical example of a comprehensive response to a
problem that has itself become global in nature. A
range of actors is involved in this effort. International
organizations, States, national organizations, non-
governmental organizations (NGO), media and civil
society groups are all participants in a system of
partnership and coalition that is attempting to take
ownership of the Programme through the national
10
S/PV.4720
commissions established by States and the national and
transnational bodies of civil society. Having been given
a formal platform, those bodies have been actively
participating in the Moratorium since the latest summit
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS).
Multidimensional and multidisciplinary strategies
are being put in place to deal with certain elements
relating to legislative reform. They also exist because
we are somewhat ahead of the game in West Africa
with regard to the issue of combating the proliferation
of arms. We have succeeded in establishing norms and
in putting in place a programme of action. We are now
attempting to link standards and behaviour though an
incentive system. To that end, we are today relying on
diplomacy and capacity-building. It should be
remembered, however, that we do not yet have the
power to impose sanctions or carry out public
negotiations.
An image was projected on screen.
This next image is of a young man from Sierra
Leone who stepped on a mine. We used this image in
our campaign during the Africa Cup to illustrate how
people’s dreams are also shattered.
Our response has therefore been comprehensive.
But above all it has been an interesting response in that
for the first time in the fight against the proliferation of
arms, we have both a political delegation comprised of
ECOWAS States and the political legitimacy necessary
for the Programme to be able to be involved on a
country by country basis and to make direct contact
with ministers for foreign affairs, defence and security
to discuss the issues at hand. This state of affairs
indeed makes for the effectiveness and level of
specificity that are among the strengths of the
Programme.
Lastly, with regard to comprehensiveness, the
most important thing about the Programme established
by UNDP in Africa is that it involves a programme for
practical disarmament that goes beyond lofty
principles. Through the UNDP Programme we have
today been able to respond to the issue of how to
resolve the problem of proliferation on the ground. Our
mission is to promote the culture of peace, train
security forces, establish border controls, create a
regional register of light weapons, harmonize laws,
collect and destroy weapons, extend the spirit of
moratorium to the rest of the African continent,
mobilize resources and begin a dialogue with arms
manufacturers.
The most important thing today is to establish
what we refer to as national commissions to combat the
proliferation of weapons. This is a matter of
establishing such commissions in all ECOWAS States.
Created by States themselves, which would also
determine their composition, such commissions would
serve as the implementing agents in combating the
proliferation of weapons. They would also be
responsible for ensuring the durability of the effort and
for strengthening the capacity of States in the area of
combating proliferation.
Up until 2001 there were only five national
commissions. Thanks to intense work done by a team
in the field, 13 out of a potential 15 national
commissions have been established in a single year.
Thirteen out of the 15 countries in the West Africa
region therefore have national commissions to combat
proliferation. Due to the current instability in the
country, Côte d’Ivoire is one of the States without a
commission. We hope that, with the support of the
Executive Secretary, we will be able to benefit from the
establishment of the new Government to set up a
national commission, set up a register in any future
peacekeeping operation and move towards destroying
surplus arms. Liberia is the other exception. That
situation is due to the civil war in the country.
However, it has demonstrated a firm commitment to
establish a national commission. Moreover — and this
is the second point I wish to make in this regard —
once established, national commissions become part of
a network that exists for the purposes of sharing best
practices, cooperating to combat the proliferation of
weapons and exchanging information.
Decentralization has now been instituted. For
example, Mali’s commission is so far ahead that it has
already created local commissions to combat
proliferation in the north, east and west of the country.
The Programme must now complete that network
by incorporating Nigeria. What is most important,
however, is that we move from the state of institutional
integration that has always existed between the
Programme and UNDP resident representatives to an
operational integration that includes in national
commissions those responsible for good-governance
programmes. From an operational standpoint, that
11
S/PV.4720
would serve to integrate the United Nations system into
anti-proliferation efforts.
Strengthening border controls is also part of our
Programme. Just a few days ago, we provided Mali
with over $200,000 to secure its borders with
Mauritania and Algeria. We are now in the process of
helping Benin, and are considering extending
assistance to Ghana and Niger.
We are also involved in training security forces.
We have trained trainers, namely, over 300 senior
officers throughout the 15 participating countries. With
the national decentralization now in place, and using
our own training manual, over 7,500 agents will be
trained in advance of the unit-level decentralization of
security and armed forces.
With regard to actual figures, we have destroyed
38,000 weapons in West Africa. The Council will note
that, as we have already stated, we have, paradoxically,
destroyed the most weapons in Liberia. In addition, as
they exit the Chamber, members will find a film on the
destruction of weapons in Liberia, which has been an
extremely significant event.
In tandem with that, we are paying particular
attention to the subject of light weapons that includes
anti-personnel mines, as they too fall within this
category. We have a zero-mines initiative in place in
West Africa. With Canada’s help, we intend to destroy
all Government landmine stocks. We will also follow
that with demining programmes, to begin a year after
the destruction of those weapons.
Three projects are currently under way. The first
entails promoting the culture of peace. In that regard, it
is important to point out that we intend to reform
primary, secondary and university curricula in West
Africa in order to include the teaching of the culture of
peace. Another project involves harmonizing security-
related legislation into a single law through an
international convention, as we have done in the area
of business law. The third, and last, programme
involves establishing a regional register of light
weapons. As the Council is aware, a regional register
of conventional arms was established following the
adoption of General Assembly resolution 46/36 L.
However, after three years of work by a group of
experts, it has not been possible to include light
weapons in the Register of Conventional Arms. Light
weapons will therefore be included in regional
registers. ECOWAS will be working on this issue
through the establishment of pilot projects on a
country-by-country basis. Several countries have
already volunteered to provide comprehensive
information on their stocks of small arms and
ammunition, which will make it possible for us to go to
the source in order to coordinate our efforts to come up
with genuinely national registers.
I now wish to refer to the future of the
Programme. First, we will seek to integrate the
Programme into the framework of international efforts,
beginning with the United Nations Conference on
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Their Aspects.
We will then seek to associate ourselves with the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD). If
memory serves me, I believe that France has been
entrusted with the peace and security portfolio, and that
it is in the process of working on that matter. That is
how we plan to involve ourselves in new international
efforts.
We also hope to expand and improve our
partnership with implementing bodies, the agencies of
the United Nations and donors in particular. In that
regard, I believe that it is very important that we have
put in place a mechanism at the level of regional
programmes that makes it possible for all the
Ambassadors of donor countries to meet their
counterparts from recipient countries in order to be
able to discuss all aspects of the Programme in total
transparency.
Another important point is integrating the UNDP
resident representatives and, further, those responsible
for the good governance within the framework of the
struggle against the proliferation of arms.
But the most important aspect of efforts to
combat proliferation, as the Executive Secretary said,
is not only political commitment and will, but also the
mobilization of resources. It must be understood that
our Programme started with a 60 per cent deficit in
resources. Of the estimated $13 million needed to carry
out the Plan of Action, we were able to mobilize only
$5 million.
I would like to give a very simple example.
Today, the minimal programme — and I stress
minimal — to strengthen borders of the 15 West
African countries, which would mean four sites per
country, would call for $6 million. But since PCASED
was established in 1998, we have not been able to
12
S/PV.4720
mobilize this sum. So this gives you some idea of our
shortfalls and deficit problems.
The last operational perspective is the matter of
reducing demand through the Moratorium and through
stricter monitoring and assessment regimes. I believe
the Interim Commissioner for Peace, Security and
Political Affairs has clearly stressed that. We need a far
more restrictive regime for countries that have adopted
the Moratorium. At the same time, on the supply side,
the proposal that the export of weapons to conflict-torn
regions be avoided is important, but that implies that
declarations be made.
Today, the customs statistics collected by the
United Nations are not sufficient, partly because
military arms are not declared, arms are in transit, and
free-trade areas are proliferating, and all this means
that important data are not available to us. Therefore,
we have to rely on voluntary reporting by States. It
should be noted that even now, among the more than
100 exporting countries, only 29 submit reports, and
they do not always provide data that are relevant to our
efforts to combat the proliferation of weapons.
Therefore, we will also step up the campaigns for
demobilization and micro-disarmament operations, and
especially for public awareness, as we have been able
to do in Chad concerning human development, saying
it is a race to be won. Another image that we would
like to put forward is that of tolerance and of all of us
coming together in national unity. Lastly, there is the
image of the flame of peace. Let us act before it dies
out.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Regional Director of the Programme for Coordination
and Assistance for Security and Development
(PCASED) in Africa for his kind words addressed to
my country.
Following this important and interesting
statement by the Director of PCASED, I would like to
remind the Council that our meeting today is a
workshop and, as such, it is interactive. The groups of
speakers, if they wish, will be able to ask questions.
Since we have the opportunity of having with us this
morning the leadership of the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States and
PCASED, they would certainly be glad to answer any
questions that might be raised.
The next speaker is Mr. Baboucarr-Blaise Ismaila
Jagne, the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of the
Gambia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Jagne (Gambia): Allow me first of all to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March. My delegation is indeed proud that it has fallen
on none other than the Republic of Guinea, a sisterly
neighbour of ours in the West African subregion, to
preside over the affairs of the Security Council at this
time — a time that might well prove to be the defining
moment in the future of the United Nations. I have no
doubt that, as always, you will discharge your
responsibility with objectivity, fairness and sagacity.
Let me also pay homage to your predecessor,
Minister Joschka Fischer of Germany, and his able
colleague, Ambassador Gunter Pleuger, for a job well
done during the month of February.
My delegation is indeed grateful to you for
organizing this ministerial workshop on the
proliferation of small arms, light weapons and the
phenomenon of mercenaries: threats to peace and
security in West Africa. This is a subject that is of great
concern to us all in West Africa, not least to President
Al Hadji Yahya A. J. J. Jammeh and the Government of
the Gambia. We have been drawing attention to this
West African problem for several years now, because
the accumulation of small arms and light weapons is
obviously an important contributing factor to the
unending conflicts that have plagued much of West
Africa and stymied development on the continent. The
fact is that, for the most part, the methods through
which these weapons are acquired are illicit, as are the
purposes for which they are acquired. Currently, it is
reported that there are an estimated 8 million illicit
small arms in circulation within and across our porous
borders in West Africa.
Within the last decade, the problem of small arms
and light weapons has led to the convening of a number
of summit meetings on the issue, culminating in 1998
in the adoption of a declaration of a three-year
renewable Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Moratorium on small arms, the first
of its kind in Africa. In addition to the moratorium,
ECOWAS heads of State also adopted a plan of action
and a code of conduct and made a decision that each
country would establish a national commission to
13
S/PV.4720
oversee implementation. Together, all these instruments
would facilitate enforcement of the Moratorium.
In addition to that, as a support and monitoring
mechanism, the Programme for Coordination and
Assistance for Security and Development (PCASED),
in close cooperation with the ECOWAS secretariat and
the various national commissions, provides assistance
with national initiatives to align existing laws and
administrative procedures with the requirements of the
Moratorium. It maintains a register of weapons being
used by peacekeeping troops in the subregion;
processes requests for exemptions and importation by
Governments of arms, ammunitions and components;
provides training in arms control; and promotes
cooperation with manufacturers and suppliers on the
implementation of the Moratorium.
Thus it can be seen that commendable efforts are
being made by West African Governments to address
the problem. Besides, the far-reaching decision taken
by our leaders to extend the Moratorium for a second
three-year period is indeed a clear demonstration of
political will to deal seriously with this problem.
Of equal concern is the character of the end users
of these arms and weapons. It is a well-known fact that
it is militias that drive conflicts in Africa. Some time
back, it came to light that these militias depended to a
significant extent on child soldiers. That realization
shocked the world into action, and the international
community responded with the appropriate measures to
confront this issue. But over and above this repugnant
reality, what has also been emerging in bold relief has
been the fact that the backbone of these militias is
made up largely of mercenaries. This phenomenon has
not yet received the attention it truly deserves.
In the past, mercenary activities in Africa were
associated with European adventurers and “dogs of
war”. Increasingly, however, Africa is becoming quite
adept in producing its own rich crop of these soldiers
of fortune. The West African subregion in particular is
riddled with war and conflict situations that are driven
by mercenary-dominated militias.
The conflicts of the Mano River Union, for
example, were sustained through the use of
mercenaries by the various warlords. It is now well
known that the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) of
Sierra Leone was made up of combatants from virtually
every country in West Africa, who were engaged on
contract terms to fight for pay and profit for the sole
purpose of overthrowing the legitimate Government of
Sierra Leone. It is also a fact that these elements were
involved in the invasion of Guinea and in the present
imbroglio in Liberia, not to mention the atrocities that
they perpetrated during those difficult times. There are
more than strong indications that in the latest conflict
situation in West Africa, in Côte d’Ivoire, the spillover
of mercenaries from the Mano River Union conflicts is
an important additional complicating element.
Mercenaries are totally lacking in conscience and
morality. Their only loyalty and allegiance is to
themselves, and they will respond only to the highest
bidder. There are known cases of mercenaries who
have fought with several different militias, some of
whom were mortal enemies. They are there, ready to
fight anyone’s war, so long as the price is right.
It is certain that for as long as these unsavoury
elements exist in our midst, the demand for small arms
and light weapons will be there — as will the
financiers and lords of war. They constitute a critical
link in the chain of conflict. And unless that link is
broken, we in West Africa will know no peace or rest.
It will be recalled that in July 2001, the United
Nations convened the Conference on the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, at
which it decided to implement the Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects. The Conference affirmed that “Governments
bear the primary responsibility for preventing,
combating and eradicating the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons in all its aspects” and that “the
international community has a duty to deal with this
issue” (A/CONF.192/15, preambular paragraphs 13
and 15). I believe that the same holds true for the
problem of mercenaries.
It is true that in the West African subregion
Governments have started to assume their
responsibilities vis-à-vis the control of small arms and
light weapons. What they have achieved, commendable
as it may be, is only a beginning. Much more needs to
be done.
In December 2002, at the end of the third year of
the Moratorium, an evaluation was undertaken. Some
of its findings and observations are instructive. Let me
highlight a few.
14
S/PV.4720
“Unless the world’s major arms producers
take more responsibility for managing the world
market in arms, the most vulnerable States will
continue to suffer from the uncontrolled trade in
small arms ... A renewed momentum needs to be
built around the issue of dialogue with arms
suppliers and producers.
“While the (numerous) applications for
waivers (for imports of arms and ammunitions)
indicate that member States do respect the
Moratorium, there have been allegations that not
all States are complying with the Code of
Conduct ... ECOWAS member States may
therefore wish to review the Code of Conduct in
order to provide (a) enforcement measures ...
when countries are found to be in violation of
their obligations, and (b) initiation of
investigation of serious breaches of the Code of
Conduct.”
Regarding import exemptions,
“there is a gray area in the exemption procedure:
there is currently no clause requiring that arms
dealers” (as opposed to State parties) “submit an
application to the ECOWAS Secretariat ... There
is yet another gray area in the exemption process:
countries which have been granted waivers do not
have to show them when purchasing weapons.”
Against this backdrop, I should like us to
consider a few proposals as to what more could be
done, over and above the efforts made so far, to address
the problem of small arms, light weapons and
mercenaries in West Africa. It goes without saying that
a priori, each West African country must show stronger
commitment towards the objectives of the sub-regional
and international initiatives on this issue and a greater
willingness to enforce the agreements made
collectively.
First, an international legislative instrument is
needed to hold both supplier and user of small arms
and light weapons to greater account. Manufacturers
and suppliers must be made to show more responsible
behaviour in the transfer of these arms and weapons to
non-State actors. A mechanism must be put in place to
ensure that transfers are made only to legitimate State
end-users. The efforts under way to regulate arms
supplies to militias in certain countries in the region
should be modified for application throughout West
Africa. In addition to that, something akin to the
monitoring and regulation of the movement of blood
diamonds should be designed to control the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. Of
course, these would have to be backed up by an
appropriate sanctions regime. In this regard, much
stronger cooperation must be sought from the arms
manufacturers and suppliers, signatories of the
Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Control for
Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods and
Technologies.
Secondly, actions should be taken to check the
activities of illicit arms brokers, dealers and retailers in
much the same way as measures have been taken
against illicit drug dealers. The situation in West Africa
today is such that it is easy for individuals or groups of
individuals to purchase any amount of arms and
weapons, sometimes fairly openly. Effective measures
must be put in place to stop this.
Thirdly, we need to promulgate an international
convention proscribing the activities and use of
mercenaries in the subregion. Warlords who recruit
mercenaries to carry out any kind of war, whether
justifiable or not, should be held to account. The
appropriate surveillance and enforcement mechanisms
should then be put in place.
Fourthly, as an immediate measure to respond to
the urgency of the situation in West Africa, steps
should be taken to demobilize mercenaries and have
them reinserted into productive and gainful economic
activities in their countries of origin. Sierra Leone
recently had a successful programme, supported by the
United Nations, for the demobilization, reintegration
and reinsertion of tens of thousands of its nationals. A
subregional version of such a programme is what is
being proposed now.
Fifthly, some legislative instrument is needed to
prevent the provision of safe havens, rear bases,
logistics, supplies, etc., to mercenaries and other users
of illicit small arms and light weapons. The appropriate
regime of sanctions on defaulters would also need to be
worked out.
Finally, to have any or all of the foregoing
enforced, we would need a much stronger partnership
between the United Nations, PCASED and ECOWAS.
At present, the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Office for Project
Services (UNOPS), the Secretariat’s Department of
Economic and Social Affairs, Department of
15
S/PV.4720
Peacekeeping Operations and Department for
Disarmament Affairs, and the United Nations Institute
for Disarmament Research provide various forms of
assistance and support to the work of PCASED. What
is now required is for that cooperation to be broadened
to include concerted actions on the question of
mercenaries, as well as a more formal arrangement
through which the Security Council, in close
cooperation with ECOWAS and PCASED, would
establish a mechanism for monitoring the situation,
receiving reports on it and enforcing its decisions on
matters of small arms, light weapons and mercenaries.
Perhaps the United Nations Office for Conflict
Prevention and Peace-building for West Africa should
assume the role of coordinator of this arrangement, and
liaison between the Security Council and ECOWAS.
My delegation fervently hopes that this workshop
will not be a one-day wonder. It is our expectation that
from our deliberations will emerge the pointers that
will lead to stronger collaboration between all the
major players in West Africa on one hand, and the
Security Council on the other, in a bid to confront our
subregion’s biggest challenge, namely, the problem of
mercenaries and the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of the Gambia
for his kind words and encouragement addressed to
Guinea.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Angola, His Excellency Mr. João Bernardo
de Miranda.
Mr. Miranda (Angola) (spoke in French): I
would first like to congratulate Guinea for the initiative
it has taken to convene this special meeting that allows
us to analyse and seek effective solutions to problems
which have gravely affected the stability of certain
regions of the African continent and that have thus
contributed to the economic backwardness of those
regions.
I would also like to welcome the presence of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs and those holding other
portfolios from the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the Executive Secretary of
ECOWAS and the High Representative of Amara Essy,
who is Interim President of the Commission of the
African Union.
The problem of the proliferation of light arms,
mercenary activities and threats to peace and security
in West Africa have become a real danger, and they
concern us. They are also directly related to the
prolongation of conflicts and of the climate of tension
that reigns in some countries in this region. The
number of deaths and wounded is growing daily
because of the use of small arms. The causes of this
problem are many, and they vary from one region to
another. The inappropriate use of light arms in some
countries creates difficulties that harm the well-being
and safety of citizens and, in other countries, even
threaten the existence of the State.
In countries that have concluded peace
agreements, this factor creates impediments and
undermines the prevailing trust among the protagonists
of the peace process, while it blocks peacekeeping
operations, efforts at reconstruction and development
in countries in the post-conflict phase, and the normal
development of national democratic processes.
Given the current serious threat to peace and
security, and given the risk that it will spread to other
regions in Africa, the problem that is striking West
Africa is of such a scope that the solution cannot rest
solely with the countries or group of countries directly
affected. A more substantial commitment on the part of
the United Nations, and of the Security Council in
particular, is vital — thus the merit and importance of
today’s meeting.
The growing concentration of light weapons in
different regions around the globe and the possession
and use of these weapons by civilian groups or
subversive armed organizations can be traced mainly to
the ineffectiveness of systems for controlling arms
imports and exports, faulty oversight of military
arsenals, and the illicit trafficking in arms, sometimes
carried out with the connivance of Governments
producing weapons.
As well, some countries selling arms have not
demonstrated sufficient restraint in exporting to regions
already destroyed by conflict. They have incited
belligerent groups to pursue subversive and
destabilizing wars.
The arms embargoes imposed by the Council in
order to control the proliferation of weapons have not
been fully respected. They have led to a transformation
of numerous regions, mostly African, into veritable
arms bazaars and sources of new conflicts.
16
S/PV.4720
The limited success of embargoes on arms for
Africa is due to the poor results achieved by a number
of States in controlling their borders, linked to a lack of
political will and to interference in the internal affairs
of other States. The experience of the Angolan conflict
has demonstrated that the importation of weapons that
were subsequently delivered to armed groups was a
fact in certain African countries that were using lawful
procedures. That situation continues to be true in the
case of other States engaged in conflicts.
We must therefore urgently speed up the fine-
tuning of an international mechanism enabling States to
identify and to trace the flows of small arms and light
weapons, including those arms of legal provenance. We
must create a mechanism that easily identifies any
individual or enterprise involved in the illicit traffic of
arms so that they can be severely punished.
Arms trafficking in Western Africa is not
inevitable. It can be eliminated. One appropriate way is
the implementation by all States of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eliminate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, adopted in July 2001.
Southern Africa, to which my country belongs, has
already taken steps in that direction by adopting the
protocol of the Southern Africa Development
Community on firearms and munitions.
We should take note of the public denunciation of
States and individuals that have been shown to be
deliberately involved in the violation of arms
embargoes, as well as of the sanctions imposed on
them. That procedure has proven to be very effective in
significantly reducing violations of the embargoes
imposed by the United Nations during the period of
conflict in my country.
The United Nations must therefore play an
essential role on the question of the proliferation of
arms. To that end, it must provide assistance to help
Western Africa carry out programmes for disarmament,
demobilization and social reintegration. The United
Nations must also promote all measures to seize and
destroy weapons arsenals in the framework of peace
accords. That very important measure will prevent
those who intend to persist in the choice of war from
gaining access to arms. My country’s experience in that
area has been very positive.
Angolan legislation stipulates that the use and
carriage of firearms are strictly prohibited. We are fine-
tuning a compensation process based on the principle
of voluntary action, which comprises three phases. The
first phase is essentially administrative in nature and
consists of establishing structures for the registering
and reception of surrendered arms. The primary
objective of the second phase is to raise the awareness
of the public. It is aimed at the overall society and
should take into account the results of investigations
and of actions for the collection of large quantities of
small firearms. We envisage compensation for
informers. The third phase will begin immediately after
the end of the time period established for the voluntary
return of small firearms. Only at the end of the three
phases will we introduce new legislation to modify the
provisions on prohibition under the law on the use and
possession of firearms by civilians.
We also consider fundamental United Nations
support for the Moratorium declared in 1998 by the
Economic Community of West African States on the
importation and exportation and manufacture of small
arms in all their aspects, which enables the States of
the region to contribute to the creation of a culture of
peace, which should lead to the gradual elimination of
their conflicts.
Also, it must be underlined that some countries in
the region — countries that are already well known —
must halt their military, political and diplomatic and
material assistance to armed groups active in other
States. The Governments of countries in conflict must,
in turn, demonstrate political will by taking concrete
measures towards greater flexibility as a prior
condition necessary for a climate favourable to the
peaceful negotiation of conflicts.
We believe that the important conclusions
established as the outcome of this meeting will signal
the commitment of the States members of the Security
Council and of the Economic Community of West
African States to cooperate effectively in order to
lessen as much as possible the climate of tension
prevailing in Western Africa and to eradicate in the
short term the currently prevailing instability.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Angola for his kind
words addressed to my country.
I now give the floor to His Excellency François-
Xavier Ngoubeyou, Minister of State for External
Relations of Cameroon.
17
S/PV.4720
Mr. Ngoubeyou (Cameroon) (spoke in French):
It is a genuine pleasure to see you, Sir, presiding over
our work today. My country is proud of the spirit with
which your country, Guinea, is guiding the Council’s
work in the particularly sensitive international
environment of March 2003 that is known to us all.
Also allow me to congratulate the Council through you,
Sir, for taking this initiative.
Holding a public debate on the question of the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and
mercenary activities: threats to peace and security in
West Africa should be placed within a larger context
that began in the decade of the 1990s. In its debate on
disarmament and micro-disarmament, the international
community has given top priority to the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons and related phenomenon.
This awareness of the danger represented by
portable arms led to the holding here in New York in
July 2001 of the United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Lights Weapons in All
Its Aspects. During that Conference, we all noted that
the manufacture, transfer and illicit circulation of those
weapons, as well as their excessive accumulation and
uncontrolled proliferation, in numerous regions of the
world, particularly in West Africa, constituted a grave
threat to peace, security, stability, reconciliation and
sustainable development at the individual, local,
national, regional and international levels.
At the end of that meeting, we jointly adopted a
plan of action to establish concrete measures at the
national, regional and international levels to prevent,
control and eliminate the illicit trade of small arms and
light weapons in all its aspects.
I felt compelled to make this digression to
emphasize that this debate should not be considered a
spontaneous occurrence, an act without precedence, but
rather a significant moment, one stage of a dynamic,
future-oriented and standard-setting process that has
long been under way. We believe that this meeting is
yet another opportunity for us to place particular
emphasis on this issue and to reaffirm the role of the
United Nations in collecting, classifying, sharing and
disseminating information on illicit traffic in light
weapons. In that context, the Council should take the
necessary measures to provide assistance to States and
subregional organizations, particularly African ones, to
ensure that all African countries will rise to the same
level of political awareness as nations of other regions
in the area of the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons.
Furthermore, by insisting on the elaboration of an
international instrument against the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons, in accordance with the above-
mentioned plan of action, I would like once again to
highlight that that is a strong recommendation, the
immediate and effective implementation of which will
undoubtedly constitute a decisive phase in our struggle
against this scourge.
Last October, under the presidency of Cameroon,
the Council had organized a day of discussion devoted
to the issue of small arms. On that occasion, several
delegations recognized that the Security Council
should play a greater role to ensure better control of the
circulation of light weapons by establishing a
permanent monitoring mechanism to follow up on
embargoes and other sanctions regarding those
weapons. Organizing the collection of light weapons
and setting up small economic projects for groups and
communities concerned could also be very useful if the
international community were to support them.
There is also a need to strengthen legislation at
the national level with regard to firearms and the
prohibition and use of firearms by security companies
that are now proliferating in our countries. Robust
measures need to be taken against the home
manufacture of firearms. What worries us today is the
linkage between trade and other prohibited phenomena
such as terrorism, organized crime, drug traffic, large-
scale banditry in our cities and road blocks that are set
up in some regions. More comprehensively, I wish to
emphasize the need at the national, and possibly the
subregional level, to adopt measures aimed at
preventing conflict, because we know that disputes
leading to civil wars or to similar situations are
important factors in the proliferation and illicit
circulation of light weapons.
Despite the entry into force in 2001 of the United
Nations convention on this matter, the use of
mercenaries is one of the major concerns of most
African States and of other areas of the globe. At the
behest of local powers, mercenaries continue to fuel
conflict in Africa, contributing to the pillage of natural
resources and the destabilization of power in the area.
There are flagrant human rights violations, particularly
of the right of peoples to self-determination. In that
regard, we believe that our priorities for action should
18
S/PV.4720
emphasize a redefinition of mercenary activity, a study
on how mercenaries are used in terrorist attacks and
how to strengthen the roles of the United Nations and
the Security Council in the fight against the
phenomenon of mercenarism.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Minister of State for External Relations of Cameroon
for his kind words addressed to my country and to
myself.
This was the last speaker in the first round. We
have not noted any questions. Therefore, we will go
straight to the next round. The first speaker on my list
is Mr. Monie Captan, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Liberia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Captan (Liberia): Let me congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March. Liberia
expresses its appreciation for your foresight in
confronting this body with the critical issues of the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and the
phenomenon of mercenaries — threats to peace and
security in West Africa.
The problem of the proliferation of small arms in
West Africa has claimed the attention of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) for
some time now, and as a result of the seriousness
attached to this problem, the Community adopted a
protocol establishing a Moratorium on the importation
of small arms into West Africa. This initiative was
spearheaded by Mali and was supported by many
international partners, in particular the United Nations.
The success of this initiative relies heavily on the
cooperation of arms-producing States, as arms continue
to enter the subregion and conflicts continue to persist.
The problem of mercenaries has also claimed the
attention of ECOWAS. A proposal by Liberia at the
meeting of Foreign Ministers of ECOWAS in
December 2002 in Dakar was adopted. Under its
provisions, ECOWAS would convene a special meeting
on the subject to explore ways and means to address
this problem. The proliferation of mercenaries in West
Africa was in part induced as a result of the
unsuccessful reintegration programmes for ex-
combatants that failed because the international
community did not provide adequate resources for
these programmes. This resulted in a large population
of idle ex-combatants in an economically stagnant
region where ex-combatants’ only means of earning a
living was to sell their skills as armed fighters for
money and loot.
The proliferation of arms and mercenaries are
linked in that mercenaries can only operate where there
are continuous military supplies. In many instances,
mercenaries join rebel movements and are ensured
military supplies by State actors who use non-State
actors as proxies in regional conflicts. The proliferation
of mercenaries is of particular concern because
mercenaries in West Africa are more often ex-
combatants from regional conflicts who are recycled
into conflicts and sustain conflict and instability in the
region. Mercenaries survive in environments where
non-State actors are actively engaged in armed
conflicts. We have witnessed this situation in Liberia,
Sierra Leone and now Côte d’Ivoire. A case in point is
the ongoing war in Liberia, where the rebels of the
Liberians United Reconciliation and Democracy
(LURD), fighting to overthrow the democratically
elected Government of Liberia, comprise ex-
combatants from the defunct warring factions in
Liberia, the Sierra Leonean Kamajors and Guinean
nationals. This rebel group of mixed nationals is now
engaged in fighting on all sides of the Ivorian conflict.
In addressing the proliferation of arms and
mercenaries, the international community must focus
on the source of the arms supply to these non-State
actors. Failure to do so will lead to the maintenance of
a large number of mercenaries in West Africa who
could surface in any part of West Africa and beyond,
causing further instability and creating a major
humanitarian crisis, resulting in an increase in already-
alarming levels of refugees and internally displaced
persons within the subregion.
The recent arrest and disarming by French forces
in Côte d’Ivoire of more than 100 Liberian mercenaries
fighting for the Ivorian Government is an indication of
the seriousness of this problem. Those Liberians are a
part of the rebel group Liberians United for
Reconciliation and Democracy (LURD), which went to
fight for the Ivorian Government in order to gain
access to and open a second front in eastern Liberia,
along the Liberian-Ivorian border. A second front was
established with an incursion into Toe Town, Grand
Gedeh County, from Côte d’Ivoire by Liberian
mercenaries. Such a development has the potential to
create a new security crisis between the two
neighbouring States.
19
S/PV.4720
In another recent development, the Government
of Ghana raided a Liberian refugee camp in Ghana,
where a recruitment centre and a military training camp
were discovered. Ex-combatants seek refuge and safety
in refugee camps, where they actively carry out
recruitment.
For the past three years, the Liberian Government
has been engaged in a war to defend its territorial
integrity against armed aggression by LURD and its
mercenaries from neighbouring countries. ECOWAS,
in its attempt to curtail such illegal activities, imposed
a sanctions regime on LURD. However, this pressure
on the part of ECOWAS has not received much support
from the international community, which has done little
to show its disapproval for this armed insurgency.
The Security Council mandated a panel of experts
to investigate the flow of arms supplies to rebel
groups — LURD — in Liberia, in violation of the arms
embargo. The panel reported to the Council that the
rebels had direct links to the President of neighbouring
Guinea and that materiel was reaching the rebels from
the territory of Guinea. The panel then recommended
that the Council expand its arms embargo on Liberia to
the other two members of the Mano River Union. That
crucial recommendation was selectively ignored by the
Council.
Today, LURD rebels continue to wage war
against the Liberian people with a robust and sustained
supply of materiel. Last month, the Government of
Liberia presented a formal complaint to the Security
Council — in keeping with Article 35, paragraph 1 of
the Charter of the United Nations — in which Guinea’s
involvement in fuelling the war in Liberia was
documented. These Guinean-backed rebels have now
surfaced in Côte d’Ivoire and have recently taken
control of Liberian territory adjacent to Sierra Leone
along the western border of Liberia.
Sustainable peace in West Africa will require an
end to such support for rebel movements and their
mercenaries. Sustainable peace will also require the
provision of adequate resources for the reconstruction
of economic infrastructure in West Africa and for the
reintegration of ex-combatants, the resettlement of
internally displaced persons, the repatriation of
refugees, job creation and the promotion of an enabling
environment for good governance, the rule of law,
respect for human rights and democracy.
When the objective of regime change is promoted
through the expediency of violence and the use of
force, acceptance of the consequences of the
proliferation of small arms and the use of mercenaries
becomes an integral aspect of international attitudes.
Such attitudes then become the source of immeasurable
human suffering and of a degradation of the humanity
of hundreds of thousands of West Africans, with an
accompanying charade of humanitarian responses. A
change in international attitudes will go a long way
towards bringing an end to human suffering, especially
with regard to political expediency and moral
justification for the use of violence.
Today, those subjects are at the core of the fact of
underdevelopment in our region — especially in the
Mano River subregion, where poverty is so entrenched
and has a dehumanizing effect on its peoples. The
tragedy is even more profound in view of the fact that
the subregion and the region as a whole are rich in
resources. Poverty, hunger and disease are endemic to
our people, while our resources assuage the greed of
countries and of people who already have much.
Through the expropriation of our resources, we
are supplied with swords and instruments created for
our self-immolation. The region has become a Petri
dish for those who manufacture small arms and light
weapons in an experiment on how to degrade nations
and people. The best and most conducive conditions
for the creation of mercenaries are an absence of good
schools, continuous cultural disruptions, economic
deprivation and a lack of economic empowerment.
Young men between the ages of 12 and 19 who are
deprived of the basic sustenance of family life and of
the hope of surviving beyond the age of 28 are apt to
embrace mercenarism as a way of life, and many
countries are prepared to provide them with the
implements of their trade.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
the Guinean presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this open debate on two key issues in the
complex scenario of threats to international peace and
security in West Africa, and we congratulate the
presidency on this initiative, which is very timely.
We welcome the broad participation that this
debate has attracted, with regard to both the States
present and the regional and subregional organizations
represented by the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). We
20
S/PV.4720
believe that the issue’s regional dimension is essential
and that only through joining measures at the national
level with regional initiatives will we be able to
consistently and comprehensively confront the threat to
peace and security that the millions of small arms and
light weapons circulating in West Africa represent.
My delegation would like to appeal to all West
African countries and to their regional organizations to
implement the measures contained in the action plan
that resulted from the United Nations Conference on
the Illicit Traffic in Small Arms and Light Weapons,
held in New York in July 2002. For the sake of brevity,
and given the impossibility of dealing with every facet
of this debate, I should like to make several comments
and to pose several questions on the following points.
First of all, I should like to stress the importance
of including concrete measures concerning the
elimination of small arms and light weapons in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes for ex-combatants. That component is
sometimes not included in peace agreements and, when
it is, its implementation in practice is slow and
problematic. In our judgement, the delays in this type
of programme have very negative consequences in the
post-conflict phase. I should like to know the opinions
of the West African States present in this Chamber that
are implementing this type of programme with regard
to what lessons they have learned in that respect.
Secondly, I should like to express my concern
about the urgent issue of child soldiers in West Africa.
We attach great importance to the reintegration of child
soldiers — especially to the educational aspect of their
reintegration. I should like to ask the States that are
present what their activities are in that respect.
My last point concerns the ECOWAS
Moratorium. In its implementation, African States must
not forget the importance of the ways in which these
arms are supplied and the great responsibility of the
States bordering the countries where conflicts are
currently taking place. I should like to ask the
Executive Secretary of ECOWAS what technical
difficulties are being encountered in the
implementation of the Moratorium. What is his
assessment of the role of the national commissions
established thus far?
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Spain for his statement and questions.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I
warmly welcome you back, Mr. Minister, to the
presidency chair, together with your fellow Ministers
from Africa in this room. I am delighted that we also
have among us senior representatives of the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the Programme for
Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development (PCASED), whose briefings to us this
morning were important.
Mr. President, congratulations on the
establishment of this workshop, which we
enthusiastically support. Small arms and light weapons
are the predominant instruments of conflict in a great
majority of recent conflicts, and it is estimated that at
least half a million people die every year as a result of
their use. This is something rightly of concern to the
Security Council.
Illegal trafficking in small arms and light
weapons threatens international peace and security. It is
closely connected with other forms of international
organized crime and with terrorism. It poses a complex
challenge, involving security, humanitarian and
development dimensions. This is, sadly, too well-
illustrated in West Africa, where small arms in the
hands of rebels have exacerbated and prolonged
conflicts.
Action needs to be taken by various players in
different forums: first, we warmly encourage ECOWAS
to work on practical steps to implement the well-
constructed Moratorium it adopted in 1998. Mr.
Chambas has described how this is being done. The
Presidential Statement we are to adopt this morning
includes several suggestions, including establishing an
ECOWAS register of small arms and light weapons,
strengthening national commissions, and introducing
standardized end-user certificates for imported
weapons. We encourage donors to provide additional
assistance to ECOWAS to meet these challenges. And I
would like to know whether the Executive Secretary
can tell us more precisely what is needed in terms of
items and cost, so that donors can respond to the
requirements of his organization.
Secondly, we also encourage arms producing and
exporting countries to exercise the highest degree of
responsibility in small arms and light weapons
transactions. The Governments of those States that
transfer small arms and light weapons bear a
21
S/PV.4720
significant responsibility for controlling trade in such
weapons. Strengthening export controls has to be an
important step in the right direction. This includes
careful scrutiny, not only of end-user certificates, but
also of the wider environment in which the weapons
are to be deployed.
The United Kingdom held a conference in
London in January during which participants
recognized the central role for the United Nations in
combating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. This conference discussed how to strengthen
efforts to implement relevant commitments in the
United Nations Programme of Action. These include
the need for States to have adequate laws and
procedures to exercise effective control over these
weapons transfers, as well as to assess applications for
export authorizations according to strict national
regulations and procedures. We look forward to
working with partners to follow up the conclusions of
this conference.
In this context, we welcome the establishment of
the United Nations group of governmental experts that
examines the feasibility of developing an international
instrument, enabling States to identify and trace illicit
small arms and light weapons. We believe that the
Council itself must take a close interest in how all
these initiatives are followed up and implemented.
Thirdly, it is crucial that United Nations sanctions
are more effectively implemented. This was the
motivation behind the proposal by the United Kingdom
and France last year for an independent monitoring
mechanism on sanctions. Mechanisms need to be
developed to strengthen the capacity to enforce United
Nations arms embargoes at the national, regional and
international levels. We would like to work further with
Council partners on this.
Others have made interesting proposals this
morning. The Foreign Minister of Gambia, for
instance, has pointed to the need for an international
legal instrument to hold those who foster the small
arms trade to greater account and for an international
convention on mercenaries. We would be happy to
consider these and other ideas, as well as ways of
promoting greater coordination between all the
different mechanisms and concepts in these areas.
In conclusion, we believe that trade in small arms
and light weapons poses real and urgent problems. The
human dimension of these problems, including their
impact on women and families, should be a powerful
incentive for Governments throughout the world, not
just in West Africa, to coordinate their efforts in
combating the proliferation of these deadly weapons.
The Council must therefore, from today onwards,
act to ensure that ideas for curtailing the trade are put
into effect and make a difference where it matters, in
West Africa and elsewhere. The Presidential Statement
we are considering is a good start and has our support.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of the United Kingdom for his
comments.
Before continuing, I would like to call on the
Director of the Programme for Coordination and
Assistance for Security and Development (PCASED)
and the Executive Secretary of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). Some
questions and observations were raised. Perhaps they
would be kind enough to answer them: specific
measures on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, concerns expressed by the representative
of Spain regarding child soldiers and activities for
reintegration of these child soldiers, as well as the
difficulties encountered to implement the Moratorium,
and other comments and observations.
I call on the Executive Secretary of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS).
Mr. Chambas: I will talk about the national
commissions, and Mr. Sall will address the issues
regarding the technical difficulties, the implementation
and some of the requirements for more effective
implementation.
A major part of the problem, of course, is the lack
of information on or ignorance about this particular
problem that plagues our subregion. The role of
national commissions is, among other things, of course,
to bring greater awareness to the various countries and
their populations and to sensitize our peoples to the
dangers of small arms and mercenaries. As we have
been informed, 13 of our member States now indeed
have national commissions, and the role of these
commissions will be to begin work effectively to, first
of all, ensure that member States incorporate the
Moratorium in their laws. By this, I mean the
Moratorium that they have agreed to — that these laws
from the subregional level and at the various national
levels are incorporated into national laws, that the
22
S/PV.4720
various security agencies, armed forces, police and
other security apparatus become an active part of the
implementation of the Moratorium. At the national
level, the laws have to move on to provincial or
regional levels, and down to the local levels. I think the
example of Mali that was cited here, where this kind of
decentralization has taken place, obviously needs to be
encouraged and promoted, so that people should be
sensitized down to the local grass-roots level as to what
it is that needs to be done to curtail the activities of
mercenaries and to reduce the spread — if not totally
eliminate — these weapons which continue to be a
threat to the peace and stability of West Africa.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the Director of the Programme for Coordination and
Assistance for Security and Development
(PCASED) — two or three minutes, please.
Mr. Sall (spoke in French): I would just like to
say that it is true that currently the first problem facing
the implementation of the Moratorium is the need to
maintain the strong political involvement that existed
at the outset of this effort. I believe that, as the
problems have become increasingly serious, we must
continue to encourage political commitment on the part
of the States and Governments of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS).
With regard to the technical questions that have
been raised, I believe that the most difficult challenge
we experienced was overcoming the ministerial
competition that arose in each country with regard to
the chairmanship of national commissions. That caused
us delays in many countries. As sovereignty issues are
often negotiated by ministries for foreign affairs at the
same time that operations are carried out by defence
and security ministries, it is not always easy to
harmonize the problems that arise between the various
ministries in an effort to have them understand each
other and engage in collective efforts. That was not an
easy thing to do. In fact, we worked on this issue quite
a bit this year.
I also wish to refer to the availability of
resources. I believe that one of the major constraints
facing national commissions is the lack of necessary
resources, beginning with human resources. Civil
servants are appointed and are also responsible for
other duties on a full-time basis: they work in
ministries and public administration and therefore
cannot systematically manage a programme to combat
the proliferation of arms. But we have seen that even
though civil servants may be otherwise occupied, the
roles of facilitators and coordinators have made a
difference. On the issue of financial resources, every
operation I have mentioned — including training,
border control, establishing registers and collecting and
destroying arms — stems from national commissions,
which actually carry out operations on the ground. Our
resources are therefore quite limited. I wish to
emphasize that only Guinea — and, to a lesser extent,
Mali — have been able to mobilize strictly bilateral
financing from donors to dedicate to programmes to
combat the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons in their countries. Other ECOWAS countries
are financed through national commissions solely from
the funds that the Programme for Coordination and
Assistance for Security and Development (PCASED)
can provide them. The idea is therefore to assist every
country to establish a national programme that will
make it possible to organize the mobilization of
resources from international community donors.
In that vein, I am pleased to report to the Security
Council that the Programme is trying to establish a
national portfolio on non-proliferation in the 15
countries. We would hope to organize a round table
some time around December 2003, at which we would
invite the international community to assist us to face
up to security issues on a country-by-country and
programme-by-programme basis, while bearing in
mind the specificities of each country.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is Mr. Cheikh Tidiane
Gadio, Minister of State and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the African Union and for Senegalese
Abroad. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Gadio (Senegal) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to extend my warm and fraternal
congratulations to you, Mr. President. We are very
proud to see you, an African, in a leadership role at the
Security Council — which finds itself at a major
crossroads in this month of March 2003. May God
continue to guide and inspire you in your sensitive but
noble mission.
My delegation associates itself with previous
speakers in commending the very wise and appropriate
choice of today’s topic, which sums up a concern
shared in the West African community, given that we
23
S/PV.4720
are determined to find long-lasting solutions to the
twin problems crucial to peace and security in our
subregion. Those problems are the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons and the activities of
mercenaries.
Before going any further, I would like to invoke
and embrace the memory of our fallen friend and
companion Mr. Kofi Panou, former Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Togo, who fought at our side for
peace and security in our subregion and on our
continent.
The eruption of identity-based and irredentist
movements, the increased appetite for certain natural
resources — both on and beneath the ground —
domestic, social and political schisms and trans-border
conflicts have resulted in the illegal influx of a large
number of small arms and light weapons into West
Africa and in the rise of mercenary operations. Those
weapons are accessible, inexpensive and easy to use.
There are over 500 million such weapons throughout
the world, and they have been employed in every
conflict to beset West Africa. Wherever they have
appeared, they have brought with them death and
desolation, undermined efforts at economic and social
development and compromised attempts at conflict
resolution that have been the result of implementing
acidulously negotiated agreements. Moreover, they
have always served to promote the rise of both
domestic and foreign criminal gangs, which have been
lured by the appeal of easy money obtained through
extortion and murder.
That picture is made all the more sombre by the
recent emergence of mercenary war dogs who have
come from distant and neighbouring lands, often
brandishing the title of agents of “military companies”.
That euphemism is hardly convincing, judging from
their terrible ability to be disruptive in the countries
where they are brought to work. West Africa has
already been a theatre of operations for those pathetic
individuals, who have illustrated the hideous damage
they can do in their flagrant denial of fundamental
human rights in places such as the Biafra region of
Nigeria, Benin and Guinea.
We must make no mistake about it. As stated in
1997 by Mr. Enrique Bernales Ballesteros, Special
Rapporteur on mercenaries for the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, mercenaries have the
terrible ability to “undermine the maintenance of
public order, the sovereign exercise of State authority
and a nation’s territorial integrity”. Added to those
burdens are the economic disruption and the fratricidal
division of the mercenary phenomenon.
Faced with all those dangers, it is welcome that
both the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the African Union have been
proactively developing appropriate instruments. In fact,
for a number of years, West Africa has been giving
high priority to combating the illicit traffic in small
arms and light weapons in all its aspects. The
determination of the leadership of our subregion was
embodied in the 1998 adoption by the ECOWAS Abuja
Summit of the Moratorium on the Import, Export and
Manufacture of Light Weapons. That important
progress was supported by the establishment of the
Programme for Coordination and Assistance for
Security and Development (PCASED), which, along
with the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), aims at establishing a culture of peace and
security in the ECOWAS region. In that connection, we
would like to commend the excellent leadership of our
countryman Mr. Ibrahima Sall. We encourage him to
continue his fight as he makes his appeal to the
international community for more resources.
I can only add to that incomplete list by
mentioning the Organization of African Union’s
adoption of the Convention for the Elimination of
Mercenarism in Africa, which is one of the most
important instruments available to combat this terrible
phenomenon.
Five months after the Security Council held a
public meeting on small arms and light weapons the
Guinean presidency had the very good idea of re-
examining this point, adding a question that goes hand
in hand with it: mercenary activities. In so doing, at a
time when the international community’s attention is
riveted by the Iraqi crisis, Guinea was quite right to
recall just how pressing this critical problem is in West
Africa, since it has a direct impact on the lives of
millions of people.
Senegal, all the same, believes that an end must
be put to the subregional omertà — the code of silence,
which continues to be the hallmark of political regimes
in our subregion who, in plain sight of all, have
mastered the art of spreading this widespread curse of
small arms and those who use them — professional or
apprentice, large or small — whom we call
24
S/PV.4720
mercenaries. We know these regimes. The international
community often points a finger at them. The supreme
irony of it all is that we are the ones who sometimes
come to the defense of such regimes.
West Africa also calls for United Nations
inspectors and international fact-finding commissions
that will be able to prove without any shadow of doubt
the bloody crimes of some political regimes in the
subregion so that those regimes can be ostracized from
the community of civilized and peaceful nations and
disarmed or neutralized, one way or another. There lies
the only legitimate debate today for the millions of
displaced persons, children crippled by shameful mines
and inconsolable weeping mothers from countries that
have been abruptly overwhelmed by rebellions that
destroy our already fragile futures.
While commending warmly my friend and bother
François Fall, I would like to emphasize several other
measures that my delegation believes should be taken
and that the international community should initiate or
support so as to stop once and for all the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons and mercenary
operations.
First, there is a need to strengthen and strictly
apply all instruments concerning the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons and mercenary activities
and to review the Organization of African Unity
Convention on mercenaries, given the new
manifestations of this scourge and its links to terrorism.
There should also be a mechanism to identify and trace
the illegal flows of small arms and light weapons.
Secondly, there is a need for transparency in
commercial and brokerage activities linked to arms; a
ban on centres for training specialized mercenaries in
subversive activities, who are discretely called “private
military companies”; measures to bring to justice
mercenaries involved in criminal activities related to
terrorism and to extradite them, in keeping with
domestic law and international instruments.
Thirdly, there is a need to promote programmes
for the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of former combatants, who might be tempted to engage
in mercenary activities.
Fourthly, monitoring the transfer of small arms
between States that produce and those that purchase
them should be strengthened, in particular by using a
twin tracking and marking system.
Fifthly, a special United Nations mechanism
should be established to control inspections for West
Africa, complemented by the creation of international
commissions of inquiry, certain of whose conclusions
could be submitted to the International Criminal Court.
Senegal would particularly like to hear the opinion of
members of our forum, especially our development
partners on the Security Council.
In conclusion, real progress still must be made if
we wish to extract our subregion from the quagmire of
the dual ills of the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons and mercenary activities. Let us hasten to act,
rather than always react, so that the shadowy network,
which shamelessly brings together unscrupulous arms
merchants and blood-stained mercenaries allied with
some of our leaders, will dissolved once and for all and
so, that West Africa, reconciled with itself, finds again
the virtuous path to peace and prosperity.
On this hopeful note, Mr. President I congratulate
you again on choosing this a critical topic. I wish you
success in your presidency, with so many pressing
items on the Security Council’s agenda this month.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Senegal for his warm
and fraternal words, the encouragement he has given
my country and the constructive proposals that he has
made.
Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): We
want to welcome you back to the Security Council, Mr.
President, and to thank you for bringing the issue of the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and the
use of mercenaries to the Security Council today. We
think that this is a very important initiative on the part
of your country.
We are also pleased to welcome your minister
colleagues from the African continent who have joined
this meeting today, as well as the representative of the
Programme for Cooperation and Assistance for
Security and Development (PCASED), the executive
secretariat of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the representative of the
African Union.
I would also like to thank your delegation for
drafting the non-paper on the subject of our meeting
today, which informs our current discussion. The illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons contributes to
violence and suffering around the world, but the
25
S/PV.4720
situation in West Africa is particularly grave. The
catalogue of conflict in the region is long, and
regrettably the indiscriminate traffic in small arms and
the use of mercenaries only exacerbates the situation.
To help stem the tide of violence, in October
1998 ECOWAS declared a moratorium on the
importation, exportation and manufacture of light
weapons. The international community, including the
United States, praised ECOWAS in 1998 for this
landmark effort. The Moratorium called for the
creation of individual national commissions to be the
focal points for the implementation of measures at the
State level.
Since that year, little progress has been made. It
is disappointing that some States have not developed
functional national commissions. Despite the 1998
Moratorium, West African societies remain awash with
small arms and light weapons. Now is the time to
complete this effort and move from political
declaration to full practical implementation.
We continue to support all signatories to the
ECOWAS Moratorium in their commitment, renewed
in 2001, to carry out its mandate. It is crucial that
ECOWAS members themselves take the necessary
steps to effectively enforce their own Moratorium on
the import, export and manufacture of small arms and
light weapons by fully establishing functional national
commissions and implementing the Code of Conduct at
the State level.
As my colleague Richard Williamson said in the
October meeting on small arms and light weapons, the
United States believes that solutions to the problem of
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons must be
practical and effective. The most effective ways of
preventing small and light weapons from getting into
the hands of those who will misuse them are
implementing and enforcing strict export and import
controls and strong arms-brokering laws, ensuring the
security of national small arms and light weapons
stockpiles, and destroying excess weapons.
Additionally, we must address the combatants
themselves, not just the weapons they wield. The
critical process of reintegration as a component of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
offers hope for soldiers who have known only violence
and destruction. In Sierra Leone, 48,000 weapons have
been turned in since the end of the conflict there.
Former rebels have been brought into camps
where they have been given tools to begin the process
of reintegration into society. Rebels have been given
monetary payments that correspond to their ranks and
were provided training to assist them in finding and
obtaining jobs.
The international community, including
individual States, such as Sweden, Norway, the United
Kingdom, Belgium, Canada and France, has
contributed generously to the implementation of the
ECOWAS Moratorium and to the rebuilding of
societies.
The United States has recently undertaken
bilateral projects with Senegal and Guinea to destroy
tens of thousands of excess small arms and light
weapons. We have provided training and
communications equipment to Guinea and Sierra Leone
to assist them in controlling their borders with Liberia.
We have also funded aerial surveillance to monitor
illicit trafficking in the Mano River border region. We
have funded a joint training programme to instruct
Nigerian law enforcement officials on tracing and
interdicting illicit small arms. The United States
remains committed in its support for both the Security
Council embargoes in the West African region and the
ECOWAS Moratorium.
My delegation urges ECOWAS member States to
establish effective national commissions and to
implement the Code of Conduct for the Moratorium, as
mandated in 1998 and 1999. I also urge ECOWAS
member States and those States that supply illicit small
arms to comply with two pertinent paragraphs in the
United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, adopted in July
2001.
Paragraph 12 of the Programme recalls,
“the obligations of States to fully comply with
arms embargoes decided by the United Nations
Security Council in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations.” (A/CONF.192/15,
article 12)
Paragraph 13 declares that States believe,
“that Governments bear the primary
responsibility for preventing, combating and
eradicating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects and, accordingly,
26
S/PV.4720
should intensify their efforts to define the
problems associated with such trade and find
ways of resolving them.” (article 13)
As we all approach the 2003 biennial review
meeting that will be held here in New York in July, my
delegation strongly urges all Governments to provide
national reporting on efforts taken to implement the
United Nations Programme of Action for Small Arms
and Light Weapons to the United Nations Department
for Disarmament Affairs. It is only through full, candid
reporting by States in affected regions that the
international community can take stock of progress
made or lack thereof in implementing the United
Nations Programme of Action and properly assess
priorities for international action on small arms and
light weapons in the future.
The United States is aware of the tragic history of
the conflict in West Africa. We are ready and
committed to work with all Security Council members
and ECOWAS member States to find practical and
effective ways to curb the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons and the use of mercenaries that are
threatening peace and security in West Africa.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Permanent Representative of the United States for his
kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Pleuger (Germany): I would like to thank
you at the outset, Mr. President, for scheduling this
open debate on small arms and mercenaries in West
Africa. The world holds its breath in view of the
imminent danger of a major military confrontation in
the Middle East with potential global consequences
that no one can foresee. But we feel that it is equally
important not to forget that there are conflicts in other
parts of the world, involving not weapons of mass
destruction but small arms, not highly trained,
specialized soldiers but mercenaries and child soldiers,
which nonetheless cause tremendous human plight,
misery and death.
It is not easy to add to the list of important and
useful thoughts that have already been put forward in
this room today. However, I would like to stress a
number of points that, from the viewpoint of the
German Government, are particularly important and
relevant.
First, it would not suffice to try to cure only the
symptoms. In other words, we need to focus on the root
causes of armed conflict that incite demand for the
import of weapons and invite trafficking with them.
Furthermore, we need to raise awareness of the
mechanism that makes conflicts of interest turn into
armed violence. Thirdly, we must ensure that small
arms and light weapons get into the hands only of
Government authorities and that they are firmly kept
there. In this context, the trade in weapons and their
further whereabouts need to be made much more
transparent, and those having acquired them need to be
held accountable for their further use.
With the Bamako Declaration and the Programme
of Action of the Conference on Small Arms held in
July 2001, important guidelines have been supplied
with regard to the measures I have just cited. We need
action, determination and, above all, a firm conviction
among the parties involved of the need to implement
the measures necessary to limit and eventually to stop
the flow of illicit small arms and light weapons.
The Governments of the countries affected by
armed conflict have a responsibility to adhere to certain
standards of good governance, order and discipline.
Governments have to show leadership that their
populations can follow. The populations are
encouraged to do their share in promoting peace and
security. There are encouraging examples of grassroots
movements taking their fate in their own hands and
trying to come to terms with the problems of the
reckless and irresponsible use of small arms and light
weapons. In this context, I would like to warmly
commend the work done by the women of the Mano
River Union. We need more of that to happen. The
declaration and prolongation of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) import
Moratorium on small arms and light weapons is an
encouraging example of a regional initiative in a region
that is most seriously affected by civil wars and armed
conflicts. It is most welcome as a step to reduce import
demand and to control legitimate imports in order to
prevent illegal imports.
On the other hand, donor countries are called
upon to support efforts made in West Africa to come to
terms with the use of small arms and battling
mercenaries. This can be done in many different ways.
The focus of aid work should be on capacity building,
for instance in the area of setting up national
disarmament commissions, training trainers and
providing know-how in different ways. Mercenaries
need to have a realistic alternative for creating a decent
27
S/PV.4720
life. I would also like to mention the concept of arms
for development, that is, the surrender of weapons in
exchange for aid to the communities of those giving up
their weapons. Policies have to be elaborated in such a
way that the whole community will benefit from the
readiness of armed persons to rid themselves of their
weapons, not for the sake of personal profit but in
order to benefit their own community as a whole. In
this context, I would like to mention the Group of
Interested States in Practical Disarmament Measures,
which, under German chairmanship has coordinated a
number of hands-on projects relating to the problems
stemming from the surplus of small arms in West
Africa.
Arms producing countries need to play by the
rules regarding weapons transfers. Germany is in full
support of the ECOWAS Moratorium and respects it, in
line with European Union decisions and its political
principles on the export of military equipment. We
advocate strict adherence to export criteria for
weapons. Not fuelling the conflict with the delivery of
weapons and ensuring that legal weapons arrive at the
legitimate certified end-user, in line with the
exchanged information, are key elements of such
criteria which we would like to see more widely
accepted.
Last but not least, I wish to mention one piece of
the disarmament puzzle which too often is overlooked
or considered a soft issue: disarmament education,
especially with regard to the recruitment of child
soldiers. Disarmament starts at a very early age.
Children need to learn that conflicts are not to be
resolved through violence, but rather through
intelligent bargaining. Children need to learn that the
strength gained through the possession of a weapon
does not help find lasting solutions. There are
commendable efforts being made to develop such
educational programmes, which also include West
Africa. The work of The Hague Appeal for Peace,
operating together with the United Nations Foundation
and the Secretariat Department for Disarmament
Affairs, is just one example. I appeal to the donor
community to give more attention to these efforts.
Let me close by expressing my sincere hope that,
for one of the regions of Africa most severely plagued
by armed conflict, sustainable solutions will be found
to bring a basic degree of stability to its peoples, and
that this debate will give new impulses towards that
goal.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Germany for his kind words.
The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m.

United Nations S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
Security Council
Fifty-eighth year
4720th meeting
Tuesday, 18 March 2003, 3 p.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.
03-28492 (E)
*0328492*
President: Mr. Fall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Guinea)
Members: Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Gaspar Martins
Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Tafrov
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Belinga-Eboutou
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Valdés
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wang Yingfan
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. De La Sablière
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Schumacher
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Pujalte
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Akram
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Jiménez de la Hoz
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wehbe
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . Ms. Howe-Jones
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Negroponte
Agenda
Proliferation of small arms and light weapons and mercenary activities: threats to
peace and security in West Africa
2
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
The meeting was resumed at 3.15 p.m.
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Côte d’Ivoire, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In accordance with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Djangoni-
Bi (Côte d’Ivoire) took a seat reserved for him at
the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): Before opening
the floor to speakers, I wish to remind all participants
that they must limit their statements to no more than
seven minutes in order to enable the Council to work
efficiently within its timetable. I thank you for your
understanding and cooperation.
The first speaker on my list this afternoon is His
Excellency Mr. Roland Y. Kpotsra, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Togo, whom I invite to take a seat at
the Council table.
Mr. Minister, I would like to extend to you my
country’s condolences and those of other Council
members upon the death of our brother, Koffi Panou,
and we would like to extend these condolences to your
country and to the family of our beloved brother.
I now invite you to make your statement.
Mr. Kpotsra (Togo)(spoke in French): Mr.
President, first and foremost, I wish to welcome your
assumption of the presidency of this prestigious United
Nations body during this particularly sensitive time
when the world is wavering between peace and war. It
is a sensitive period, because of tensions, conflicts and
threats of war prevailing all over that are continuing or
will not fail to cause many victims and destruction.
Sir, my delegation is convinced that this sad state
of affairs in the world can only reinforce your
commitment to the search and the strengthening of
international peace and security.
In addressing these warm congratulations to you,
my delegation would like to assure you that we have
great confidence in your eminent qualities as a skilled
diplomat to successfully conduct the Council’s
proceedings during this month when all are looking at
the Council.
Mr. President, by including on the Council’s
agenda the question entitled “Proliferation of small
arms and light weapons and mercenary activities:
threats to peace and security in West Africa”, your
country, Guinea, is once again demonstrating its
unswerving devotion to peace, security, friendship and
the policy of good-neighbourliness. Our Government
welcomes this fortunate initiative, which again
provides an opportunity to the international community
to assess the crises in the subregion and to determine in
the light of the assessment that it makes the best ways
and means to provide West Africa with the political
stability and security that it so much wishes, with a
view to ensuring that the integration policy can
flourish.
Before going any further, I should like to bring
your attention to an excerpt from a speech delivered on
Friday, 7 March, by the President of the Togolese
Republic, His Excellency Mr. Gnassingbé Eyadema, in
the presence of His Excellency John Kufuor, President
of Ghana, the current President of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), at the
opening of the Third ECOWAS Trade Fair:
“By creating ECOWAS, we sought an ideal
to become fact: to build a vast common market
for harmonious trade and development in a space
of peace and security. We rightly think that the
peoples and nations of West Africa are as capable
of taking their own fate in their hands, to succeed
in integrating their economies and to work
together to ensure their prosperity, as have the
peoples in Europe, America and Asia. We are
aware that no development effort is possible
without peace and security. Hence, we have
decided to give pride of place to dialogue,
working together and preventive diplomacy to
avoid having conflicts distract us from economic
progress.
“We have also come to understand that
ensuring the free movement of people and
goods — which is an essential component of
economic integration — peace and security must
be guaranteed to all member States of the
Community.
3
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
“Unfortunately, like other parts of the
continent, our subregion continues to be at the
mercy of fratricidal conflicts that threaten
development efforts and subregional integration.
“Day after day, the climate of insecurity —
which began in December 1989 with the Liberian
war — is spreading like wildfire. As if part of
some domino effect, since 19 September 2002,
Côte d’Ivoire too has been beset by civil war.
“That succession of armed conflicts is
simply the direct result of the free movement of
light weapons and of the recruitment of
unemployed young people who are trained in
ECOWAS member States to attack other member
States. If we want such wars to stop, we must do
our utmost to fully implement the Protocol on
Non-Aggression we signed at Lagos on 22 April
1978, precisely to ensure that the territory of a
member State cannot be used for the recruitment,
training or arming of assailants who would attack
another member State.
“Only strict respect for the Protocol will
make it possible for our subregion to avoid the
fratricidal wars that lead to the loss of many
human lives, destroy property, maim people,
drive millions of men, women and children into
homeless exile and delay economic development
and prosperity in our States.”
That statement by Togo’s Head of State conveys
the steadfast nature of our country’s foreign policy,
which seeks to make peace, security and political
stability the fundamental goals of its diplomacy. It is
for that reason that Togo is working tirelessly to find a
peaceful resolution to conflicts and to establish
peaceful and good-neighbourly relations of cooperation
with our immediate neighbours and with other
countries. That Togolese presidential statement also
demonstrates Togo’s commitment to contribute as
much as it can to ensuring that West Africa becomes a
region of peace and an area that promotes economic
integration throughout our continent of Africa.
The item on our agenda illustrates the fragility
and precariousness of West Africa, particularly as a
result of the conflicts in the Mano River region and the
civil war in Côte d’Ivoire. With the conflicts in Liberia
and Sierra Leone, our region has been moving for over
a decade towards a state of instability marked by the
length of those conflicts and by the scope of their
humanitarian, economic and social consequences.
The end of the war in Sierra Leone led us to
believe that there would be a climate of peace; but then
Côte d’Ivoire plunged into turmoil. How could one
explain that progressive extension of war from State to
State in our subregion? Looking at the situation, one
could say that the ease with which armed insurrection
and war take place so easily in West Africa is due to
the proliferation and circulation of small arms and light
weapons and to the ease with which those who provoke
such conflicts are able to find the necessary local and
foreign human resources willing and able to undertake
destabilizing actions, aggression and war.
However, that state of affairs can also be
explained by the inconclusive results of two essential
phases of the consolidation of peace. The first phase is
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
combatants in order to strengthen peace; the second is
the implementation of economic and social measures
conducive to reconstruction and to reducing social
injustice.
As the Council will recall in that regard, many
measures were put forth to strengthen peace after the
tragic conflicts in Liberia and Sierra Leone.
Unfortunately, they did not meet expectations. The
pledges of financial contributions to bring about the
effective and seamless disarmament, demobilization
the reintegration of former combatants and the
reconstruction of economic and social infrastructure
have generally not been honoured. It is therefore
important to acknowledge that policies to re-establish
peace have had very limited success, thereby
promoting the proliferation and circulation of light
weapons and the resurgence of mercenary activity. That
activity has often occurred because former combatants
and child soldiers are prepared to provide their services
and expertise whenever conflict erupts or when there
are uprisings against constitutionally established
regimes.
Given the dangerous situation that has emerged as
a result of the proliferation of light weapons, on
31 December 1998, the heads of State and Government
of ECOWAS adopted a Moratorium on the Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Light Weapons in
West Africa for a renewable period of three years. That
was followed by the establishment of the Programme
for Coordination and Assistance for Security and
4
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
Development (PCASD) in March 1999 as a body to
support the Moratorium. Progress has been made in the
implementation of those two mechanisms, namely,
through the setting up of national commissions to
combat the proliferation and illicit traffic in small arms
and light weapons, the training of armed and security
forces and the collection and destruction of light
weapons. All of that justifies the importance and utility
of such bodies to our countries.
The essential goals of those mechanisms require
that the international community further strengthen and
make more effective its support through appropriate
financial assistance that makes it possible for the
mechanisms to better carry out their missions to deal
with the problems caused by the flow of these
weapons. The porous nature of borders makes it
possible for such weapons to, among other things,
nurture banditry, insecurity and cross-border crime.
Similarly, the international community must provide
considerable assistance to our States so that we can
work to implement the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,
which was adopted by the United Nations Conference
on the subject that was held in July 2001. A review of
that Programme will take place in a few months.
Togo is a party to the Organization of African
Unity’s Convention for the Elimination of Mercenarism
in Africa, which was adopted on 3 July 1977 at
Libreville. We are also a party to the International
Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing
and Training of Mercenaries, which was adopted under
the aegis of the United Nations on 4 December 1989.
We are therefore very concerned about the use of
mercenaries in the current conflict in West Africa. We
vigorously condemn the use of mercenaries in
conflicts, and urge countries and others involved in
providing the services of mercenaries to end their
activities for the sake of peace, security, friendly
relations, brotherhood and cooperation among our
countries. At the international level, the United Nations
Convention against Mercenarism should be further
implemented and adapted to deal with new pernicious
forms of mercenarism today.
We are fully aware of the fact that the major
objectives of ECOWAS cannot be achieved without
first establishing lasting peace, security and
harmonious understanding between our member States.
Accordingly, Togo continues to attach special
importance to the Protocol on Non-Aggression signed
at Lagos on 22 April 1978, the scrupulous adherence to
which will spare West Africa from the challenges
posed by the wars it is experiencing.
In accordance with the purposes and principles of
the United Nations, the provisions of the Protocol
stipulate that member States must refrain from
threatening or using force against the territorial
integrity and political independence of other member
States. It also forbids States from committing,
encouraging or supporting any acts of subversion,
hostility or aggression against other member States.
States must also prevent such damaging acts on the part
of resident foreigners or non-resident aliens who are
using their territory as a base for operations. The
Council will agree with my delegation that the Protocol
provides a basis for healthy political cooperation
among ECOWAS States in order to decisively prohibit
any actions that may impair their sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity.
We are convinced of the relevance and positive
nature of the Protocol. My country would therefore like
to reiterate what President Eyadema said at a recent
CENSAD summit held in Niamey by the members of
the Community of Sahel and Saharan States. He stated
that every member State must fully respect and
implement the letter and spirit of the Protocol, as the
economic integration that will promote the prosperity
and happiness of the people of West Africa depends
upon it.
It is a fact that the proliferation and illicit
circulation of light weapons and the use of mercenaries
in West Africa poses a serious threat to international
peace and security. Our States must act to further pool
their efforts to eliminate these factors of political
instability that are also capable of destroying economic
and social infrastructure. Particular attention should
also be given to the traffic carried out by independent
intermediaries who facilitate the illicit trade in light
weapons between manufacturers and armed groups.
That must by achieved by strengthening national
legislation in this area and by increasing cooperation
between States in the field of border control.
Lasting peace and security, which our countries
wish so much to see and for which they are actively
working to lay the foundations, cannot be established
unless the international community makes a genuine
and determined commitment, through assistance that is
5
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
more sustained and is commensurate with our goals in
the implementation of policies for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants
and the financing of peace-building processes.
There is also a need for relevant and rigorous
measures to prevent the recruitment of mercenaries
from the usual countries of origin and for the countries
that produce and export weapons, particularly certain
members of the former Warsaw Pact, to commit to a
true ban on the illicit export of weapons to African
countries in general, and ECOWAS States in particular.
This is the only way that the States of ECOWAS can
hope to stem the proliferation of and illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons and counter mercenary
activities, in order to preserve the peace and security
that are so dear to each of our nations, and to assure the
harmonious development of countries of the subregion.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Togo
for his kind words addressed to me and my country.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are very glad to see you, Sir, preside over
the Council. We thank you for convening today’s
meeting and welcome in this Chamber the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs from the Economic Community of
West African States.
Today’s meeting is further proof of the great
interest that the international community and the
Security Council have shown in cooperating to resolve
the complex problems of maintaining and restoring
international peace and security on the African
continent. It is proof of our common aspiration to work
out effective strategies to combat the scourge of the
illicit proliferation of small arms and light weapons
and mercenary activities.
Russia firmly condemns mercenary activities and
has consistently supported international efforts to
eradicate this criminal phenomenon. Such services
have become particularly in demand in the recent
decades, during which armed mercenaries have been
used in the struggle against legitimate Governments
that had freed themselves from colonial dependence on
certain States. Everyone is aware of the tragic
consequences of the involvement of mercenaries in
regional and national conflicts. We have become aware
of them from the tragic examples in Sierra Leone, Côte
d’Ivoire, Angola and other countries.
Mercenary activities are highly unethical and
illegal, according to the generally recognized principles
of international law. An important landmark in the
process of establishing universal approaches to
defining the illegal nature of this phenomenon was the
adoption of the first Protocol Additional to the Geneva
Conventions, which fleshed out the legal content of the
concept of a mercenary. The entry into force in 2001 of
the International Convention against the Recruitment,
Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries has
significantly expanded the means available to combat
this scourge.
Without a doubt, the establishment of effective
mechanisms to counter mercenary activities requires a
corresponding measure of political will in order to
consistently carry out international standards in
national legal systems. Current Russian law includes
special norms that carry criminal penalties not only for
direct involvement of mercenaries in armed conflict,
but also for activities for their recruitment, training,
financing and other logistical support.
Recently within the United Nations there has
been substantially heightened interest in the problem of
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and its
impact on regional security. Of great significance in
this regard were the 2001 Conference and the
Programme of Action adopted at it. This summer there
will be the first biennial review conference on the
implementation of the Programme, which undoubtedly
will facilitate the further resolution of pressing
problems connected with the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons in all its aspects.
Many practical questions related to the supply of
small arms and light weapons, including brokerage,
end-user certificates and others, will be discussed
during the meeting of the group of governmental
experts to be convened by the Secretary-General. We
believe that the Security Council should focus its
attention on instances in which the illegal trade in
small arms and light weapons is directly related to
conflict situations in Africa that are on its agenda.
The Russian Federation has consistently called
for tough measures in cases in which weapons are
supplied by illegal armed groups. We believe the
Security Council is justified in imposing an embargo
on arms shipments in conflict regions. This certainly
will have a positive impact, and the examples of Sierra
6
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
Leone, Angola and other crisis situations have
convinced us of this.
During the past years we have managed to fine-
tune the oversight mechanism for monitoring the
Council’s weapons embargoes. This has been made
very clear by the regular reports of the chairpersons of
the relevant sanctions committees. Of course, much
remains to be done, particularly to enhance the
effectiveness of monitoring of the investigation of the
facts of embargo violations.
We consider it justified that in the context of
carrying out peacekeeping operations under United
Nations auspices, the peace agreements between the
parties should include specific provisions for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants. It is also essential to endeavour to
include in the mandate of such operations adequate
resources to collect and destroy illegal small arms and
light weapons used in conflicts. It is important to help
countries of the West African region to implement
measures to monitor and combat the illicit trafficking
in small arms and light weapons.
Of great significance is developing practical
measures to combat the illegal shipments of small arms
and light weapons at the preventive stage and in the
post-conflict phase of settlement. Regional
organizations have a solid body of useful experience,
including in Africa. We believe that the measures
proposed within the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) — such the establishment of
an information-exchange mechanism in the area of
small arms and light weapons, the introduction of a
regional register that would provide data on the
national stocks of such weapons in the ECOWAS
countries and other practical steps — deserve to be
approved and supported.
It is also necessary to take steps to improve
domestic legislation to stop small arms and light
weapons from falling into the illicit trade system.
Above all in countries in which such legislation is
lacking, steps must be taken to upgrade and codify a
national system of export controls and to establish a
broad-based exchange of information between States
regarding existing legislation and practical experience
in this area.
We hope that today’s meeting under your
presidency, Sir, will allow us to move forward on all
these issues.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of the Russian Federation for his kind
words addressed to me.
Mr. Pujalte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
country is very pleased that you, Sir, are presiding over
the Security Council today. We consider you to be a
great friend of Mexico. We hope with all our heart that
this workshop will be a success and that its conclusions
will promote discussion in the Council on the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons, links
with mercenaries and the threats they represent to
peace and security in West Africa.
We have listened very closely to the opinions and
proposals put forward by Secretary-General Kofi
Annan, the Interim Commissioner of the African
Union, the Executive Secretary of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
representative of the Chairman of ECOWAS, the
representative of the Programme for Coordination and
Assistance for Security and Development, and
ministers of West Africa on this situation. It cuts across
all borders, because small arms and light weapons and
their connection to the use of mercenaries exist in other
conflict regions.
Mexico attaches great importance to the follow-
up and full implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Combat, Prevent and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, adopted in 2001, as well as
the proper coordination of activities among the
Security Council, including the design of mandates for
peacekeeping operations; the other organs and
programmes of the United Nations; and regional bodies
and agreements with specific mandates to combat the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.
Members of the Council periodically examine
developments in the situation in Guinea-Bissau, Sierra
Leone, Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire. One of the greatest
causes for concern in our discussions has been the
excessive accumulation of small arms and light
weapons and their destabilizing effect on the region of
West Africa, in particular on the countries of the Mano
River Union.
We note that the illicit flows of those weapons
have not been stopped, despite the arms embargoes
imposed by the Security Council. We therefore call
once again on all countries, particularly those countries
that export arms, to comply fully with the relevant
7
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
resolutions of the Security Council. Similarly, we
support accompanying all legal transfers of arms with
end-user certificates as an effective tool for combating
the diversion of, and illicit trade in, small arms and
light weapons.
We encourage the States of West Africa to carry
out the necessary steps for full compliance with the
Moratorium agreed in 1998 on the importation of this
category of arms. Those efforts, as well as compliance
with the commitments entered into under the United
Nations Programme of Action, will lead to a reduction
in the amount of arms available to use by mercenaries.
The recruitment, financing, training and use of
mercenaries are a cause of concern to the international
community because of their responsibility for
violations of human rights and the provisions of
international humanitarian law, and due to their links to
the illicit trade in arms and diamonds and other
criminal activities in which they are involved.
Mexico is committed to combating the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons and has
demonstrated its concern for that trade’s links with
transnational organized crime, the illicit traffic of drugs
and international terrorism, as well as its negative
impact on democracy and the development of
countries. In that context, Mexico promoted the
adoption of the Inter-American Convention against the
Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Munitions, Explosives and Other Related Materials and
was an active participant in the negotiations on the
United Nations Programme of Action and on the
complementary protocol of the Convention Against
Transnational Organized Crime, prepared in Vienna.
Mexico is particularly concerned that the
presence of mercenaries has been detected in the
conflicts in Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire because those
activities not only contribute to the internal
destabilization of those two countries but also
constitute a risk for the stability and security of Sierra
Leone, Guinea and other countries of the subregion.
They also impede the access of humanitarian
organizations and agencies to the areas where refugees
and internally displaced persons are located.
We therefore reiterate the call made by the
Security Council in the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2002/36) of 13 November 2002 on the
situation in Liberia, for States in the region to prevent
armed individuals from using their national territory to
prepare and launch attacks on neighbouring countries.
We also support the efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
African Union and the United Nations to put an end to
the practice of the use of mercenaries, including child
soldiers, in conflicts in West Africa.
I would like to mention the following suggestions
to prevent, combat and eradicate the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons and the use of
mercenaries in this region of the African continent.
The lessons learned in the disarmament process in
Sierra Leone should be taken into account in order to
carry out similar actions in Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire.
The collection and destruction of surplus arms should
be an integral part of peace agreements in the
subregion. The supervision of disarmament and
destruction activities by regional organizations and the
United Nations will provide a guarantee for preventing
excessive accumulations and the destabilizing effects
of these weapons.
The international community must continue to
support programmes for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants in
Sierra Leone, as the lack of financial resources has
meant that a significant number of young people move
to conflict zones in the region where they can obtain an
income by taking up arms. The Security Council must
support the use of programmes of that type in Liberia
and Côte d’Ivoire.
The countries of West Africa must strengthen
mechanisms for political consultation in order to deal
with the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
and the phenomenon of mercenaries. The forums
provided by ECOWAS, the Mano River Union and the
Rabat Process must be used fully to benefit security,
safety, stability and peace in the subregion.
The Security Council must take into account the
regional context of the conflicts in Liberia and Côte
d’Ivoire and promote mechanisms of coordination and
cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations in the search for peaceful solutions to
these crisis situations.
Finally, allow me to express Mexico’s
appreciation to the delegation of Guinea for preparing
and leading negotiations on the annex to the draft
resolution to be adopted at the end of this meeting.
8
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Mexico for his kind words addressed
to me and for his suggestion.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is His
Excellency Mr. Pierre Osho, Minister of State for
Defence of Benin. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Osho (Benin) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to associate myself with preceding speakers
in extending my sincere and enthusiastic
congratulations to our brother, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Guinea, who has the honour of presiding
over this meeting of the Security Council during this
delicate month of March 2003. This is especially so in
light of the burning acuteness of the present
international political situation, which, as everyone
knows, is almost completely polarized with respect to
the Iraqi crisis. To note the speech given a few hours
ago, the holding of a workshop such as this ran the risk
of seeming a non-event. But, very fortunately, that is
not the case when you consider the number and the
stature of the participants, in particular, the effective
presence of Secretary-General Kofi Annan at this
meeting’s opening. I would also like to warmly
welcome the positive inspiration of the Guinean
Minister for Foreign Affairs — the President of the
Security Council — to inscribe for reflection by this
United Nations body this matter of concern for West
African States — the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons and the use of mercenaries.
Regarding the topic submitted to us for our
individual and collective reflection, and speaking after
a series of speakers, there are not too many new things
for me to say. The essential things have been said,
particularly by the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs
of Senegal, whose approach and conclusions, the
relevance of his ideas, as well as the relevant statement
of the honourable representative of the United
Kingdom, I would like to publicly support.
Benin believes that we must stop making
speeches on the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons. Rather, we must look to specific and
effective actions. In that context, Benin believes that
we must act upon the source and the fundamental
reasons for two scourges — the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons and the use of mercenaries.
Our specific proposals in that regard are the following.
We must establish an international convention
that strictly limits the purchase of light weapons of war
only to States and national armies, aiming particularly
at the ability to trace weapons and at supplying them
through official channels.
Secondly, we must put in place at the
international level provisions related to the dismantling
of bodies, firms and international networks that sell
weapons that do not have the agreed or official status
of an exporting State of these light weapons of war.
Benin draws the attention of all participants to the fact
that poor countries such as ours have neither the
technology nor the logistics to sell or manufacture, or
to organize the flows or the delivery of weapon
stockpiles. Therefore, countries that have this
technology and these logistics, both in terms of
manufacturing weapons and transporting, shipping and
delivering them, are, clearly, fully responsible in this
regard.
Thirdly, we must put in place a United Nations
convention for the dismantling of companies and
agencies that specialize in so-called military-service-
providing activities, which are nothing more than
official mercenary companies, militias or private
armies. These companies exist and are flourishing in
the northern countries. In some southern countries,
these companies have set up shop and have begun
recruitment through legally placed advertisements.
Why is that the case? Because today we increasingly
are seeing actions recognizing these companies as
providers of government protective services and
protective services for official institutions, while in
reality, these companies that provide lethal and
destabilizing services are nothing but mercenary
organizations.
Therefore, we must admit that henceforth our
assessment of the question of the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons and of the use of mercenaries
must clearly integrate the empowerment of States,
holding them responsible, including groups of
nationals, where groups of nationals have been
identified as mercenaries. It will no longer suffice to
invoke the personal freedom of individuals who have
made the choice to engage in an activity, even if that
activity is marginal, illegal or illicit. They will not be
able to sidestep their responsibility with respect to the
State. We will have to admit that individuals,
recognized as mercenaries from a particular country,
engage, at the same time, the responsibility of States
9
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
that have not been able to gain control over their
institutions and nationals in illicit activities carried out
abroad.
The fourth proposal is that the Security Council
should put in place a working group that would design,
organize and carry out a media counter-campaign at the
international level, against the campaign that we have
seen for a while now, a campaign which tends to extol
or preach the decriminalization of mercenary activities.
We read increasingly in the press — as I did on my
way to New York yesterday — specialized articles to
the effect that, given their weakness and their lack of
money, poor countries are not able to organize their
own security and that, as a result, it is legitimate that
those States have recourse to certain services and
agencies that specialize in security matters. Those
companies, however, are the same ones that are the
service providers for political groups that organize the
destabilization of legal institutions within States.
My fifth proposal — and it is of a general
nature — is to act upon the source of these two
scourges. Acting upon the source means that it should
be understood that the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons and the use of mercenaries have as
fertile ground misery, poverty, the lack of a political
system and institutional democracy, the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons and endemic
underdevelopment that persists in most of the southern
countries and in the subregion I come from.
As a result, the global problem of development
assistance once again emerges. And, in the search for
effective solutions to that problem, there is the problem
of assistance to the armies and national police forces of
underdeveloped countries. Today, cooperation
agreements that have been concluded, whether at the
bilateral or the multilateral level, generally and
systematically exclude the police and the army from
their aims, on the pretext that those are institutions of
State sovereignty and that cooperation is limited to
economic, technical and financial aspects, among other
things.
But how can we create conditions enabling a
national army to control the situation within a
country’s borders, to confront aggression and to protect
State institutions, if that army itself is not a well-
equipped army, a trained army, an army that does not
function with respect for the constitution and for State
institutions? The same applies to the police and the
national police with regard to public security. As a
result, it is increasingly appropriate to consider very
seriously the issue of the equipping, arming and
technically training national armies and national police
forces so that they can become institutions that serve
the rule of law and, if the conditions are such, so that
we will naturally be able to lend enough help to the
countries in which the democratic process is
developing harmoniously, to assist the countries in
which we observe concrete and significant efforts
aimed at good governance. Because it is bad
governance — marginalization of a part of the
population, of the intelligentsia outside the political
sphere — that creates frustration. Once again, that is
fertile ground for the recruitment of mercenaries and of
those who wish to take up arms to bring about political
changes through violence and destabilization.
I shall conclude by expressing the hope that the
necessary support will be provided to ECOWAS to
enable it to complete the follow-up of the
implementation of the Moratorium and all other
oversight activities of the national commissions to
combat the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Minister of State for Defence of Benin for the kind
words he addressed to me and for his timely proposals.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is His
Excellency Mr. Jean de Dieu Somda, Minister for
Regional Cooperation of Burkina Faso. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Somda (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I should like to express to you, Sir, our
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of March and on
the admirable way in which you are carrying out your
heavy responsibilities, especially during this period of
difficult deliberations in which the future of the world
is at stake. To those congratulations, the delegation of
Burkina Faso would like to add its thanks for your
excellent initiative to organize this workshop on a
subject of great urgency for Africa and, more
particularly, for our subregion.
Over the past few years, the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons has provoked and exacerbated
a number of armed conflicts throughout the world. That
situation has caused human insecurity that is
10
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
unprecedented in our history, with particularly grave
consequences for women and children, the most
vulnerable members of society.
By holding the largest conference ever on the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in New
York in July 2001, the United Nations expressed a
universal concern over the threat that this scourge
poses to international peace and security. The outcome
of that conference certainly did not fully meet the
expectations of countries affected by the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons, but it did enable the
participating countries to establish an action plan. We
must follow up those efforts with other initiatives
aimed at ensuring the effective implementation of the
action plan.
In that connection, Burkina Faso welcomes the
forthcoming first biannual meeting to follow up the
conference of July 2001, which will enable us to
measure the progress achieved. As we await the
recommendations that will result, the current debate
should provide here and now an opportunity for the
Security Council to renew its support for the
worldwide process of combating the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons. Moreover, our subregion
expects that the Council will support the initiatives
already under way in West Africa for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants.
A new phenomenon has just appeared in West
Africa: mercenarism. In fact, the recent crises that have
arisen in the subregion have exposed this phenomenon
and have shown that even Governments use them to
deal with internal rebellions or to neutralize crisis
situations. Mercenaries are a source of insecurity. They
are not strangers to the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons; quite to the contrary, they facilitate it
and are naturally active in creating a favourable
environment for it.
By devoting today’s debate to this issue, the
Security Council is once again reminding all of us of
our responsibilities and of the paramount need to
observe the spirit and the letter of the United Nations
Convention against mercenarism. It would be
appropriate to send a strong signal to those who recruit
and train mercenaries that they must put an end to that
practice without delay and must refrain from engaging
in it in the future.
Burkina Faso has always affirmed its wish for
freedom and peace within its borders and in all other
countries. But we must emphasize here that the armed
conflicts and rebellions that have erupted in certain
countries bordering Burkina Faso have naturally
promoted the circulation and trafficking of small arms
and light weapons from those zones into our country,
spawning a certain kind of cross-border criminality and
deepening insecurity for our country and for the entire
subregion.
Our country’s geographical position makes
controlling our borders difficult, which requires
effective cooperation with neighbouring countries to
try to eliminate that insecurity.
To curb this situation, which we are facing on a
daily basis and which is creating a certain insecurity
both nationally and subregionally, Burkina Faso has
taken an active part in the process that led to the
Moratorium on the Importation, Exportation and
Manufacture of Light Arms in West Africa. That
process was held on 1 November 1998 in Abuja
alongside the twenty-first session of the Conference of
Heads of State and Government of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). It is
within this framework of searching for solutions to the
problems of insecurity that Burkina Faso has given a
lot of attention nationally, subregionally and
internationally to all of the ongoing actions and
meetings that might effectively contribute to combating
the proliferation and illicit trade in small arms.
At the national level, a number of actions to
implement the multilateral agreements have been
implemented by the Government. First, in 1994, we
received a United Nations mission to assess the state of
trafficking of small arms in the Sahelo-Saharan zone.
This mission, subregional in nature, also went to Niger,
Côte d’Ivoire and Mali. Secondly, in 2001 our re-
reading of legislation on weapons and civilian
munitions in Burkina Faso was necessary as the best
means for combating all illegal actions in this area. It
meant a hardening up of all measures and sanctions
initially scheduled in prior texts. Thirdly, in April
2001, we established a national commission to combat
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons. And
fourthly, on 24 January 2001, we created a high
authority to oversee importation of weapons and their
use, which backstops the national commission’s action
to combat the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons with information that can be provided as to
the physical and geographical situation of those
weapons that are imported. To show its commitment to
11
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
fight against the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, Burkina Faso, in spite of its difficult
financial situation, accepted the headquarters of the
observation zone and follow-up group number two, the
region which takes in Mali, Niger, Côte d’Ivoire and
Burkina Faso. The chief of zone in Burkina Faso has
been there since 2001. The zone was formally set up in
October 2002.
At the subregional level, Burkina Faso has
actively participated in all meetings regarding the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons held in
the subregion, of which the most important meetings
were a conference on conflict prevention, disarmament
and development in West Africa, held at Bamako from
25 to 29 November 1996; a meeting of experts, held
from 8 to 13 March 1998 in Yamoussoukro on the
ECOWAS Mechanism and on transferred crime; a
workshop organized in Accra from 19 to 21 November
1999 on the establishment of a register and a data base
on small arms for ECOWAS member States; an Abuja
workshop, held from 24 to 30 September 2000 on
elaborating a programme to train the trainers of armed
forces and security in combating the proliferation of
small arms; a ministerial conference held in Bamako
from 25 November to 2 December 2000 to prepare the
international conference on the illicit trade in small
arms in all its aspects; and training courses having to
do with border control and weapons control, which was
organized by the United States Customs Service from
11 to 24 February 2001.
At the regional level, our country participated in a
meeting of the African Group and experts on the illicit
trafficking of firearms in Africa, held in Kampala from
10 to 12 January 2000, and a meeting of experts on
small arms, organized in Addis Ababa from 14 to 21
May 2000.
At the international level, Burkina Faso actively
participated in the development of three additional
protocols to the Vienna Convention by the special
United Nations committee in Vienna from 1999 to
2001, particularly the protocol on the illicit trafficking
of small arms, their elements and munitions. Burkina
Faso was also the first African country to ratify this
protocol.
We participated in the United Nations Conference
on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms in all Its Aspects,
held in New York from 9 to 21 July 2001.
In conclusion, I would like in particular to
emphasize that in all of these actions undertaken at the
national level, the financial effort was made to
participate in all meetings where the critical problem of
combating the proliferation, exportation, importation
and the illegal manufacture of small arms and light
weapons was debated. It proves that, if need be,
Burkina Faso has made a resolute commitment for 15
years now to combat this scourge by all possible
means.
My country remains convinced that the fight
against the proliferation of small arms cannot be
conducted only at the regional or subregional level, or
even only at the national level. The chances for success
reside solely in the cooperation and synergy of action
on the part of the entire international community. The
ECOWAS Moratorium shows the strong will of a
subregion to pool its potential to combat this scourge
that claims many victims each day in its civilian
populations. But we cannot succeed without the
logistic and financial support from our development
partners.
And so the Security Council, in a unique way, has
a critical role to play and should become involved in
helping to eradicate this phenomenon that undermines
the foundation of development — the basis of peace
and security.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Minister of Burkina Faso for his kind words addressed
to me.
Mr. De la Sablière (France) (spoke in French):
First of all, Sir, I would like to thank you for having
chosen to draw the Security Council’s attention to the
question of the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons and mercenary activities and to have
organized this workshop with the Ministers,
delegations, States of the subregion and representatives
of the African Union and the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS).
Since this morning, the debate has shown that
these two scourges are everywhere, but they have a
particular impact on West Africa, and they threaten
peace and security. They undermine economic
development, are at the heart of many excesses, and
contravene human rights. These two threats are most
often linked. Mercenaries and other armed groups
profit from easy access to illicit trafficking in small
arms in order to acquire large quantities of weapons at
12
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
often ridiculously low prices; and, therefore, they
maintain their ability to harm.
We also see in post-conflict situations, in the
context of fragile peace efforts, that if these
phenomena are not overcome in time, they remain an
ongoing impediment to strategies for peace,
demobilization and the reintegration of ex-combatants.
In fact, we have seen that mercenaries, once present in
a war economy based most often on the exploitation of
lucrative natural resources, such as diamonds, drugs or
other illicit trafficking, have no trouble at all in
recruiting their troops and in acquiring enough small
arms to continue their nefarious activity.
Another point that these two things have in
common is that they have a trans-border character. We
see the ground and air routes that are used by
traffickers of small arms that criss-cross the subregion
and the groups of mercenaries. These activities know
no boundaries. They use country X as a base for their
atrocities, and then they gradually export conflict and
war economy to the entire subregion.
I would first like to talk about mercenary
activities and then small arms and light weapons, since
they are related phenomena. For convenience’s sake, I
will distinguish between them in my statement.
Thousands of combatants, often completely out of
control, are traversing the conflict areas of the
subregion — from Liberia to Sierra Leone and
throughout Côte d’Ivoire. These are mercenaries
without borders who leave in their wake only
destruction, atrocities, theft, murder, rape and attacks
of all kinds, including those carried out in Sierra Leone
by so-called “short sleeves” and “long sleeves”. We
must therefore ask why this phenomenon occurs more
frequently in West Africa than it does elsewhere. I
would offer one explanation: the first civil war in
Liberia.
Combatants in that bloody conflict were never re-
integrated into society, or even disarmed. The
international community was not up to the task of its
responsibilities. A number of those combatants merely
reconstituted themselves into the conflict in Sierra
Leone, either as rebels of the Revolutionary Armed
Forces (RUF) or as part of the Civil Defence Force
(CDF) militia. As far as the RUF is concerned, they
undoubtedly received support from the Government of
Liberia, as the reports of the Groups of Experts on
Sierra Leone and Liberia have pointed out. The
Security Council reacted by imposing sanctions against
the Government of Liberia. Resolution 1343 (2001),
which was renewed as resolution 1408 (2002),
demanded that the Liberian authorities cut off all ties
with the RUF. That decision was necessary but
insufficient. Those mercenaries will not disappear,
despite the disappearance of the RUF as a rebel army.
Today it is mostly Liberian mercenaries — but
also mercenaries from Sierra Leone — who are
clashing in the western part of Côte d’Ivoire. That is an
inter-Liberian conflict, and not one between the people
of Côte d’Ivoire. Those mercenaries are impeding the
return to peace. Let us not forget that the ceasefire is
being respected in the rest of the country.
The international community must take action in
the face of this a phenomenon, and France is
determined to do its share. What, then, should we do?
The first obligation when confronting the use of
mercenaries is to contain them with an effective
military presence. The Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno,
has referred to “robust peacekeeping”, which is a very
good English phrase. The United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) employed robust
peacekeeping successfully against the RUF. French
troops are doing the same today in Côte d’Ivoire
against the rebel movements in the western part of the
country. But robust peacekeeping is only an initial
phase. The only long-term solution entails real
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes. In Sierra Leone the United Nations has
thus demobilized and reintegrated over 46,000
combatants. Liberia must be the next field of action.
There is no other way to avoid other countries in the
region being convulsed by conflict similar to that
which is unfortunately taking place today in Côte
d’Ivoire.
I would now like to say a few words about
combating the illicit traffic in small arms. We need to
take action at the national, regional and international
levels in order to eradicate illicit markets and the
destabilizing supply of small arms and light weapons in
the West African subregion.
In September 1999, France launched an initiative
to conclude an international instrument on the marking
and tracing of small arms and light weapons. Our goal
was to identify the illicit traffic in these weapons. My
country is pleased with the work that has been done —
13
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
on the basis of joint proposals submitted by France and
Switzerland — by the United Nations Group of Experts
on this subject with regard to the feasibility of this type
of international instrument. We hope that there will be
long-term negotiations for an international convention
in this field.
France would like to emphasize the importance of
producing States having a responsible attitude. If they
have not yet done so, they must without delay adopt
stringent legislation on export controls.
All of these essential measures are currently
being implemented or explored as part of the
Programme of Action adopted by the first United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Traffic in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, which was held
in July 2001. The biennial conference to be held in July
will provide an opportunity for an initial examination
of the work under way. Another meeting, to be held in
2005, will allow us to begin preparations for the 2006
review conference. The Security Council has supported
these efforts, as it and the international community
should in fact do with regard to efforts under way in
the subregion.
In that regard, my country has from the beginning
supported the Moratorium on the Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Small Arms and Light
Weapons in West Africa, which was adopted by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). Last February, France announced the
renewal of its contribution to the Programme for
Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development (PCASED), which is managed by the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). The
Programme has the specific task of supporting the
implementation of the Moratorium. In addition, since
2000, France has supported the operations of the
United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament at Lomé.
The effectiveness of the Moratorium must
nevertheless be strengthened, especially as regards
establishing exemptions and an end-user certificate that
cannot be forged. France hopes that the Executive
Secretary of ECOWAS will limit requests for import
exemptions made by States to the legitimate security
needs of those countries.
On this issue, I would like to know the
assessment of partners as regards the progress made in
the implementation of the Moratorium and the
proposals made to strengthen its effectiveness.
Assistance provided within the PCASED
framework to implement the ECOWAS Moratorium has
a special role in operational activities. Those activities
pertain to the establishment by each State participating
in the Moratorium of a national commission and a
small arms register. It also entails their training
security forces, harmonizing legislation and collecting
and destroying confiscated weapons. We have
concluded that the results achieved are encouraging.
Twelve national commissions have been set up in the
15 participating countries. Nevertheless, additional
efforts will have to be made in order that the
commissions are truly able to begin their work.
I have one final question for the representatives
of the Secretary-General.
The West African subregion is obviously being
threatened by a number of conflicts, in particular by the
two on our agenda today: the proliferation of small
arms and the use of mercenaries. Would it then not be
worthwhile for the Secretariat to prepare for the
Council a report on the specific risks that exist in this
region — as Mr. Annan himself suggested in his report
of the summer of 2001 on the issue of conflict
prevention? Such a report could highlight the trans-
border dimensions of conflicts that are already on the
Council’s agenda. It would also be based on relevant
information at the disposal of the Secretariat and
various actors on the ground, such as UNDP. In
particular, the report could focus on the problem of
small arms and light weapons and of mercenary
activities, even if other questions — particularly
humanitarian ones, for example — would also be part
of that discussion.
I think that this work would facilitate the follow-
up on this important question that is being considered
by the Security Council.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of France for his kind words addressed
to me.
Before calling upon the next speaker, I would like
to ask the Regional Director of the Programme for
Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development to react briefly to some questions that
were raised by the representative of France.
14
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
Mr. Sall (spoke in French): I would simply like
to add a small note to the statement of the
representative of France, by saying that indeed it has
been some time since we last communicated with his
country, when our Programme noted 12 national
commissions out of 15. We have moved a step forward
since then, with a national commission set up in Benin.
We therefore now count 13 national commissions out
of 15.
As for the functioning of national commissions,
once decrees have been signed by the Presidents of the
Republic, and ministers or heads of Government have
established national commissions, we plan to
immediately make financial resources available so they
can start their activities. Once the documents have been
adopted and executive action has been taken, we plan
to immediately finance the national commissions so
that they may become operational.
A second point that I believe should be
remembered is the final-use certificates. This question
frequently comes up, and there has been the possibility
of falsifying those certificates. Therefore, what I would
like to propose for the coming months in the review in
our programme of activity — we do have joint reviews
carried out by PCASED and ECOWAS — is to have
included on our agenda a review of the end-user
certificate to improve it and make it more reliable to
meet the problems just raised.
Concerning the specific risks in the subregion,
there was a meeting of UNDP resident representatives
no more than a month ago in Dakar, after which the
idea was adopted of carrying out a study on future
security risks in the subregion that would be
coordinated with the representative of the United
Nations Secretary-General in West Africa, Mr. Ould-
Abdallah.
These are all issues that are currently being
addressed, and I am pleased that France put its finger
precisely where needed. I would not say on a sore spot.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Regional Director of the Programme for Coordination
and Assistance for Security and Development for his
clarifications.
Mr. Acuña (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I welcome
the holding of this public debate organized as a
workshop, a format that is used to deal with topics that
are the subject of paramount concern in the Council
and the international community because of their
relevance in humanitarian, peace and security fields
and in the development of peoples.
Chile cannot but share the deep concern about the
impact of the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons in conflicts besetting West Africa and of the
increasing illicit intervention of mercenary forces in
such conflicts. Those practices contribute considerably
to the violation of human rights and international
humanitarian law, both among the combatants and the
affected civilian populations.
In this connection, as was clearly stated this
morning by the Secretary-General, the question of the
involvement of children in armed conflict acquires a
particularly serious prominence. We associate
ourselves with his appeal that States of the subregion
implement the international instruments prohibiting
such practices and develop the necessary machinery to
deal with the problem.
As we said in the high-level debate at the United
Nations Conference in 2001 on the illicit trafficking in
such weapons, we believe it indispensable not only for
regions such as West Africa but also for the entire
international community to lay down norms to restrict
severely the manufacture and trade of small arms and
light weapons, to duly registered manufacturers and
duly authorized trading agents. In this connection, we
are convinced that we must give pride of place to
restrictions over freedom of commerce.
With regard to the question of supplying small
arms to West Africa, Chile supports the initiative of
shoring up cooperation and the exchange of
information among States of the region to identify and
monitor individuals and entities that are involved in the
illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons and
those who are supporting mercenary activities in West
Africa.
Similarly, my country recognizes that States of
the region must commit themselves more profoundly to
the practical implementation of the Moratorium on
small arms and light weapons declared in 1998 by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). To that end, particular account must be
taken of the recommendations of the recent African
conference on the implementation of the United
Nations Programme of Action on small arms and light
weapons of 2001.
15
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
From the global standpoint, the Security Council,
with the assistance of the Secretariat, over years has
developed a set of measures to avoid at least in part the
devastating consequences of the excessive
accumulation of small arms and light weapons and
their illicit trade by means of measures entailing
embargoes on territories where there is conflict and in
cases of conflict prevention, peacekeeping operations
or peace-building activities.
My delegation would like to thank the President
for organizing this seminar, which has enabled us to
exchange views in our search for effective solutions to
tackle this scourge that is so seriously affecting the
region of West Africa. The workshop format used on
this occasion, as well as the quality and suitability of
the Ministers for Foreign Relations and the other
speakers invited to participate have given us a very
comprehensive, first-hand picture of the situation and
the needs of West Africa. Those elements will enable
the Security Council and the Secretariat, as well as
Member States, to better prepare their work on those
sensitive issues.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Chile for his kind words addressed to
me.
Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): We are pleased to see you, Sir, once again,
within two weeks, presiding over an important
meeting. We would also like to thank you for your
initiative, which led to putting this item on the agenda
this month, in view of its importance in many parts of
the world, and especially West Africa. It is our pleasure
to welcome the Ministers and the representatives of the
regional organizations who are with us today.
Today’s meeting is one in a series of important
meetings held by the Security Council on the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and the
phenomenon of mercenaries, in view of their negative
effects on West Africa. In that context, we would like
to confirm the need to respect international law and the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular respect for national sovereignty,
non-interference in the internal affairs of Members
States, the right to individual or collective self-defence
as stipulated by Article 51 of the Charter, the right of
peoples to self-determination and the right of Member
States to develop their own defence systems to
guarantee their national security.
The international community’s adoption of the
Programme of Action of the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects in July 2001 was an
important step forward in dealing with one of the most
urgent problems confronting international peace and
security: the tragedy of the unruly and excessive
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and the
illicit trafficking of them. Those are among the most
important reasons for the continuation and the fanning
of conflicts all over the world. The illicit trade in small
arms, especially in West Africa, adds to the violence
and contributes to the displacement of innocent people,
spreads the culture of violence and undermines the
stability of societies. It also undermines the efforts at
peace and negotiations, victimizes children, women
and vulnerable groups in particular, and creates a
climate propitious to the looting of valuable minerals,
especially in West Africa.
My delegation believes that the way to deal with
this question in general, and in West Africa in
particular, lies in encouraging measures designed to
restore peace, security and confidence among countries
so that resorting to weapons is made less necessary; in
promoting measures to prevent conflicts and seeking
negotiated solutions; and in taking all necessary
measures to control the circulation of small arms and
light weapons and their possession, use, transfer and
stockpiling. A mechanism must be established to stop
the exportation of small arms to non-State entities,
such as combatants and mercenaries, and sanctions
must be imposed on manufacturers, arms traffickers
and middlemen who do that.
We need to give financial and technical support to
national programmes aimed at reintegrating the
demobilized combatants and those illicitly possessing
small arms.
With respect to the question of mercenaries, my
delegation believes that armed conflict, illicit
trafficking and covert operations by third countries
lead, inter alia, to an increase in the demand for
mercenaries in the international market. It is part of
supply and demand. The recruitment, financing,
training and use of mercenaries are part of this. It is a
great cause of concern to all countries. It is also a
violation of the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.
16
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
The General Assembly and the Security Council
have adopted many resolutions condemning the use of
mercenaries as a form of external interference in the
internal affairs of States in cases where the purpose is
to undermine the stability of such countries and to
violate their territorial integrity, independence and
sovereignty. The relevant United Nations resolutions
have emphasized the need to prevent the training,
financing and recruitment of mercenaries and their
being sent from one country to another. They also
underline the need not to offer them any facilities,
including financing, in order to equip them and to give
them the opportunity to go to other countries. Those
resolutions describe the use of mercenaries against
national liberation movements struggling against
colonialist domination or other forms of foreign
occupation as a crime.
The political problems and disputes among
neighbouring countries, especially in West Africa, have
led to armed conflicts, and the presence of mercenaries
is a recognized fact in all these conflicts. That has led
to barbaric actions and the continuation of wars.
Although the phenomenon of mercenaries is not
limited to West Africa, Africa is the continent where it
has continued and has done the most harm. We have
heard many ministers and representatives confirm that.
Many armed conflicts in Africa are the result of
extended political instability and the presence of
valuable natural resources that other foreign entities try
to control by encouraging and arming their allies
within those countries so that they can take power.
Later, such acts are carried out by mercenaries who
have the individual military skills or by what are called
military security companies, which use well-organized
small armies of mercenaries in order to calm the
situation in any of those countries. It is wrong to think
that such private military security companies can help
in managing the affairs of the countries in which they
operate.
The problem of the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons and the use of mercenaries threatens
peace and security in West Africa and other parts of the
world. My delegation believes that discussion of this
problem in its general framework definitely applies to
this important part of the African continent. There is no
doubt that we should follow up the question closely
and draw the necessary lessons from what has
happened in those lands.
Finally, we believe that cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations is essential for the
achievement of the United Nations objectives of peace
and security in West Africa, in all parts of Africa as a
whole and in the entire world.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic for his kind
words addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is Her Excellency
Mrs. Senn, Minister of Labour and Vocational Training
of Mali. I invite her to take a seat at the Council table
and to make her statement.
Mrs. Senn (Mali) (spoke in French): I wish, at
the outset, to express, on behalf of the delegation of
Mali, my warmest thanks to the delegation of the sister
Republic of Guinea for this initiative of convening this
Security Council workshop to consider an issue that
has been a concern to our subregion for almost 10
years. I am referring to the circulation of small arms. I
wish to pay tribute to the Secretary-General for his
tireless efforts in dealing with that matter. My
delegation also thanks the various institutions
combating the proliferation of light weapons, and it
fully agrees with their analysis.
First I wish to briefly refer to two major
initiatives that my country has taken on the issue of
small arms and light weapons. In 1994, the President of
Mali at that time, His Excellency Mr. Alfa Omar
Konaré, called for and obtained from the Secretary-
General a study on the risks inherent in the illicit
circulation of small arms in the Sahelo-Saharan
subregion. A year later that led to a United Nations
resolution on small arms, which has become a
resolution of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) on assistance to States to
halt the illicit circulation of small arms and light
weapons and to collect and destroy light weapons.
Secondly, I wish to recall our initiative,
subsequently approved by ECOWAS, that a
Moratorium be adopted on the import and export of
small arms. Speaking about the Moratorium and its
characteristics, President Konaré said “In the mind of
Malian diplomacy, the Moratorium is not a legal ban
designed to infringe on the sovereignty of States and
their freedom to provide defence, but rather it is an act
of faith showing the world the unswerving political
commitment of our States to eradicate the
accumulation of death and destruction-dealing devices,
17
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
to pursue the economic and social development of our
peoples that have been so sorely tested. It is an act of
diplomatic intelligence leading to self-censorship,
restraint, the temporary abstention of States of the
subregion from producing, receiving or exporting
weapons, as a necessary preliminary stage to reinforce
means of effective security and take positive action
related to micro-disarmament in subsequent phases”.
Support for the Moratorium is voluntary and is
open not only to States of the subregion, but also to all
African States. The Moratorium is essentially a
confidence-building measure relating to the import,
export and manufacture of small arms. To enhance the
effectiveness of that Moratorium and to reinforce the
capacity of concerned Governments to exercise stricter
monitoring of small arms traffic, Governments may
take additional steps. The Programme for Coordination
and Assistance for Security and Development is an
additional device that was adopted. I will not dwell on
that programme, which was addressed in a statement
this morning.
Five years have elapsed since the adoption of the
ECOWAS Moratorium on the import, export and
manufacture of light weapons. In announcing the
Moratorium on 31 October 1998, the heads of State of
the Community decided to harm themselves by
refraining from importing, exporting or manufacturing
small weapons for three years. Those three years would
then be used to draw up an inventory of the national
arsenal, to create national and community registers.
That period was designed to enable the various
ECOWAS members to take the steps necessary to
protect borders and prevent the illicit circulation of
small arms. At the end of that three-year period, an
assessment reinforced the conviction of the heads of
State that they made the right choice in renewing the
Moratorium for three more years.
It is obvious that as long as there is illicit
proliferation of small arms in the subregion, peace in
ECOWAS will always be precarious. Without being the
cause of conflict, small arms nonetheless contribute to
exacerbating them. Brawls and small disputes among
neighbours, farmers and ranchers frequently become
armed conflicts among socio-professional groups or
ethnic groups and can spawn civil war or genocide. The
proliferation of small arms and light weapons underlies
the phenomenon of child soldiers. The massive
accumulation of small arms and light weapons has
meant that supply exceeds demand. That means that
supplies of arms and munitions are very plentiful in
times of armed conflict.
The implementation of the Moratorium has made
it possible to reduce the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons in the subregion, with the participation
of arms manufacturers. While the circulation of
weapons has been slowed down, there are nonetheless
8 million weapons in West Africa remaining in the
hands of illegal owners. To prevent any possibility of
their misuse, it is necessary to recover these illicit
weapons that are illegally held, which contribute to
banditry, the creation of armed gangs, criminal cross-
border activities and the use of mercenaries. Over the
long term, if their firepower permits it, those armed
gangs regroup and form mercenary armies willing to do
anything to threaten the peace and security of other
countries. That is the situation prevailing in our
subregion. The situation in Côte d’Ivoire is a perfect
illustration of that.
As can be noted, all armed conflicts occur when
one party or another feels that it can engage in an
armed battle after having stockpiled arms and
munitions that they can use or that they have received
through a deal with mercenaries. Despite international
legal instruments prohibiting the use of mercenaries, it
must be noted that they are still relevant because they
are now using new information technology, such as the
Internet.
To improve the situation of small arms in relation
to the use of mercenaries, my delegation would like to
make the following suggestions. Embargoes against all
countries to a conflict might be envisaged, as could
preventive measures imposed against countries
responsible for the illicit traffic of weapons. Also of
value would be a binding resolution prohibiting the use
of mercenaries in all its forms. The provision of
additional support to national commissions combating
the illicit proliferation of small arms in order to
establish additional development projects might also be
envisaged.
Unfortunately, our subregion, once a haven of
peace, is afflicted by this fever, which is rooted in
poverty, unequal distribution of justice, joblessness,
unequal distribution of income, bad governance and,
finally, a deficit in democracy.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Mali for the kind words she addressed
to me and for her suggestions.
18
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I
should like to tell you once again, Sir, how pleased I
am to see you presiding over the work of the Security
Council.
I believe that the Guinean presidency was right to
keep this workshop on the “Proliferation of small arms
and light weapons and mercenary activities: threats to
peace and security in West Africa” in this month’s
programme of work. It not only concerns an important
problem for the subregion, but also, in my delegation’s
view, is a way of emphasizing the importance that the
Council attaches to African issues at a time when all
eyes are, of course, turned towards Iraq.
Congratulations, therefore, on such tenacity.
I should also like to say how much my delegation
appreciates the presence of eminent personalities of the
subregion and of regional and subregional
organizations, and how useful this discussion is for the
future of the subregion. The Secretary-General’s
participation also represented an important
contribution.
Before addressing specific subjects, I should like
to say that my delegation appreciates the extremely
positive role played by the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) on behalf of peace and
stability in the subregion. Once again, we should like
to express our support for the efforts of ECOWAS to
promote peace, particularly in Côte d’Ivoire. In that
regard, I should like to thank the current Chairman of
ECOWAS, Ghanaian President John Kufuor, and the
ECOWAS force in Côte d’Ivoire, who should be fully
supported in their efforts by the international
community.
It is logical for the Security Council to devote
special attention to the problems related to the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons in the region of
West Africa, because that is one of the world’s regions
that suffers most from the destabilizing accumulation
of such weapons. Bulgaria expresses its grave concern
at the excessive accumulation, illicit and uncontrolled
proliferation, circulation and trafficking of small arms
and light weapons, which continue to be a major
challenge to stability and development in West Africa.
The uncontrolled proliferation of small arms and light
weapons intensifies existing ethnic and political
tensions, causes considerable loss of human life and
weakens the international community’s efforts to
provide humanitarian assistance to civilian populations.
My country welcomes the integrated approach of
the United Nations and of the Security Council aimed
at reducing and preventing the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons as it relates to West Africa.
Bulgaria commends the more active cooperation
among the region’s countries, which represents an
important element in the global strategy aimed at
combating the illicit and uncontrolled proliferation of
small arms and light weapons. Those countries already
possess a tool to combat the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons: the ECOWAS Moratorium on the
Importation, Exportation and Manufacture of Light
Weapons in West Africa, adopted in 1998. The
effectiveness and performance of that monitoring
mechanism must be improved. My country encourages
the countries of the region to implement the
recommendations contained in the reports of the groups
of experts on Liberia and Sierra Leone and to
strengthen the implementation mechanisms, with a
view to putting an end to the trafficking of small arms
and light weapons.
The international community must lend consistent
support to the efforts of the States of the region. It
would be useful if the chairmanship of ECOWAS
briefed the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1343 (2001) concerning Liberia
on the actions that ECOWAS is undertaking to
implement the Moratorium on light weapons. That
occasion should contribute to the creation of conditions
for more effective implementation of the Moratorium.
Finally, I should like to say that Bulgaria supports and
respects the ECOWAS Moratorium on the Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Light Weapons in
West Africa.
The implementation of embargoes in force are
also an important element of the global strategy to
combat the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
in West Africa. We must say that the reports of the
groups of experts on Sierra Leone and Liberia reveal
similar violation schemes, often orchestrated by the
same arms traffickers. As the Council is aware, the
destabilizing activities of such individuals are not
limited to the region of West Africa but extend far
beyond it. My country believes that the Security
Council must consider what the best way to tackle this
reprehensible phenomenon would be. We believe that a
structural change along the lines of the French-British
idea of a semi-permanent mechanism is desirable,
because that would better contribute to monitoring the
19
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
implementation of sanctions imposed by the United
Nations.
The second element of our discussion today —
the use of mercenaries in armed conflicts — is
undeniably a threat to peace in the subregion.
Mercenaries play a particularly nefarious role in
conflicts in the subregion. We are all fully aware of the
harmfulness of the activities of mercenaries in Côte
d’Ivoire. The international community must examine
and assess recent concentrations of mercenaries in
Africa, particularly in the West African region. It is
clear that the settlement of conflicts depends on the
immediate demobilization of mercenaries.
In conclusion, I should like to say that my
delegation fully supports the draft presidential
statement that should be adopted following this debate,
which is a useful contribution to efforts aimed at
eradicating these threats.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Bulgaria for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Niger. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Moutari (Niger) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Mr. President, I should like to pay a warm
tribute to the Republic of Guinea, your country, for the
excellent work that it has accomplished in the
presidency of the Security Council during this period,
so critical for international peace and security.
Niger is pleased to see members of the Council
devote today to a debate on the illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons and the use of
mercenaries in West Africa. Her Excellency
Ms. Aïchatou Mindaoudou, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Niger, had wished to be present and to
discuss with Council members this issue, whose
importance led our heads of State and Government to
proclaim, in 1998, a Moratorium on these types of
weapons in West Africa. Unfortunately, having been
unable to make the trip to New York for scheduling
reasons, she asked me to convey to you her friendly
greetings and her best wishes for success.
Because of its geographical location and its
recent national experience, Niger feels not only that it
is an integral part of all initiatives taken in this area but
also that the path we have followed, with the
benevolent help of countries and friendly institutions,
can provide some useful examples within the
framework of preventing and resolving conflicts, as
well as the consolidation of peace and reconstruction in
the post-conflict period.
As the Council knows, Niger is familiar with
armed rebellion. It began as early as the 1990s and has
affected a substantial portion of our territory, including
the northern areas of Aïr and Azawak, and, in the
eastern part of the country, Manga.
Our national experience teaches us that, whatever
one might say about the illicit proliferation of arms and
the use of mercenaries, the pivotal point in the quest
for solutions is, first of all, a genuine will on the part of
the national protagonists to deal peacefully with the
deep-seated reasons for the conflicts they face. Foreign
assistance in this way is certainly very useful, even
essential, but it is still just assistance. Thanks to an
understanding on the part of the different national
actors in Niger, peace agreements were signed between
April 1995 and August 1998 between the Government
and 17 fronts and self-defence movements, with the
help of friendly countries, including Algeria, Burkina
Faso, France and Chad. These agreements have
allowed us to begin the procedure to collect and
destroy small arms and light weapons. This procedure
finally led to the organization on 15 September 2000 in
Agadez of a peace torch, with the presence of United
Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan, to whom I
once again would like to convey my deep gratitude.
Then there was the design and implementation of
the project to collect small arms and light weapons in
the Gigme area in Manga. This was done thanks to help
from the United Nations and the group of interested
States — Germany, France, Norway and Japan — who
were trying to breathe hope into that part of Niger.
From its outset, this project was designed and
perceived as a pilot project, the success of which would
enable us to progress and the experience of which was
to be replicated in other parts of the country. It was
concerned with places such as Aïr and Azawak, but as
it spread out in concentric circles, it was also meant to
link with other projects going on in the rest of West
Africa so as to ensure that similar initiatives would be
eventually implemented in other member countries of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). Along these lines, a new project to
consolidate peace has just been crafted by Niger, in
partnership with the United Nations Development
20
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
Programme (UNDP), with the United Nations
Volunteers and with French cooperation, in order to
reintegrate 3,160 ex-combatants to promote a culture of
peace and development in areas affected by conflict.
Our national experience in Niger has thus brought
us to a full implementation of peace agreements and to
make it a major priority. From this perspective, the
socio-economic reintegration of the ex-combatants was
a priority for us, without which the peace process could
not be successfully concluded, because the feeling of
abandonment, due to the fact that financial promises
had not been kept, made people impatient, and even fed
up. They did not really wish to progress; rather, this led
to armed banditry situations. This project, valued at
about 1,400 million CFA francs (about $2 million), has
been submitted to the donors for their consideration.
In addition, it seems to us that one of the
shortcomings that has to be corrected as soon as
possible is the weakness of the national structures
responsible for follow-up of the collection of small
arms and light weapons, as well as the reintegration of
ex-combatants and the reconstruction of the affected
areas.
Our national commission to collect these
weapons, and our high commission for peacekeeping,
are cruelly short of human, logistical and financial
resources that are essential for them just to carry out
the everyday work of their mission. Strengthening
national institutions is necessary. It is a basic need for
us. The same can be said for the regional level, as Mr.
Chambas reminded us this morning.
ECOWAS has an urgent need to establish a small
arms unit to provide for the effective implementation
of the Moratorium. As was also pointed out by
Ambassador Said Djinnit, of the African Union, a
Moratorium on the importation, exportation and
manufacture of weapons can only function if there is a
follow-up oversight mechanism adequately resourced
and truly independent; this would allow them to point
out and name the violators, as well as impose a
sanctions regime against the parties in default.
We truly hope that recommendations will emerge
from this workshop that will strengthen the national
capacity-building of the national, regional and
continental institutions that are to work against the
scourges of the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons and the use of mercenaries.
Finally, the Regional Director of the Programme
for Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development (PCASED) told us this morning how
small the number of resources are that they have to
work with, in spite of the ever more urgent needs of the
States in the region. It is important, therefore, that one
of our recommendations speak specifically to the need
for strengthening our financial wherewithal to do our
work.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Niger for his kind words addressed to
me and to my country.
Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First and foremost, Mr. President, I welcome you to
New York in presiding over this important meeting. I
also wish to extend a welcome to other Foreign
Ministers of African countries and the representatives
of regional and subregional organizations. I wish to
thank them for their important speeches.
In recent years, the excessive accumulation of
and rampant illicit trafficking in small weapons in
Africa, especially in West Africa, have aggravated
armed conflicts and turmoil in these regions. Through
their prolonged presence in these regions, mercenaries
have not only been involved in armed conflicts but also
have been engaged in the trafficking of arms and the
plundering of resources, thus further exacerbating and
prolonging the conflicts.
In the absence of an effective resolution of this
issue, peace will remain illusive in Africa, especially in
West Africa. The international community should give
greater attention to this issue and support and assist
regional and subregional organizations in combating
the illicit trade in small weapons and the use of
mercenaries.
The Chinese delegation believes that only an
integrated approach, with a regional dimension, can
effectively solve the question of small arms and
mercenaries in West Africa. Therefore, better
coordination and cooperation among members of the
community, especially among the West African
countries, are of critical importance. As a matter of
priority, the countries concerned in this region should,
in accordance with the Programme of Action adopted
by the 2001 United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, as well as the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Moratorium on the
21
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
importation, exportation and manufacture of small
arms and light weapons, develop an update of their
domestic legislation on the manufacture, possession,
transfer and stockpiling of small arms in their
countries, in light of their specific circumstances, and
take effective and reliable measures to ensure their
scrupulous implementation.
The Security Council should continue to
strengthen its cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations; actively promote the West
African peace process; implement disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes in areas
of conflict; and strengthen its monitoring of the
enforcement of arms embargoes. From a long-term
perspective, the international community — while
remaining committed to assisting West African
countries to eliminate tension and conflict — should
actively help the countries of the region to develop
their economies, pull themselves out of poverty and
achieve sustainable development. That is the only
approach capable of resolving the issue of small arms
and mercenaries in West Africa at the root level and of
restoring and safeguarding peace and security in the
subregion.
China has always opposed the illicit manufacture
of and trafficking in small arms, as well as the
recruitment and use of mercenaries. We have great
sympathy for the people of Africa, and especially for
those of West Africa, who have long suffered from the
proliferation of both small arms and mercenaries.
China supports regional and subregional efforts aimed
at resolving these issues. We also support strengthening
cooperation between the United Nations and the
countries of the region. We are ready to work with the
international community to reach an early and
appropriate solution to the question of small arms and
mercenaries in West Africa.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of China for his kind words addressed to
me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Sierra Leone. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Pemagbi (Sierra Leone): I wish to apologize
for the absence of the Foreign Minister of Sierra
Leone. He was looking forward to attending this
meeting. Unfortunately, developments in his schedule
did not make it possible for him to be here. I am
therefore delivering this short statement on his behalf.
Let me join previous speakers in congratulating
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. In so doing, I am
fully conscious of the fact that you are occupying the
chair during one of the most disturbing — and indeed
one of the most critical — periods that the world has
faced in the last three decades. My delegation would
therefore like to commend you for the admirable
manner in which you have been performing your
difficult task under extremely tense circumstances.
My delegation welcomes the initiative by Guinea,
our good neighbour, to have the Security Council
consider two interrelated issues that pose a serious
threat to peace, human security and stability in the
West African subregion. That initiative is timely
because it reminds us of the efficacy of the Security
Council, an organ whose primary responsibility is, and
remains, the maintenance of international peace and
security. Like every other man-made institution, the
Council may have weaknesses. That notwithstanding,
Sierra Leone continues to have faith in the United
Nations as a centre for harmonizing the actions of
nations. We also have faith in the Council’s ability to
contribute to our collective effort to prevent, combat
and eradicate the menace of the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons.
The current situation in the West African
subregion compels us to reiterate to the Council and
the international community at large that the illicit
trade in and proliferation of those weapons, especially
among roving bands of rebels that practice their deadly
activities within and across national frontiers, is not
merely a West African subregional problem. It is a
problem that is inherently international. That will be
the focus of my short contribution to today’s
discussions.
We of course realize that it is the responsibility of
States of the subregion to take all necessary measures
at the national and subregional levels to prevent,
combat and eradicate these weapons. However, we
cannot, and should not, underestimate the international
or global dimension of the problem and its implications
for international peace and security. The characteristics
of proliferation clearly indicate that national and
regional measures are not enough to deal with the
problem. Such measures and initiatives must be
22
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
strengthened through sustained and effective
international cooperation.
Members of the Security Council may wish to
comment on this and, if time permits, perhaps suggest
how best the Council can further contribute to the
implementation of the global measures already
identified in the Programme of Action of the 2001
United Nations Conference held to promote the
prevention, reduction and eradication of the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons.
We acknowledge the critical role that
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes play in that regard. In Sierra Leone the
success of our disarmament and demobilization of ex-
combatants, followed by the equally successful
community arms collection and destruction campaign,
was due primarily to the level of international
assistance and cooperation extended to the Government
and people of Sierra Leone. However, I should add that
unless such cooperation is accelerated with regard to
the reintegration component of the DDR programme,
many ex-combatants could easily be recruited to fight
in new and ongoing conflicts in the subregion. We
recall that the Programme of Action of the 2001
Conference on small arms called for international
assistance and cooperation in support of DDR
programmes, as well as arms for development projects
in post-conflict areas.
Much ground has already been covered with
regard to the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Moratorium on the Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Small Arms and Light
Weapons in West Africa, which has been extended for a
further three-year period. It is obviously in the interest
of the member States of ECOWAS to scrupulously
implement the Moratorium. The idea of extending it
indefinitely or making it a legally binding regional
instrument could also be in the interest of the
Community. However, the fact is that virtually all the
estimated 8 million illicit small arms in circulation in
West Africa, including those that are in the hands of
rebels, bandits and other non-State entities, were
manufactured outside the West African subregion.
Therefore, the implementation of the ECOWAS
Moratorium and similar regional initiatives should be
seen in the context of continued collaboration between
ECOWAS and arms-manufacturing States. The
implementation of the Moratorium should also be
considered in the context of efforts aimed at securing
legally binding international agreements on the
marking and tracing of small arms and light weapons.
In the view of my delegation, those are core issues that
must be actively pursued if we are to make any
significant progress in curbing the illicit transfer and
trade in these weapons. As part of the global approach,
due consideration should continue to be given to the
question of the adequacy of existing machinery to deal
with the related problem of brokering.
Recognizing the importance of these issues, the
Security Council had requested the Secretary-General
to include in last year’s report on small arms, among
other things, an analytical assessment of the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons in such areas as
availability, lines of supply, brokering, transportation
arrangements and financial networks for these
weapons. Again, this underscores the fact that the
responsibility for dealing with controlling the illicit
circulation of these weapons in the West African
subregion is not ours alone.
Finally, several speakers have referred to the role
of Security Council arms embargoes and similar
measures in controlling the proliferation of these
weapons. This is one area that falls directly within the
responsibility of the Council.
By resolution 1171 (1998) the Government of
Sierra Leone was required to mark, register and notify
a Security Council monitoring committee of all arms or
related material imported by the Government through
named points of entry registered with that committee.
The Government complied with those requirements. At
the same time, the Council prohibited States and their
nationals from supplying or selling arms to non-
governmental forces in Sierra Leone. However, the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) rebel movement
was able to acquire a considerable amount of arms and
ammunition to maintain its vicious campaign of death
and terror, with the direct and indirect support of a
network of international and regional arms dealers. In
short, the embargo was deliberately and successfully
violated.
All my delegation can say at this stage is that in
reviewing any existing arms embargo the Security
Council should take into consideration the prevailing
situation and any continued serious threat to peace and
security in the West African subregion as a whole.
23
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Sierra Leone for his kind words
addressed to me.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Let me at the outset
welcome you, Sir, back amongst us in the Security
Council. Your presence here to preside over the debate
on the proliferation of small arms and light weapons
and the phenomenon of mercenaries’ threats to peace
and security in West Africa is one indication of the
importance of this issue to the region from which you
hail.
I would also like to extend a very warm welcome
to the Ministers from several other African States and
to the representatives of the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS).
We congratulate Guinea, our brother Ambassador
Traoré and you yourself for the initiative to hold this
meeting.
It is alarming that 8 million illicit small arms are
in circulation in West Africa. Intra-State conflicts have
created a staggering demand for small arms and have
contributed to the continued proliferation of bandits,
rebel groups, mercenaries, child soldiers and militia in
the entire subregion. As was succinctly expressed by
the Secretary-General in his opening remarks today,
these problems sustain conflicts, hinder development,
undermine human rights and humanitarian law and
exacerbate violence, especially against women and
children.
Pakistan was affected by the problem of small
arms in the context of the Afghanistan war, which
began in 1979. Two years ago, we adopted a
comprehensive strategy to control and eliminate this
problem. We have had considerable success, although
this is not yet complete. Our campaign against illicit
arms is continuing, but we would be happy to share our
experiences with friendly countries.
We feel that the problems faced by West Africa
are complex and multifaceted, affecting stability and
peace within and outside individual countries. We need
to address peace and stability in the entire subregion,
not one country at a time. We agree with the
assessment of the Secretary-General that efforts must
be made to remove tensions between the concerned
countries and also to find ways to collectively address
their problems. To this effect, we fully support the
efforts that have been made in ECOWAS and urge the
United Nations to take a more proactive role to find a
comprehensive solution to West Africa’s problems.
Efforts must focus on the implementation of the
Programme of Action adopted by the United Nations
Conference on Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons. We also endorse several of the
recommendations in the Secretary-General’s report on
small arms, submitted to the Security Council last year
in document S/2002/1053.
With the adoption of the Bamako Declaration on
an African Common Position on the Illicit
Proliferation, Circulation and Trafficking of Small
Arms and Light Weapons on 1 December 2000, the
African Union articulated for the first time a continent-
wide strategy for tackling illicit small arms on that
continent. Similarly, the renewal by ECOWAS of its
Moratorium on the import, export and manufacture of
small arms and light weapons last year is a sincere
effort to address the issue.
The ECOWAS Moratorium can be strengthened
through several of the recommendations that are
reflected in the draft presidential statement before us,
that is, through transparency, better end-user
certificates, effective implementation of United
Nations sanctions and well-conceived disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes.
Arms-producing and exporting countries should also
enact stringent laws and regulations to ensure that their
exports to West Africa do not contribute to
destabilizing the region. The implementation of DDR
programmes in the affected countries needs generous
financial support of the donor community.
We are facing what one could call a series of
complex crises in West Africa and elsewhere. It is
obvious that only a comprehensive approach that takes
into account social, economic, political, security and
other factors can address effectively the problems
associated with small arms and light weapons. The
international community should help deal with the
complex causes of instability in West Africa. In
particular, the economic and social problems afflicting
the region must be tackled through comprehensive
support for development, greater market access, debt
relief, enhanced official development assistance,
human resources development and a focused effort to
eradicate HIV/AIDS.
24
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
We at the United Nations, and especially in the
Security Council, need to devise a new composite
method and a composite approach that draws together
all those who can contribute to solutions to these
complex crises in one place. I suggest that we discuss
this composite approach in the Ad Hoc Working Group
on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa, which
already exists.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Pakistan for the kind words addressed
to my country and my delegation.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Nigeria. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria): Mr. President, I bring
you warm greetings from your colleague, Mr. Alhaji
Sule Lamido, Foreign Minister of Nigeria, who is
unavoidably absent from this meeting. I wish to thank
you on behalf of the Nigerian delegation for your
initiative in organizing this important workshop. It
affords the Security Council an excellent opportunity to
fully address the menace posed by small arms and the
use of mercenaries in the West African subregion. We
look forward to a successful and fruitful conclusion of
the workshop under your able guidance — and that is
already near.
The problem of the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons is of particular concern to Nigeria
because it constitutes a major impediment to peace,
stability, security and economic development in many
developing countries, especially in Africa. These arms
continue to have devastating consequences on the
African continent, considering their capacity to fuel,
intensify and prolong conflicts. Sir, you are no doubt
aware of the millions of lives lost, as well as the
humanitarian crisis created in the region, as a result of
their illicit use. I need not mention the destruction of
catastrophic proportions of economic and social
infrastructure on the continent as a direct result of the
illicit use of these weapons. We know how long and
how expensive it often is to put up such structures.
The West African subregion has more than its fair
share of these conflicts. These conflicts have been
fuelled by the illicit and free circulation of these
weapons in the subregion.
The greatest difficulty in the control of the
proliferation of small arms is their easy accessibility to
non-State actors. That was an issue that dogged the
outcome of the General Assembly debate on small
arms and light weapons in 2001. My delegation
therefore believes that for an adequate and effective
control of the proliferation of this class of weapons,
efforts must be made to legally control the sale of these
weapons to non-State actors.
The illicit trade in small arms has always
obstructed the implementation of arms embargoes
imposed by the Security Council. The recent
establishment of an independent panel of experts and
monitoring mechanisms by the Council to promote
compliance with arms embargoes is welcome.
While in West Africa this measure will be useful
in controlling the illegal cross-border movement of
small arms into conflict areas, it will be, however,
ineffective in controlling and eliminating those arms
that are already inside the areas of conflict. We
therefore emphasize the need for effective
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
mandates that include weapons collection, disposal and
destruction.
In order to trace the flow of small arms and light
weapons from their sources, it is necessary to identify
the points of diversion into illicit networks. Tracing the
movement of these weapons will help to promote
awareness and accountability in arms transfers and will
deter their illicit transfer to non-State actors. We
welcome the recommendation of the Secretary-General
to develop an international instrument to enable States
to identify and trace illicit small arms and light
weapons that enter their countries so that they can
effectively control such inflows. We hope that the
ongoing work of the group of experts on tracing small
arms will ultimately lead to a legally-binding
international agreement on the subject.
As an additional measure in ensuring success in
this regard, it is important that licensed manufacturers
apply appropriate and reliable markings on each small
arm and light weapon as an integral part of the
production process, as stipulated in the Programme of
Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons. Efforts
should be put in place to ensure that the United Nations
Protocol Against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, which was successfully
concluded in 2001, will complement the Programme of
Action in this vital area when it enters into force.
25
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
Recent studies have shown that arms brokering
plays a significant role in the illicit arms trade. The
establishment of an effective international regime to
control the practice has therefore become necessary.
We call on Member States to fully abide by their
commitment to enhance international cooperation and
the exchange of information as a prelude to the
establishment of such a regime. That position was
underscored in the 2000 Bamako Ministerial
Declaration containing Africa’s common position on
small arms and light weapons.
This is connected with the issue of licensing and
end-user controls. We believe that developing effective
national, regional and international controls on export
licensing and end use are crucial elements in ensuring
that this trade remains under Government control and
is not diverted to illicit markets or end users. In that
regard, my delegation urges the Security Council to
encourage States that have not already done so to
introduce the use of authenticated end-user certificates
as a means of monitoring the export and transit of
small arms.
It is equally important for the Council to intensify
efforts to investigate and to identify the link between
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and the
illicit exploitation of natural and other resources. The
determination of this linkage and the efforts to control
the use of proceeds from illegal resources to fund the
illicit arms trade have significantly brought the
conflicts in the West African subregion to a successful
end. Such investigation should of necessity apply to all
areas of conflict in the West African subregion, where
there is often interlinkage between one conflict
situation and another.
The Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Moratorium on the Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Small Arms and Light
Weapons in West Africa has been in existence since
1998, following its renewal two years ago. ECOWAS
member States will continue their best effort to ensure
the success of the Moratorium. It is unfortunate that
conflict situations have persisted in the West African
subregion in spite of the Moratorium. ECOWAS
member States need the cooperation of the
international community to implement the Moratorium.
My delegation therefore wishes once again to call on
the international community to support the
implementation of the Moratorium. In order to succeed,
it is important that the Moratorium is fully respected by
all States, both within and outside the subregion. We
also urge other regions to follow the example of
ECOWAS by imposing similar moratoriums in their
respective regions.
Nigeria has always believed in conflict
prevention measures and the pursuit of negotiated
solution to conflicts as the most effective means of
solving the small arms problem. The international
community should pay particular attention to the need
to adopt these measures as the best strategy for peace.
Connected to this is the need for the creation of a good
political atmosphere that will enhance harmonious
relationships in our countries and a sense of belonging.
The emphasis in this regard should be on promoting
structures and processes that strengthen democracy,
human rights, the rule of law and good governance, as
well as economic recovery and growth as a means of
eliminating conflicts and guaranteeing durable peace.
The task of the Security Council in this regard is quite
enormous and calls for genuine commitment and
concerted action on the part of the Council.
I cannot conclude this statement without
expressing our gratitude to the Secretary-General for
his bold initiative in establishing the Coordinating
Action on Small Arms (CASA) as a mechanism for the
harmonization of the activities of United Nations
agencies to promote the implementation of the
Programme of Action. CASA has a special role to play
in promoting and coordinating assistance to West
African States, especially those most severely affected
by small arms proliferation.We also note with
satisfaction the recent establishment of the Small Arms
Advisory Services to provide advisory services and
formulate programmes on small arms for
implementation. As these two bodies rely on
extrabudgetary resources to fund their activities, we
call on Member States in a position to do so to make
voluntary contributions to enable them to fulfil their
mandates.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Nigeria for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Côte d’Ivoire. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Djangone-Bi (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): First let me say that my delegation is very
happy to see you, Sir, presiding over the work of the
26
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
Security Council in March 2003, which has witnessed
the establishment of the Government of National
Reconciliation under the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement.
Things have never been so difficult for the
international community, as current challenges, to
which pressures are added, are numerous and seem
insurmountable.
However, assured by your excellent qualities of
diplomatic experience, we do not doubt for one
moment that the proceedings of this distinguished
institution will be completed successfully.
We would also like to congratulate the
representative of Germany who, last month, conducted
the work of the Council with the great competence we
know he possesses.
I would like to begin my statement by saying that
my delegation approves of most of the
recommendations that have been made, particularly
those by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Senegal
and Benin. Since almost everything has already been
said, I will confine my statement to a few words about
the existence of so-called Liberian fighters supposedly
in the Côte d’Ivoire army. In fact, this morning, in his
statement to the Security Council, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Liberia stated, without providing a
shred of evidence and in spite of the denial of the
Government of Côte d’Ivoire that was published by a
number of press agencies, that particularly in the
western part of Côte d’Ivoire, Liberian mercenaries
were fighting alongside the national army of Côte
d’Ivoire.
It is highly regrettable that Liberia has turned this
workshop that has been so carefully organized into a
trial against Côte d’Ivoire. In a spirit of peace, and
despite the averred collusion of fraternal countries with
the aggressors against Côte d’Ivoire, my country has
not deemed it necessary to pour oil on the fire by
publicly denouncing anybody. We are trying to prepare
the post-crisis period, given that teeth and tongues are
condemned to live together, in spite of the accidents
along the way.
Given the falsehoods related by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Liberia aimed at distracting the
international community, my delegation would like to
issue the following clarification.
We do not know the sources of the representative
of Liberia. However, the truth is that Liberian
mercenaries are part of the aggressors against Côte
d’Ivoire and have been since the night of 18 to 19
September 2002. All the diplomatic Missions were able
to see on Ivorian television Liberian mercenaries,
among others, that the national armed forces had taken
prisoners after heavy fighting. Some of those
mercenaries even admitted that they belonged to the
Liberian army. President Charles Taylor assured
President Gbagbo that those mercenaries had no
connection with the Liberian army. The Ivorian
authorities noted that. At any rate, if they are not
soldiers of the Liberian army, then they are Liberian
mercenaries.
There can be no doubt, because the English
accent of Liberia is quite different from that of the
other anglophone countries in West Africa. The
majority of those mercenaries can be easily confused
with the border populations of Côte d’Ivoire, given that
they speak the same languages and are part of the same
ethnic groups as those populations.
To then say that Liberia mercenaries are Ivorians
is a large step to take — a step that the critics of Côte
d’Ivoire, including the Minister, blithely took.
My delegation vigorously protests such
fabrications that attempt to present the victim of
aggression, Côte d’Ivoire, as being the culprit in this
matter.
A number of Liberian mercenaries have come
from the ranks of armed groups that are trying to
overthrow President Taylor’s regime. Those Liberian
mercenaries, who have fanned out across West Africa
and are currently aggressing against Côte d’Ivoire, can
be defined in terms of the following paradigm. First,
they are, for the most part, totally under the control of
a drug empire. Secondly, they are merciless. Thirdly,
they systematically pillage plantations, houses, and so
forth.
Fourthly, they kill indiscriminately; one could
even say that they kill for the fun of it, which explains
why there are so many mass grave sites in rebel areas.
Fifthly, they have no regard for women and girls,
whom they rape on a daily basis.
The Liberian Ministry of Foreign Affairs
certainly forgot that since that fraternal country has
been unstable — which has been for at least a
decade — Côte d’Ivoire has taken in refugees; at times
half a million people have been accepted. The United
27
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees can testify to
that.
There is one specific thing that should be pointed
out. Contrary to what is done elsewhere, instead of
putting people into camps in Côte d’Ivoire, Liberian
refugees are received by families and integrated into
the population. At the meeting in Serta, Libya, my
country was congratulated by the African Union for
that hospitality, which was described as being second
to none.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Liberia
certainly forgot to point out to the Security Council
that, for more than a decade, the combatants of the
various factions fleeing the fighting were coming into
Ivorian territory with their supplies of arms and have
largely contributed to the insecurity that is
undermining my country today, and which is
characterized by ambushes, hold-ups and other acts.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Liberia
certainly does not know that, before the aggression that
we are talking about, Côte d’Ivoire did not hesitate to
send regular teams of military doctors and medicines to
Liberia.
The list is long. Therefore, allow my delegation
to conclude with the following. Contrary to partisan
reports that have been made to the Council by actors
who are destabilizing Côte d’Ivoire, first, Liberian
mercenaries that are spreading desolation in the
western part of Côte d’Ivoire have no connection with
the regular army; they should in no way be considered
as extra recruits of the national armed forces of Côte
d’Ivoire. Secondly, in the western part of the country,
as well as at Bouaké, Liberian mercenaries, recruited
and paid by the aggressors against Côte d’Ivoire, are
fighting alongside and are on the payroll of the latter.
Thirdly, Liberian thieves are acting
independently, profiting from this situation in the
western part of Côte d’Ivoire. Fourthly, Liberian
mercenaries arrested by the French forces in the region
of Duékoué Bangolo have no connection with the
regular forces of Côte d’Ivoire. That is the truth that
the international community should know.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Côte d’Ivoire for the kind words he
addressed to me.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guinea.
In the historic Declaration of the Millennium
Summit, the world’s leaders, meeting here in New
York, affirmed their willingness to work to establish a
climate of peace and security, the fundamental basis for
a partnership for sustainable development. Today, we
must recognize that the international community seems
to demonstrate a certain impotence in the face of
numerous human tragedies and the destruction of
socio-economic infrastructures, the consequences of
the persistence of many flashpoints of tension in the
world.
For more than a decade, West Africa, the theatre
of several conflicts, has been a subject of great concern
because of its disturbing number of refugees and
displaced persons. The causes of this instability have
been diagnosed many times, but the remedies have not
always been applied to restore peace and calm for the
people of the subregion. Today, the constantly growing
number of unemployed youth and the consequences of
conflicts are fertile ground for the development of this
phenomenon. The use of child soldiers also results
from these deep-seated causes.
Faced with this new threat, what remedies should
be proposed to eradicate this scourge? Undoubtedly,
the domestic conflicts in Liberia, Sierra Leone,
Guinea-Bissau and recently in Côte d’Ivoire have had
deplorable consequences, both for those countries and
for neighbouring States, jeopardizing the subregional
balance.
The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
and the increasingly frequent recourse to mercenarism
are unlikely to enhance the restoration of peace and
security in West Africa. The Ivorian crisis is an
unfortunate illustration. While it is recognized that the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons is not in
itself the cause of these armed conflicts, it has
nonetheless been established that it helps to exacerbate
them. The joining of such proliferation with the use of
mercenaries today constitutes factors of destabilization
and insecurity in West Africa.
The holding of this interactive workshop has been
to the point, because it has undoubtedly enabled us to
measure the impact of these scourges and to provide
the necessary incentives to eradicate them. In other
words, we must proceed to an in-depth consideration of
the mechanisms that underlie these phenomena, and we
must adopt appropriate measures with a view to both
prevention and elimination.
28
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
The conclusions of previous studies and debates
on these issues confirm the gravity of the danger and
the scope of the damage caused in West Africa in
particular. It is, in fact, deplorable to note that 500
million light weapons are circulating freely in the
world — 30 million of them in Africa and 8 million in
West Africa. Even worse, 60 per cent of these weapons
are held by civilians, of whom approximately 500,000
die each year; 80 per cent of these victims are women
and children.
That somber tableau surely explains the feeling
that, in Africa, guns are not only weapons of choice,
but weapons with devastating effects. My delegation is
concerned by the uncontrolled and abusive use of small
arms and light weapons, which affect the public
resources of our States — already very limited — and
the implementation of development programmes. We
are of the view that this form of governance has as its
corollary the flight of foreign capital and
disinvestment.
Moreover, we must recognize that the moderate
cost of these weapons and the fact that they are easy to
use and to acquire explain their possession by
everyone, including children, who are often recruited
against their will for armed conflicts. Guinea
subscribes to the view that these conditions
dangerously compromise the implementation of peace
agreements in the subregion, whose failure is often
attributed solely to the absence of political will. How,
in fact, can those agreements be effectively
implemented when the subregion is more concerned
with its safety and stability? Taking that factor into
account is a matter of moral fairness.
We admit that, besides the weak capacity of
security forces, unemployment and poverty promote
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons. In
that regard, several initiatives have been undertaken, in
vain, to eradicate this scourge. In October 1998, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) adopted a Declaration of Moratorium on
the Importation, Exportation and Manufacture of Light
Weapons in West Africa for a renewable three-year
period. In order to accelerate implementation of the
Moratorium, an action plan for the Programme for
Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development (PCASED) was adopted in March 1999,
thanks to the cooperation of the United Nations system.
Despite the slowness observed in the establishment of
national commissions, years after the adoption of the
Moratorium, some progress deserves to be emphasized:
to date, 13 national commissions have been created.
Nevertheless, increased assistance by the United
Nations system is required to make them more
operational.
We understand that the difficulties encountered in
the effective functioning of the ECOWAS Moratorium
are also attributable to the absence of effective and
efficient cooperation among States to harmonize their
policies; to insufficient personnel and equipment at the
ECOWAS secretariat level to oversee implementation
of the Moratorium; and to the absence of binding legal
provisions.
Therefore, my delegation remains convinced that
we need to strengthen the subregion’s institutional
capacities, ensuring a long-term fight against the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons, by
taking the following elements into account: the
introduction of a standardized end-user certificate in
the subregion; the broadening of the Moratorium with
the goal of creating a mechanism for the exchange of
information on all types of weapons acquired by the
States of the subregion, as well as on deliveries made
by the countries exporting them; the computerization of
aircraft registration lists, in conformity with the
provisions of the International Civil Aviation
Organization Convention of 1944; the elaboration of
national action plans; the increased involvement of
national commissions and of local structures in the
implementation of measures taken at the subregional,
regional and international levels; and finally, the
strengthening of unity of action to break the mafia
mechanisms that feed weapons trafficking.
Guinea, for its part, has taken the following
measures: the creation of a national commission on
18 August 2000; the elaboration of an action plan
based on the nine priorities defined by PCASED; the
introduction of legislation and of administrative
procedures on arms possession, soon to be adopted; the
establishment of a training and awareness programme
for the Guinean army; and the holding of numerous
symposiums, seminars and workshops and participation
in those types of events with a view to gradually
establishing a true culture of peace. Regardless of such
efforts, the hoped-for success will essentially depend
on the considerations that we have just cited.
My delegation notes — and deplores — the fact
that people without faith or law, whose sole motivation
29
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
is enrichment, are selling their services today to parties
in the same conflict. Members will agree with me that
the degrading use of mercenaries has made the security
situation of our States — already so worrisome — even
more fragile. It has been proved that these mercenaries
are, more and more often, turning soullessly against
their own employers. That is to say, the common
enemy of the States of the subregion is now mercenary
activity. We must denounce those who order it or
permit it. We must not forget that these mercenaries
operate in motley groups of various nationalities,
sometimes nurtured by former combatants who have
never been taken in charge by disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes.
My country, the Republic of Guinea, has paid a
heavy price for the use of mercenaries. It was the
victim of aggressions in November 1970 and in
September 2000, which enabled us to measure the
danger of mercenary activity to a country’s stability
and security.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to invite
the Security Council to ensure scrupulous compliance
by all States of the subregion with measures taken
against the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons and the use of mercenaries. Therefore, it is
essential that our States give due consideration to the
recommendations and observations that have resulted
from this workshop, with a view to combating these
scourges — an undeniable reality — and to ensuring a
better future for coming generations.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the Director of the
Programme for Coordination and Assistance for
Security and Development (PCASED), and I would ask
him to give us a very brief assessment of our
workshop.
Mr. Fall (spoke in French): I would like to start
by commenting on the new recommendations having to
do with the Plan of Action that has been drawn up and
then list them in terms of the entities that would have
to act to implement them. I think I would start by
saying that the international community recognizes not
only the importance of security in West Africa but also,
unfortunately, the threats that have been highlighted
here, in particular the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons and mercenaries.
Still, with respect to the international community,
I think there is a need for it to support the Moratorium
on the Importation, Exportation and Manufacture of
Light Weapons — first of all, by supporting the
national commissions responsible for this issue;
secondly, by helping the Secretariat of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to
strengthen its capacity in this domain; and, finally, of
course, by coordinating development assistance within
the United Nations system.
As regards the Council itself, we have noted the
idea of having an embargo on light weapons in conflict
areas. I think this was an early initiative launched here
at a Security Council ministerial-level meeting by Mrs.
Madeline Albright, former Secretary of State of the
United States of America. I think this idea has come up
again, and we should note it, while at the same time
penalizing the mercenary operations in West Africa.
I also note the willingness to contain mercenary
activities and proliferation through the adoption of
appropriate legal instruments. Of course, the Security
Council would need the assistance of the Conference
on light weapons as regards the definition of standards
and so forth.
Finally, there was mention of developing
independent mechanisms, evaluation and sanctions. Of
course, this mission would naturally fall under the
auspices of the Security Council.
At the subregional level, specifically for
PCASED and ECOWAS, two things are very
important: improving the procedure for monitoring of
import controls and the end-user certificates, and
starting in the next semester, we will look at reviewing
and improving these procedures as part of our agenda.
Finally, as regards ECOWAS, PCASED and the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
together, I see the need to evaluate risks in the
subregion and to report annually on arms trade flows
and mercenary activities in the region.
The President (spoke in French): I would like to
thank the Director of the Programme for Coordination
and Assistance for Security and Development
(PCASED) for his contribution.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2003/328, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council’s
prior consultations.
30
S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Chile, China,
France, Germany, Guinea, Mexico, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Spain, Syrian Arab Republic,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.
The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1467 (2003).
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations on Iraq, immediately following the
adjournment of this meeting.
The meeting rose at 6.20 p.m.
