United Nations S/PV.5028
Security Council
Fifty-ninth year
5028th meeting
Thursday, 2 September 2004, 7.40 p.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.
04-49874 (E)
*0449874*
President: Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Spain)
Members: Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Baali
Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Gaspar Martins
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Adechi
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Sardenberg
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Maquieira
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wang Guangya
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. De la Sablière
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Trautwein
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Akram
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Baja
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dumitru
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Denisov
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . Mr. Thomson
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Danforth
Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
2
S/PV.5028
The meeting was called to order at 7.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Lebanon, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Mohamad Issa,
Secretary-General of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
and Emigrants of Lebanon and Vice-President of the
Lebanese delegation to the General Assembly.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Issa
(Lebanon) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/707, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by France, Germany, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America. I should also like to
draw the attention of members to document
S/2004/699, containing the text of identical letters
dated 30 August 2004 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General and to the President
of the Security Council, and to document S/2004/706,
containing the text of identical letters dated
1 September 2004 from the Permanent Representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General and to the President
of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Mohamad Issa, Secretary-General of the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs and Emigrants of Lebanon and Vice-
President of the Lebanese delegation to the General
Assembly.
Mr. Issa (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to take this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and to commend your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation, for his efforts last month.
Today the Council is considering a draft
resolution introduced by the United States of America
and France and supported by other States, including
Germany and the United Kingdom — all of which are
countries friendly to Lebanon. We recall that two
previous resolutions on Lebanon, resolution 425 (1978)
of 19 March 1978 and resolution 520 (1982) of
17 September 1982, were adopted by the Council, in
the first instance because of Israel’s aggression and
occupation of southern Lebanese territory and the
western Bekaa, and in the second instance when Israeli
forces invaded Lebanese territory and occupied part of
Beirut. Resolution 425 (1978) called for the withdrawal
of all Israeli forces from all the Lebanese territories
they had occupied; resolution 520 (1982) emphasized
the determination of Lebanon to ensure the withdrawal
of all non-Lebanese forces from Lebanon following the
invasion of Lebanese territories and incursions into
Beirut by Israeli troops.
Although we appreciate the interest shown by the
United States, France, the United Kingdom and
Germany — all of which are friendly countries, as I
said — and their emphasis on Lebanon’s sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence, we must
recall that it is the Lebanese people who have a stake in
those matters. The country that attacks Lebanon,
continues to occupy parts of its territory and threatens
its political independence with continued air, land and
sea aggression — Israel — was forced to leave the
western Bekaa and the south by the Lebanese national
resistance but continues to occupy parts of Lebanon.
In that regard, there are no militias in Lebanon.
The Lebanese national resistance appeared following
the Israeli occupation of Lebanese territory and will
remain as long as the Israelis occupy parts of Lebanon,
because we look forward to putting an end to the Israeli
occupation. The resistance forces exist alongside the
Lebanese national forces; our military authorities
determine their presence and their size according to our
3
S/PV.5028
needs. The authority of the Lebanese State extends
over all of Lebanese territory except the Israeli-
occupied areas, which we are resolved to liberate by
peaceful means, if possible.
The draft resolution submitted to the Council for
its consideration today confuses two matters. The first
is the unique relations between Lebanon and Syria,
which achieve their common interests, particularly
Lebanon’s interests. Friendly Syria has helped Lebanon
to maintain security and stability within its borders. It
has fended off the radicalism and violence that are fed
by Israel’s extremism and violence against the
Palestinians, which threaten their security and stability.
At the same time, Israel has also threatened Lebanon’s
security and stability by violating its land borders,
territorial waters and airspace. All those violations
have been reported by Lebanon and by the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon to the relevant
United Nations organs. The second matter is purely
internal, and relates to the presidential electoral process
now under way in Lebanon because the mandate of its
President will come to an end on
23 November 2004.
Syrian troops came to Lebanon in response to our
legitimate request. Their presence is guided by the Taif
Agreement, which had the support of the Security
Council, as well as by agreements concluded between
the two sovereign States. Those troops have been
redeployed many times, and their presence is invisible.
They contribute to rebuffing Israel’s radical and
excessive actions, which continue to include totally
unjustifiable and excessive acts of violence. Those
reactions in turn generate Palestinian violence, pushing
the region into a dangerous and unpredictable
whirlwind. To say that Syria supports radical
movements in Lebanon in therefore untrue. To the
contrary, as we have said, it supports a national
resistance movement seeking to liberate the territories
occupied by Israel.
The draft resolution under discussion today refers
to support for free and fair presidential elections in
Lebanon. I do not believe that an issue such as this,
which is an internal matter for a founding State
Member of the United Nations, has ever been discussed
in the Security Council with regard to any other
Member State, and the Organization has never
interfered in such a matter in the case of any other
State. Lebanon’s parliamentarians have been chosen by
free and impartial elections, and, as representatives
entrusted with Lebanon’s future, its Constitution and
its institutions, they have the right to take decisions
pertaining to elections and to who is elected and how.
The legitimacy of the United Nations, the Charter
and the Council’s rules of procedure provide no
justification for this draft resolution, which constitutes
interference in the internal affairs of a State Member of
the Organization. The draft resolution also discusses
bilateral relations between two friendly countries,
neither of which has filed any complaint with regard to
those relations, which are guided by the agreement on
coordination and cooperation they have signed. We
therefore call for the withdrawal of the draft resolution.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Lebanon for his kind words addressed
to me.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution (S/2004/707)
before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, Benin, Chile, France, Germany,
Romania, Spain, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
Algeria, Brazil, China, Pakistan, Philippines,
Russian Federation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The result of
the voting is as follows: 9 votes in favour, none against
and 6 abstentions. The draft resolution has been
adopted as resolution 1559 (2004).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.
Mr. Danforth (United States of America): The
Security Council consistently has affirmed that it
supports the full sovereignty and independence of
Lebanon, free of all foreign forces. We believe
Lebanon should be allowed to determine its own future
and assume control of its own territory. Yet the
Lebanese people are still unable to exercise their rights
4
S/PV.5028
as a free people to make those choices and to take
those steps as a nation.
With France, we introduced the draft resolution
on Lebanon and Syria; and with the sponsorship of
Germany and the United Kingdom, we asked for a vote
tonight, because the situation in Lebanon is moving
very quickly. The Government of Syria has imposed its
political will on Lebanon and has compelled the
Cabinet and the Lebanese National Assembly to amend
its Constitution and abort the electoral process by
extending the term of the current President by three
years. The final vote in the Assembly is scheduled for
Friday, so it is imperative for the Security Council to
address this issue now.
The Lebanese parliament and the Lebanese
cabinet should express the will of the Lebanese people
through a free and fair presidential electoral process.
What the Lebanese people and we have witnessed over
the past week in terms of Syrian actions is a crude
mockery of this principle. It is clear that Lebanese
parliamentarians have been pressured, and even
threatened, by Syria and its agents to make them
comply. We strongly support the extension of the
control of the Government of Lebanon over all
Lebanese territory, including southern Lebanon, as
called for by the Security Council over the past four
years. The continued presence of armed Hizbullah
militia elements, as well as the presence of the Syrian
military and Iranian forces in Lebanon, hinders that
goal.
We believe that this situation — 14 years after the
end of Lebanon’s civil war and four years after the
Security Council accepted unanimously the Secretary-
General’s report that Israel had complied fully with
Security Council resolution 425 (1978) — is simply
unacceptable. It is wrong for Syria to continue to
maintain its forces in Lebanon, in flat contravention of
the spirit and clear intent of the Taif Accord. And it
would be very wrong of Syria to continue to interfere
in the presidential electoral process in Lebanon. We
have called on the Security Council to carry out its
responsibility of supporting the full independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon, free
after so many years from all foreign forces, and to
support the Lebanese people in their ability to make
their own national decisions, free at long last from
outside coercion and dictate.
Mr. De la Sablière (France) (spoke in French):
France welcomes the adoption of resolution 1559
(2004), which we co-sponsored.
Lebanon has been through several decades of
upheaval. It has been confronted by war. Its internal
stability and the stability of the region have been
repeatedly and seriously threatened.
After the war, Lebanon began to rebuild, and it is
committed to strengthening the rule of law, faithful to
its democratic aspirations. After a very troubled period,
Lebanon must be able to restore confidence and
prosperity. That will come through the full restoration
of its sovereignty and the free exercise of democracy.
Since 1978 — and long since it took note of
Israel’s withdrawal — the Security Council has been
calling for respect for the territorial integrity, political
independence and sovereignty of Lebanon. It has
regularly reaffirmed those objectives. Today, the future
of Lebanon is being seriously threatened by Syria’s
interference in the political life of the country and, in
particular, in the electoral process — the reason for the
current crisis — as well as by the continued occupation
and the persistent presence of armed militias.
France is deeply concerned that Lebanon might
retreat from the objectives that are constantly
reaffirmed by the international community. That is why
the rapid mobilization of and a decisive response by
the Security Council seemed essential to us. The
withdrawal of foreign forces from the entire territory of
Lebanon and the dismantling of Lebanese and
non-Lebanese militias should be delayed no longer.
The electoral process should proceed without any
foreign interference.
These demands, reiterated by the Security
Council today, are in keeping with the position that it
has regularly adopted for more than 25 years. The
Council is not committing an act of interference by
denouncing the risk to international peace and security
represented by the current crisis. Rather, if it refrained
from taking action, the Council would be sanctioning
the inadmissible interference by a State in the internal
affairs of another sovereign State.
France believes that by responding firmly today
the Security Council is showing its confidence in the
future of Lebanon. That future must include the full
restoration of its sovereignty — not increased external
interference.
5
S/PV.5028
Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Respect for sovereignty, independence, territorial
integrity and the principle of non-interference in
internal affairs in international relations constitutes the
centrepiece of China’s foreign policy. It is also a
fundamental principle enshrined in the United Nations
Charter. Adhering to that principle, China has always
been resolute in supporting respect for, and the
safeguarding of, the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Lebanon.
The draft resolution co-sponsored by the United
States and France touches on questions concerning
presidential elections in Lebanon. In our view, those
questions fall within the purview of the internal affairs
of Lebanon and should be freely decided by the
Lebanese people themselves. China is aware that the
Permanent Representative of Lebanon clearly stated, in
his recent letters to the President of the Security
Council and to the Secretary-General, his
Government’s objection to the consideration of those
questions by the Council. China respects the wishes of
the Lebanese Government in that regard and hopes that
all Council members will do so. On the basis of that
position, China abstained in the vote on the draft
resolution.
China has been closely following the
developments in Lebanon and sincerely hopes that
Lebanon will continue to maintain its stability and
economic development. That would be in the interests
of peace and stability in the Middle East region and
would prevent new uncertainties from being introduced
into the region.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
China’s hope that the parties concerned will be able to
satisfactorily resolve, through political negotiation, all
of their problems, including those of the Palestinian-
Israeli, Syrian-Israeli and Lebanese-Israeli tracks, so
that a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East can soon be achieved.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Algeria
which is resolutely committed to strict respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and
independence of Lebanon, as well as for the principle
of non-interference in the internal affairs of Lebanon
and in its political and economic choices, decided to
abstain on the draft resolution presented by the United
States and France for a number of reasons.
First, the situation prevailing today in Lebanon
does not appear to constitute a threat to international
peace and security and is therefore not of a nature to
prompt consideration, especially on an urgent basis, by
the Security Council — still less a decision on its part.
Secondly, it is Israel that, by its policy of
occupation and colonization of Arab lands, including
the Lebanese enclave of Shaba’a, the Syrian Golan and
the Palestinian territories of the West Bank, Gaza and
East Jerusalem, and its policy of aggression against the
countries of the region and of brutal repression of the
Palestinian people, constitutes an incontrovertible
threat to international peace and security — a threat
that does require urgent consideration and effective
measures by the Security Council to compel Israel to
respect the decisions of the Council and to comply with
international law.
My delegation would therefore have hoped to see
the Security Council display towards Israel the same
firmness it is today showing with respect to Lebanon
by demanding that Israel withdraw its occupation
forces from Arab lands within 30 days. It would
undoubtedly gain credibility and would make a
decisive contribution to the settlement of a painful
problem that has been undermining the Middle East
region for decades.
Thirdly, the Security Council must interfere
neither in the internal affairs of States nor in bilateral
relations between States, especially when these in no
way pose a threat to international peace and security,
because the Council’s primary responsibility under the
Charter is solely the maintenance of international peace
and security. In that regard, the Council’s consideration
of an internal Lebanese matter constitutes an
unfortunate precedent that must not be repeated, lest
the Council be dragged seriously adrift, with
consequences that would be detrimental to its
credibility and to the Charter in both its letter and its
spirit.
Fourthly, as a matter of principle, Algeria cannot
associate itself with a draft resolution that includes
even implicit threats against fraternal countries —
countries, moreover, that respect international law.
Finally, bearing in mind the complex and
multidimensional nature of the Middle East problem,
Algeria believes that only a comprehensive, just and
lasting settlement based on respect for international
law, the principle of land for peace and Israel’s
6
S/PV.5028
withdrawal from all occupied Palestinian and Arab
lands can bring about a just and final peace throughout
the region.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Pakistan abstained in the
vote on the draft resolution just adopted by the
Council, with nine votes in favour, as resolution 1559
(2004). We did so for the following reasons.
First, the resolution is not consistent with the
Security Council’s functions and responsibilities.
Article 39 of the Charter stipulates that the Security
Council shall determine the existence of any threat to
the peace, breach of the peace or act of aggression and
shall thereafter make recommendations for action. In
this case, the resolution establishes no evidence of any
urgent threat to peace. There has been no complaint
from the country whose sovereignty and integrity the
resolution purports to uphold. On the contrary,
Lebanese representatives communicated to the Council
their opposition to consideration of the draft resolution.
Secondly, the resolution addresses the wrong
threat. If there is a threat to Lebanon it is well known;
it does not arise from Syria. We construe the provisions
of paragraph 2, as now worded, as constituting a
reference to those foreign forces which have entered
Lebanon uninvited and by the use of force.
Thirdly, the resolution goes beyond the mandate
and the authority of the Security Council. Article 24,
paragraph 2, of the Charter states that Security Council
shall act in accordance with the purposes and principles
of the United Nations. A fundamental principle of the
United Nations is stated in Article 2, paragraph 7:
“Nothing contained in the present Charter shall
authorize the United Nations to intervene in matters
which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction
of any State”. This resolution, in its sixth preambular
paragraph and in its operative paragraph 5, intervenes
in the internal affairs of Lebanon. Such intervention is
unacceptable and is contrary to the Charter. It also sets
an unfortunate precedent. It is, moreover, unclear, since
it will be impossible for the Council to determine
whether and when the constitutional rules of any
country, in this case Lebanon, are, in the words of
those paragraphs, “devised without foreign interference
or influence”. For that reason, this provision of the
resolution is also unimplementable. Indeed, the
Security Council will find it impossible to enforce
changes in the national constitutions and rules of
sovereign States.
We have acted on this resolution under the item
on the Middle East. The Security Council must address
the real threat to peace in the Middle East arising from
the occupation of Palestinian and Arab territories,
including territory of the Syrian Arab Republic. We
trust that we shall not be deflected or diverted from
that objective by the resolution which the Council has
adopted today.
Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Yesterday during the Council’s discussion of
the draft resolution on the situation in Lebanon
proposed by our United States and French colleagues,
we said that from our point of view its main purpose
was to prevent further escalation of tension in the
Middle East. We note that a high level of attention is
being devoted to the situation in Lebanon. Any misstep
could possibly exacerbate the situation in the region
and lead to the emergence of a new pocket of
instability in addition to the ongoing Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and the situation in Iraq. There is also a danger
of upsetting the fragile political balance in Lebanon
itself.
Guided by those thoughts, we submitted for the
Council’s consideration the amendments with which
members are familiar. Their purpose was to situate the
draft resolution more in the context of an overall
Middle East settlement and to prevent it from being
one-sided and from concentrating solely on domestic
Lebanese affairs. We believe that Russia’s proposals
improved the draft resolution submitted by France and
the United States by making it more acceptable to all
members of the Council.
Unfortunately, our proposals were not adopted.
Therefore, we were unable to support the draft
resolution.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): Brazil abstained from
voting on the draft resolution put before the Security
Council this evening. We have been following very
closely the events taking place in Lebanon. This
interest comes from the friendly historic ties that link
us to the Lebanese people. Suffice it to say that there is
a large community of people of Lebanese descent in
my country. Bilateral relations with Lebanon constitute
a high priority for the Government of Brazil.
It is our view that resolution 1559 (2004) deals
with matters that are essentially within the domestic
jurisdiction of Lebanon. The existence of a dispute
likely to endanger international peace and security has
7
S/PV.5028
not been properly characterized in the text. If it had
been, the Security Council would have had to take into
consideration the procedures for settlement of the
dispute already adopted by the parties. Finally, we
took into account the legitimate expression to the
United Nations of the Governments of the countries
specifically concerned that the matter under
consideration is not within the Council’s attributions.
The delegation of Brazil takes this opportunity to
reiterate its full commitment to the promotion of peace
and stability in the Middle East based on a just and
comprehensive settlement in all tracks, in conformity
with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003); the Madrid
terms of reference; the principle of land for peace; the
existing agreements between the parties and the Arab
League initiative of Beirut.
Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Chile voted in favour of this resolution
because we share its philosophy regarding respect for
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and the internal
political process of States. Our support is also justified
by the important amendments made to the original text,
which made it possible to overcome some of the
primary basic objections that our delegation had and
which brought the resolution into line with my
country’s position of principle.
At the same time, the delegation of Chile wishes
to state that this resolution in fact means once again a
double standard in the Middle East conflict, as
demonstrated by the sad lack of political will to deal
with Israel’s occupation of the West Bank, Gaza, and
the Golan. It is also of concern that there is no mention
of the peace plan, which Chile believes is the only
viable mechanism for negotiations that can reduce
tensions in the region and lead to a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): My country
voted in favour of this resolution, as the concerns
expressed and proposed as amendments have been
taken into account — though not sufficiently. This is
not a perfect resolution; it is the possible resolution. It
is the hope of my delegation that by adopting
resolution 1559 (2004) the Security Council will be
able to make an effective contribution to the
strengthening of the political independence, territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Lebanon in its territorially
recognized borders. It is also our hope that its adoption
will not have undesirable and unexpected effects, since
the situation in Lebanon does not represent an
immediate threat to peace and security.
In the view of my delegation, the approach
adopted by the Security Council could have been better
balanced and could have taken into account very
delicate geostrategic realities of the region. The
Council could also take a more proactive role in the
search for a comprehensive solution to the problems
prevailing in the region. My delegation would have
preferred — as we expressed during the consultations
on the draft resolution — to seize the opportunity for
the Council to encourage the Governments of Lebanon
and Syria to conclude a bilateral agreement under the
auspices and guarantees of the Security Council. That
approach, in the view of my delegation, might better
safeguard the interests of all parties concerned and
better guarantee the attainment of the objectives set by
the international community, thus contributing to a
better way and defusing tensions prevailing in the
entire region.
Mr. Baja (Philippines): We abstained in the vote
on resolution 1559 (2004) because it cannot be justified
as part of the role given to the Security Council in the
collective security system under the United Nations
Charter. There is a fine but nevertheless clear boundary
that demarcates the role of the Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security as
embodied in Article 39. Resolution 1559 (2004)
crossed that line, and it collides head-on with the long-
standing and revered principle of non-interference
embodied in the Charter.
We acknowledge the generally constructive
rationale of the resolution — to promote and enhance
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Lebanon. But
no matter how noble and well-intentioned its motives
are, resolution 1559 (2004) places the Council in a
situation of acting in a manner that it seeks to excise in
the first place, and that is not to interfere in what is
essentially internal affairs of a country. Article 2,
paragraph 7, of the Charter is sacrosanct. The
amendments presented by the Russian Federation
would have removed the resolution from a distinctly
Lebanese internal affairs context.
Our action today is aimed at preserving the
integrity of the United Nations Charter and its time-
honoured values of sovereign equality of States and
non-interference. As a founding Member, we feel a
8
S/PV.5028
special duty to the Organization to show resolve in
defence of its Charter and principles.
Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): Benin
voted in favour of resolution 1559 (2004). The
initiative of the cosponsors was basically intended to
help stability in Lebanon, a friendly country that is
recovering from several years of civil war and has
managed to restore a peaceful democracy. My country
voted in favour of the draft resolution because we share
the concern to reaffirm the Council’s support for the
sovereignty and independence of Lebanon.
Resolution 1559 (2004), just adopted, deals with
the situation in the Middle East. We would like to
reaffirm here our support for the efforts to bring about
a comprehensive political settlement in the Middle East
through the withdrawal of all foreign forces present in
the countries of the region. Accordingly, we have
repeatedly expressed our commitment to peace and
security in that region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 8.30 p.m.
