United Nations S/PV.5612
Security Council
Sixty-first year
5612thmeeting
Saturday, 23 December 2006, 11.30 a.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.
06-68094 (E)
*0668094*
President: Mr. Al-Nasser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Qatar)
Members: Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mayoral
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wang Guangya
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Gayama
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Løj
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. De La Sablière
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Nana Effah-Apenteng
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Vassilakis
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Oshima
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ruiz Rosas
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Churkin
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Burian
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . Sir Emyr Jones Parry
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Manongi
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wolff
Agenda
Non-proliferation
S/PV.5612
06-680942
The meeting was called to order at 11.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Germany and the Islamic Republic
of Iran, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zarif
(Islamic Republic of Iran), took a seat at the
Council table; Mr. Matussek (Germany) took the
seat reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/1010, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by France, Germany and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
I wish to draw members’ attention to three letters
addressed to the President of the Security Council from
the representative of France, contained in documents
S/2006/521, S/2006/814 and S/2006/815. I also wish to
draw members’ attention to a letter addressed to the
President of the Security Council from the
representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, contained in document
S/2006/985.
In addition, I wish to draw members’ attention to
the relevant reports of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, including those
reports dated 27 February, 28 April and 31 August
2006, contained in documents S/2006/150, S/2006/270
and S/2006/702, respectively.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation will support the draft
resolution before us relating to Iran’s nuclear
programme. We will do so because we believe that the
draft, the outcome of lengthy and complex
consultations, focuses on the affirmation of measures
that Iran must take in order to produce confidence in its
nuclear programme, formulated by the Board of
Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA). In other words, the main thrust of the draft
resolution we are to adopt today is the support of the
Security Council, through its authority, of the Agency’s
activities in that area.
It is crucial that the restrictions being introduced
on cooperation with Iran apply to those areas that are
the cause of the IAEA’s concern. In that regard, we
firmly believe that cooperation with Iran in areas and
using resources that are not restricted by the draft
resolution shall not be subject to the draft resolution’s
restrictions.
We believe that some of the draft resolution’s
wording could have been made clearer.
We are convinced that ways effectively to resolve
the Iranian nuclear problem are to be found exclusively
in the political, diplomatic and legal framework. In that
context, it is important that the measures provided for
in the draft resolution be taken in accordance with
Article 41 of the United Nations Charter and commit
no use of force. In strengthening the global non-
proliferation regime for nuclear weapons, it is
necessary to seek the establishment of solid regional
and international security and stability.
Russia views the draft resolution as a serious
message to Iran regarding the need to cooperate more
actively and more openly with the IAEA to resolve the
remaining concerns and questions relating to its
nuclear programme. The parameters for the required
cooperation have been set forth in the resolutions of
the IAEA Board of Governors and supported by the
Security Council.
S/PV.5612
306-68094
The draft resolution clearly reaffirms that, if Iran
suspends all activities relating to the enrichment and
chemical reprocessing of uranium, the measures
spelled out in the draft resolution will be suspended.
That will make it possible to launch the negotiating
process in the interests of a solid political settlement of
the Iranian nuclear problem. The proposals that have
been transmitted to the Iranian Government on behalf
of the “six” remain valid.
We hope that Iran will correctly and most
earnestly consider the contents of the draft resolution
and take the measures necessary to redress the
situation. Constructive steps by Tehran to comply with
the draft resolution will make it possible to mitigate the
urgency of the questions relating to Iran’s nuclear
programme.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): Iran’s
pursuit of nuclear weapons capability constitutes a
grave threat and demands a clear statement from this
Council. Today we are placing Iran in the small
category of States under Security Council sanctions
and sending it an unambiguous message that there are
serious repercussions to its continued disregard of its
obligations and defiance of this body.
Nearly four months ago, the Council sent an
unequivocal message to Iran that it must take the steps
required by the Board of Governors of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), including fully
verifiable and sustained suspension of all enrichment-
related and reprocessing activities, research and
development. That step was taken to convince Iran to
relent from its confrontational course; consider the
offer of a negotiated solution by the United States,
France, the United Kingdom, Germany, Russia and
China on 1 June 2006; and avoid further Security
Council action. Regrettably, Iran continues to defy the
international community by its continued enrichment
activities, its refusal to comply with its obligations
under Security Council resolution 1696 (2006), and the
requests of the IAEA.
Today’s Chapter VII draft resolution requires Iran
to suspend all enrichment-related and reprocessing
activities, including research and development, and to
stop work on all heavy water-related projects,
including construction of a heavy water research
reactor. That suspension is subject to IAEA
verification; a report from the IAEA Director General
on the status of the suspension is due to the Council
within 60 days. Iran is also required to provide the
IAEA the access it needs to verify suspension and
resolve outstanding issues. Finally, the IAEA calls on
Iran to ratify the Additional Protocol.
In order to persuade Iran to take these steps, the
draft resolution imposes sanctions on elements of the
Iranian regime involved in dangerous proliferation
activities. It decides that Member States shall not
engage in trade with Iran in three key nuclear areas —
enrichment, reprocessing and heavy water projects —
and it prohibits Member States from engaging in any
trade with Iran that could contribute to its development
of a nuclear weapon delivery system. Similarly, the
draft resolution prohibits Iran from exporting a range
of proliferation-sensitive technologies or related
equipment.
This draft resolution prohibits any technical or
financial assistance related to the transfer or use of the
prohibited items to other countries; it requires States to
freeze the assets of identified individuals and entities
involved in Iran’s proliferation-sensitive nuclear
activities or the development of nuclear-weapon
delivery systems, and calls on States not to allow
international travel by these individuals. The IAEA is
also required to stop providing technical cooperation
for such activities.
The United States expects that Iran and all other
United Nations Member States will immediately act
under their Charter obligations to implement the
requirements of this draft resolution.
This will be the second Security Council
resolution under Chapter VII on Iran in response to that
country’s efforts to obtain a nuclear weapons
capability, reflecting the gravity of this situation and
the determination of the Council. We hope this draft
resolution will convince Iran that the best way to
ensure its security and end its international isolation is
to abandon the pursuit of nuclear weapons and take
steps needed to restore international confidence. In this
draft resolution the Council has clearly affirmed its
intention to review Iran’s actions based on the IAEA
report and to adopt further measures if Iran has not
complied fully with its obligations.
We look forward to Iran’s full, unconditional and
immediate compliance with this draft resolution. Iran’s
cooperation would pave the way for a negotiated
solution. We hope that the Iranian leadership comes to
S/PV.5612
06-680944
understand that the pursuit of a nuclear weapons
capability makes it less, not more, secure.
In conclusion, this draft resolution provides an
important basis for action. It compels all United
Nations Member States to take all measures necessary
to deny Iran equipment, technology, technical
assistance and financial assistance that would
contribute to Iran’s enrichment, reprocessing, heavy
water or nuclear-weapon delivery programmes. It is
clear on this and not open to interpretation. We will
insist on absolute adherence to its requirements.
But adoption of this draft resolution is only a first
step. In the coming weeks, we will work with the
sanctions committee to ensure that this draft resolution
is as effective as possible. We will also take steps
under United States law to ensure that we have put in
place appropriate measures against individuals and
entities involved in the Iranian nuclear programme, and
we will call on every other country to urgently follow
suit.
Finally, if necessary, we will not hesitate to return
to this body for further action if Iran fails to take steps
to comply.
I thank you, Mr. President, and the other
members of the Council for your efforts in helping
secure this draft resolution.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Qatar.
The State of Qatar is eager for all States to
comply with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT). That is a matter of principle
to which we are committed because we believe in the
important role of the Treaty in saving humanity from
destruction — and the threat of destruction will persist
as long as nuclear weapons exist on Earth. For that
reason, we have tirelessly appealed for a Middle East
region free from all weapons of mass destruction. We
have also called on nuclear-weapon States to submit
their facilities to the inspection regime of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Further,
we have never ceased our call upon States possessing
nuclear stockpiles to work towards dismantling those
stockpiles. Moreover, my country has supported all
United Nations resolutions calling for such measures.
The State of Qatar believes that commitment to
the Treaty, within the framework of the IAEA, which is
the international forum for the sharing of nuclear
information and technology among developed and
developing countries, can encourage the safe use of
nuclear technologies, help build confidence among
States and promote understanding among nations.
The State of Qatar considers that Iran has the
right to undertake research on nuclear technology and
to use that technology and produce nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes. No one can invoke articles I and II
of the NPT to take away that right. But atomic
concepts designed for destruction have given rise to
advanced technologies that can be turned to peaceful
purposes, provided that standards for safety, including
the safety of nuclear reactors, are in place. Such
standards would avert accidents. Great benefits can
come of cooperation with the IAEA in this sphere,
because the Agency is a centre for exchanging
information and for establishing guidelines.
With respect to this difficult issue, Qatar has no
suspicions concerning the sincerity of Iran’s intentions
as regards the peaceful nature of its nuclear
programme. But we must not risk the potential benefits
of cooperation with the IAEA in guaranteeing nuclear
safety, particularly since this draft resolution would
impede delivery of equipment necessary for the Iranian
nuclear programme, which could have dangerous
repercussions for the nuclear safety issue. That is why
we appeal once again to our sisterly neighbour Iran and
urge it to respond to this draft resolution. We know that
the draft resolution is tough, but we are confident that
there is wide scope for diplomatic cooperation, given
that Iran has expressed readiness to continue to permit
inspection activities under IAEA safeguards, including
settling outstanding questions, so long as the issue
remains within the IAEA’s purview, in conformity with
Iran’s letter dated 27 April 2006 addressed to the
Director General of the IAEA.
The Council’s draft resolution also states that the
measures to be enforced would be suspended to
provide an opportunity for negotiations. These are
issues that can be overcome, so long as we act in good
faith. Iran can use its wisdom to address the situation
with the rationality that is required. Our vote is
prompted by our concerns over the safety of Iranian
nuclear facilities.
Finally, we hope that the Council will stand
united in the search for a peaceful settlement and that it
will use such a settlement to limit nuclear proliferation
S/PV.5612
506-68094
in other regions, in accordance with existing
resolutions, in particular with respect to the Middle
East region, and especially with respect to Israel,
which has recently made statements concerning its
nuclear deterrence capability.
For all those reasons, the State of Qatar will vote
in favour of the draft resolution.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/2006/1010.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, China, Congo, Denmark, France,
Ghana, Greece, Japan, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America
The President (spoke in Arabic): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1737 (2006).
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): On
31 July, the Security Council adopted resolution 1696
(2006) which made mandatory the suspension required
by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) of
enrichment-related and reprocessing activities in Iran.
The Council called upon Iran, without further delay, to
take the steps required by the IAEA Board of
Governors to act in accordance with the provision of
the Additional Protocol and to implement all
transparency measures as the IAEA may request.
The resolution set a deadline of 31 August for
Iranian compliance. Iran’s response was to step up its
sensitive activities and offer to export the technologies
it developed to other countries. The IAEA reported in
November that Iran continued to provide insufficient
transparency to help the Agency resolved outstanding
issues and remove uncertainties.
In sum, Iran has simply thumbed its nose at the
Council and defied international law. Bearing in mind
the Council’s primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and in
this regard taking with utmost seriousness the threat
from the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
the Council unequivocally expressed its intention in
resolution 1696 (2006) to adopt measures under Article
41 of the Charter of the United Nations in the event of
Iranian non-compliance.
And that is what we have done today. We have
adopted resolution 1737 (2006) under Chapter VII of
the Charter, and in this we reiterate and expand the
Council’s mandatory suspension of Iran’s proliferation-
sensitive activities. We have also established an
embargo aimed at preventing Iran from importing the
items and material that will sustain its proliferation-
sensitive activities.
In addition to taking steps to inhibit Iran’s
proliferation-sensitive activities, the Council has
introduced a set of measures intended to persuade Iran
to stop pursuing activities of concern. This resolution
underlines the seriousness of the situation, including
the international community’s lack of confidence about
the direction of Iran’s policies.
But, importantly, the door is not closed for Iran.
The United Kingdom, France and Germany, with the
European Union High Representative, Javier Solana,
have led negotiations with Iran. We remain committed
to seeking a diplomatic, negotiated solution with Iran,
based on cooperation. A new relationship between the
European Union and Iran is on the table, but it must be
with an Iran which eschews nuclear weapons.
In resolution 1737 (2006), the Council makes
clear that Iran’s suspension of enrichment and
reprocessing activities will permit negotiations to
resume and intensify, this time with the United States,
Russia and China engaged alongside France, Germany
and the United Kingdom.
For this reason, in the pursuit of a negotiated
agreement to resolve the situation, it is vital that all
States implement the resolution as fully and
comprehensively as possible. This means taking
immediate action, including by adopting the necessary
legislation to pave the way for rapid and robust
implementation. Without that, we cannot expect the
Council to be able to meet its objectives.
In the event that Iran does not change course, the
Council has committed itself in this resolution to the
adoption of further measures. Iran, therefore, faces a
choice. The vote today illustrates the gravity of that
S/PV.5612
06-680946
choice and the seriousness with which we, as a
Council, view Iran’s behaviour.
We hope Iran will heed the decision of the
Council and return to negotiation to resolve the nuclear
dossier. This, in turn, would open the way for the
European Union and Iran to develop a new and wider
relationship to our mutual benefit and to the benefit of
international peace and security.
Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French):
France welcomes the unanimous adoption by the
Security Council of today’s resolution taking measures
with regard to Iran under Article 41 of Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations.
This resolution, adopted on the basis of a draft
presented by Germany, the United Kingdom and
France, confirms the mandatory nature of the
suspension of sensitive activities in the nuclear field,
which are of concern to the international community,
because they do not have a credible civilian application
in Iran today. These include enrichment, reprocessing,
the manufacture of heavy water and the construction in
Arak of a reactor moderated by heavy water capable of
producing plutonium of military grade quality.
The resolution also allows the international
community to make sure that Iran will not benefit from
external contributions, under any form whatsoever, for
its sensitive nuclear activities, as well as for its missile
programmes. The export by Iran of sensitive
technology is also prohibited, as are services, including
financial services, surrounding sensitive transactions to
or from Iran. The travel of those with operational
involvement in the programmes will be restricted, and
their assets outside of Iran will be frozen, as will the
entities involved in sensitive programmes on behalf of
which they operate. These measures will also apply
immediately to some 20 persons and entities directly
listed in the Annex to the resolution. Lastly, the
resolution reinforces the powers of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in its verification
work.
The aim of these measures, which is recalled in
the preamble to the resolution, is to invite Iran to
conform to its commitments within the framework of
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and to the demands of the Security Council
and the IAEA, to persuade it to conform to resolution
1696 (2006) and to stop the development of its
sensitive technology supporting its nuclear and missile
programmes.
These sanctions are proportionate and reversible.
The Security Council states, without ambiguity, that if
Iran re-establishes the suspension of all its enrichment
and reprocessing activities, including research and
development, the measures that the Council has just
adopted will be suspended. If it conforms to all
provisions of resolution 1696 (2006) and 1733 (2006),
as well as those of the resolutions of the IAEA Board
of Governors, these sanctions will be lifted; but if it
persists on its current path, there will be other
measures under Article 41 of Chapter VII.
This resolution sends out a clear message on the
part of the international community to Iran, which is
now facing a strategic choice, which was recalled by
President Jacques Chirac on 12 December: cooperation
with the international community or growing isolation.
We hope that Tehran will choose dialogue and that it
will take decisions that will allow for a resumption of
negotiations based on resolutions 1696 (2006) and
1733 (2006). France, with its partners, remains ready
for this at all times.
Mr. Oshima (Japan): It is a matter of great regret
that the Council has been compelled to act in this
Chamber on another resolution regarding Iran’s nuclear
issue only five months after adopting resolution 1696
(2006). Over the course of this year, we have had
intensive discussions on the Iranian nuclear issue in the
Council as concerted international efforts continued for
the purpose of seeking a peaceful and diplomatic
resolution of this problem by the States concerned,
including my own. These efforts, however, have failed
to produce positive results.
In defiance of resolution 1696 (2006), Iran has
refused to take any steps required of it to comply with
the measures set out by the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) and the Security Council,
including the suspension of enrichment- and
reprocessing-related activities. On the contrary, the
situation has worsened, with Iran’s expansion of its
enrichment- and reprocessing-related activities.
Japan attaches great importance to the non-
proliferation of nuclear weapons as an issue that can
affect its own national peace and security and that of
the international community. Proliferation of nuclear
and other weapons of mass destruction, along with
their means of delivery, is a clear and present global
S/PV.5612
706-68094
challenge posing a great threat and must be handled
with firm determination. It is our strong belief that, in
order to counter such a threat, actual or potential, the
international community must act appropriately,
resolutely and in a timely manner wherever it occurs,
be it in the Middle East, North-East Asia or elsewhere
in the world. We believe that Iran’s case, where it has
failed to comply with the requirements set out by the
IAEA and the Security Council, must be dealt with
based on the basis of a principled stand.
At the same time, the right to the peaceful use of
nuclear energy by all States is also important and must
be fully respected and protected. Iran has that right,
just as much as any other country. We hope and expect
that, in the exercise of that right, Iran will fully comply
with its international obligations and give its utmost
cooperation to the IAEA so that it will be able to enjoy
fully the fruits of the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
Because of the importance of non-proliferation,
and taking into account the measured approach in the
text, Japan voted in favour of the resolution. However,
this resolution does not mean the end of the
negotiations on the issue. The resolution keeps the door
open for negotiations with Iran and explicitly mentions
the reversibility of the measures that it introduces.
Japan enjoys the right to the peaceful of use of
nuclear energy to the fullest in full compliance with its
international obligations. We are a country that
traditionally has enjoyed good, important relations with
Iran. In adopting this resolution, we earnestly hope and
appeal to Iran that it will seek to resolve this issue at
the earliest possible time through diplomatic
negotiations in full respect of its international
obligations. That ought not to be impossible. To that
end, Japan will continue to contribute to the efforts to
resolve the issue through bilateral negotiations with
Iran and other diplomatic channels.
Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Since the beginning of this year, Iran’s nuclear issue
has attracted more and more attention in the world.
Regrettably and disappointingly, Iran has yet to
respond positively to the requirements of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the
Security Council and show flexibility on the
suspension of enrichment-related activities.
After issuing a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2005/15) in March and adopting resolution
1696 (2006) in July on Iran’s nuclear issue, the
Security Council has today adopted another resolution,
aiming at safeguarding the international nuclear non-
proliferation mechanism, reinforcing the IAEA’s
authority and role, and promoting diplomatic efforts to
seek peaceful solutions to Iran’s nuclear issue. The
Chinese delegation has therefore voted in favour of the
draft resolution before us.
China wishes to emphasize that sanctions are not
the end, but are a means to urge Iran to resume
negotiations. The sanction measures adopted by the
Security Council this time are limited and reversible,
and they target proliferation-sensitive nuclear activities
and the development of nuclear-weapon delivery
systems. There are also explicit provisions indicating
that if Iran suspends its enrichment-related and
reprocessing activities, complies with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and meets the
requirements of the IAEA, the Security Council would
suspend and even terminate the sanction measures.
The Security Council cannot handle Iran’s
nuclear issue single-handedly. The IAEA remains the
principal mechanism for dealing with this issue.
Dialogue and negotiations are the fundamental, indeed
the only, way out. The solution to Iran’s nuclear issue
requires all-around diplomatic efforts.
Diplomatic efforts outside the Security Council in
particular should be strengthened. The resolution
welcomes the commitment of China, France, Germany,
the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom and the
United States to a negotiated solution to this issue, and
encourages Iran to engage with those six countries’
proposals for a long-term comprehensive agreement.
Such an accord would allow for the development of
relations and cooperation with Iran based on mutual
respect and the establishment of international
confidence in the peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear
programme. All these aspects would be conducive to
reactivating a new round of diplomatic efforts.
All along, China has supported safeguarding the
international nuclear non-proliferation mechanism and
opposed the proliferation of nuclear weapons. We do
not wish to see new turbulence in the Middle East. We
are in favour of a peaceful solution to Iran’s nuclear
issue through political and diplomatic efforts and
negotiations.
Under the current circumstances, we wish to call
upon all the parties concerned to adopt a highly
responsible and constructive attitude, remain calm,
S/PV.5612
06-680948
practice restraint, and refrain from taking any steps that
would harm diplomatic efforts and lead to a
deterioration of the situation. At the same time, we
hope that the parties will seek to resume negotiations
in a creative and forward-looking manner and continue
to spare no effort in seeking to enhance diplomatic
endeavours in favour of the comprehensive and
peaceful solution of Iran’s nuclear issue.
China is ready to continue to work jointly with all
the parties concerned and contribute to maintaining
international and regional peace and stability,
safeguarding and consolidating the international non-
proliferation mechanism, and resolving Iran’s nuclear
issue through political and diplomatic efforts.
Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): The
United Republic of Tanzania voted in favour of the
resolution we have just adopted. We voted thus while
regretting the fruitless outcome of the diplomatic
efforts made to engage the Islamic Republic of Iran
and ensure its pursuit of the peaceful uses of nuclear
activities. We have stated on many occasions that, as a
matter of principle, the United Republic of Tanzania is
opposed to the development or possession of nuclear
weapons by any party, including our traditional friends.
We are therefore opposed to nuclear proliferation
and strongly support the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the non-
proliferation regime it establishes under the auspices of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), of
which we are a member. We expect all IAEA members,
including the Islamic Republic of Iran, to uphold the
obligations set forth in the Treaty.
The United Republic of Tanzania firmly believes
in the right of the people of Iran to civilian nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes. The current resolution
does not in any way seek to constrain that right. It
should be made clear, however, that any such
programme has to be subjected to a verifiable
inspection regime and the safeguards of the
International Atomic Energy Agency. In our view, the
provisions of the resolution should also not constrain
other legal and commercial transactions that have no
bearing on non-proliferation.
The United Republic of Tanzania had hoped all
along that the relevant parties would utilize available
avenues to resolve the highly sensitive Iranian nuclear
issue peacefully through negotiations. We place faith in
the capacity of the parties to build on the positive
aspects of the dialogue and to return to the negotiations
under mutually acceptable terms. Unfortunately,
progress has been painfully slow due to the
uncompromising positions pursued by both sides.
Despite tremendous efforts to overcome the
differences, the situation has remained deadlocked,
mainly over the issue of enrichment and reprocessing
activities as a condition for further negotiations. We
believe that this issue can still be overcome by the
negotiators.
The United Republic of Tanzania voted in favour
of the resolution because we believe that the impasse is
reversible if good political will prevails among all the
parties involved in the discussions. The resolution is to
be taken as a signal and a call to revisit the issue at the
earliest opportunity.
Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I should like to state that Argentina voted in
favour of resolution 1737 (2006), just adopted, because
the resolution reaffirms the inalienable right enjoyed
by all States parties to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons under articles I and
II of the Treaty to develop, research, produce and use
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without
discrimination.
At the same time, on behalf of my Government, I
express our confidence that the Government of Iran
will in the future pursue its nuclear programme
exclusively for peaceful purposes, following the
parameters established by the International Atomic
Energy Agency and the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council. Moreover, on a different point, we
note our satisfaction that the resolution was adopted
unanimously and under article 41 of the United Nations
Charter. In other words, there is no possibility under
resolution 1737 (2006) of recourse to the use of force.
We would point out that the peaceful settlement
of international conflicts should be the United Nations
main objective. To that end, its principal aim should be
to maintain international peace and security, and that is
Argentina’s understanding in this instance. We
therefore issue a new call to all parties involved to
resume dialogue in order to find a diplomatic solution
to the Iranian nuclear issue.
Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): Today is a
sad day for the non-proliferation regime. Only a few
days ago, the Prime Minister of the Israeli regime
boasted about his regime’s nuclear weapons, but
S/PV.5612
906-68094
instead of even raising an eyebrow, let alone
addressing that serious threat to international peace and
security and to the non-proliferation regime, the
Security Council is imposing sanctions on a party to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) that, unlike Israel, has never attacked
or threatened to use force against any Member of the
United Nations; has categorically rejected the
development, stockpiling and use of nuclear weapons
on ideological and strategic grounds; was prepared to
provide guarantees that it would never withdraw from
the NPT; has placed all its nuclear facilities under the
safeguards of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA); fully implemented the Additional Protocol for
over two years, and stated its readiness to resume its
implementation; allowed over 2,000 person days of
IAEA scrutiny of all its related and unrelated facilities,
resulting in repeated statements by the Agency on the
absence of any evidence of diversion; voluntarily
suspended its lawful enrichment activities for over two
years, as verified by the IAEA, in order to build
confidence and provide ample opportunity to find a
mutually acceptable solution, if that ever were the
intention of its negotiating partners; presented various
far-reaching proposals to ensure permanent non-
diversion; and has consistently called for time-bound
and unconditional negotiations to find a mutually
acceptable solution — a call that was repeated
yesterday by the Iranian Foreign Minister.
The same Governments that have pushed this
Council to take groundless punitive measures against
Iran’s peaceful nuclear programme have systematically
prevented the Council from taking any action to nudge
the Israeli regime towards submitting itself to the rules
governing the nuclear non-proliferation regime. By so
doing, they have provided it with wide latitude and
even encouragement to indulge freely in the
clandestine development and unlawful possession of
nuclear weapons, and even in public boasting about
them with impunity.
As I pointed out in my letter of 20 December
2006 addressed to you, Mr. President, it is indisputable
that nuclear weapons in the hands of an Israeli regime
with an unparalleled record of non-compliance with
Security Council resolutions — if that is the criteria
that is being applied today — and a long and dark
catalogue of crimes and atrocities, such as occupation,
aggression, militarism, State terrorism, crimes against
humanity and even apartheid, pose a uniquely grave
threat to regional and international peace and security.
The reversal of the hypocritical policy of strategic
ambiguity followed by the Israeli regime has removed
any excuse — if there ever were any — for continued
inaction by the Council in the face of that actual threat
to international peace and security.
The reaction of the Security Council to the Israeli
regime’s unlawful possession of nuclear weapons will
show whether the Council is even considering to act —
as it is obliged to do under Article 24 of the Charter —
on behalf of the members of the international
community that have made their views on that issue
abundantly clear, or whether it is merely a tool in the
toolbox of a few of its permanent members, which only
misuse it to fix their foreign policy problems and to
serve their short-sighted perceived interests.
With such tendencies, it is not at all surprising
that a nation is being punished for exercising its
inalienable rights, primarily at the behest of a
dangerous regime with aggression and war crimes as
its signature brand of behaviour, which is apparently
being rewarded today for having clandestinely
developed and unlawfully possessed nuclear weapons.
Does anyone expect that to enhance the credibility of
the Council or to strengthen the authority of the NPT?
Put into perspective, today’s resolution can only
remind the Iranian people of the historic injustices that
this Security Council has done to them over the past
six decades. It is reminiscent of the attempt made in
the Council to punish the Iranian people for their
nationalization of their oil industry, claimed to present
a threat to peace. It is also a reminder of the Council’s
indifference in the face of a military coup, organized
by two of its permanent members, which restored the
dictatorship. It refreshes the memory of the Iranian
people of the time when the Council did not consider
the massive invasion of Iran by the former Iraqi regime
as a threat to international peace and security, and
refused to even call on the invading army to withdraw
from Iranian territory. It brings back the horrors of the
long years when this Council turned a blind eye to the
extensive and brutal use of chemical weapons against
Iranian civilians and soldiers and, by so doing, made
itself responsible for the tens of thousands of Iranians
who continue to suffer and perish as a result of
chemical weapons whose components, incidentally,
came from certain countries permanently seated in this
Council. We do not need to go far to find those victims.
Only last month, I lost one of my brightest colleagues
S/PV.5612
06-6809410
in the mission, Mahdi Vahidi, to cancer caused by
those very chemical weapons. He was only 39 years
old.
I dealt with the pretexts used for the involvement
of the Security Council in Iran’s peaceful nuclear
programme in my statement before the Council on
30 July. I will not repeat them today. Allow me to
simply make a few points.
The bringing of Iran’s peaceful nuclear
programme to the Council by a few of its permanent
members, particularly the United States, is not aimed at
seeking, nor will it help to find, a solution or at
encouraging negotiations. Even their stated objective is
not to achieve that. Their stated objective has always
been to use the Council as an instrument of pressure
and intimidation to compel Iran to abandon its rights.
Knowing their bright recent history, we can all assume
what the unstated objective has been. Allow me to
provide just two examples of the stated objective.
An informal paper entitled “Options for
Addressing Iran’s Nuclear Programme at the United
Nations Security Council”, circulated by the United
States mission in October 2004 — exactly when the
United States three European Union (EU) allies were
ostensibly engaged in negotiations with Iran — states:
“The United States has long believed that Iran’s
nuclear activities must be reported to the United
Nations Security Council … The United Nations
Security Council has the legal authority to require
Iran to stop its enrichment programme.”
That was the intention. As to our negotiating
partners, the Political Director of the British Foreign
Office, in a letter dated 16 March 2006 addressed to his
counterparts in France, Germany and the United States,
revealed the more conniving British plan:
“We may also need to remove one of the Iranian
arguments that the suspension called for is
‘voluntary’. We could do [that] by making the
voluntary suspension a mandatory requirement to
the Security Council.”
The letter gets even more interesting as we read
on:
“I agreed to circulate a short paper which we
might use as a sort of speaking note with the
Russians and Chinese. Implicit in the paper is a
recognition that we are not going to bring the
Russians and Chinese to accept significant
sanctions over the coming months, certainly not
without further efforts to bring the Iranians
around … In return for the Russians and Chinese
agreeing to [a Chapter VII resolution], we would
then want to put together a package that could be
presented to the Iranians as a new proposal.”
Now we see what motivated the presentation of
the infamous package of incentives presented to Iran
on 6 June 2006, and now we see why the United States
and its EU three partners never even took the trouble to
study various Iranian proposals. They were from the
very beginning bent on abusing this Council and the
threat of referral and sanctions as an instrument of
pressure to compel Iran to abandon the exercise of its
NPT-guaranteed right to peaceful nuclear technology. It
is now an open secret that their sole objective in the
negotiations has always been to impose and then
prolong and perpetuate the suspension of Iran’s rights,
in line with their arbitrary and fluctuating red lines.
Finding solutions has never even been among the
objectives.
Suspension is not a solution. It is at best a
temporary — one might call it a stop-gap — measure
to allow time to find a real solution. Such a suspension
was in place for over two years and, contrary to the
excuse that the proponents of the resolution have
presented here and there, the IAEA repeatedly verified
that Iran fully suspended what it had agreed to suspend
in each and every report from November 2003 to
February 2006. So, we had a suspension for two years
and on-and-off negotiations for three. The question is:
What has been done during those three years to find an
agreement?
Have the EU three or the United States presented
any proposal on what measures — short of outright
revision of the NPT — would remove their so-called
proliferation concerns? Having failed to do so, did they
ever consider the far-reaching proposals that were
offered by Iran in Paris on 23 March, 2005, which the
EU three negotiators initially considered to contain
positive elements? Did they ever propose how those
positive elements could be enhanced or how the points
of divergence could be bridged? Or did they, after
consultations with a certain absent party, come back
and simply say “It is not good enough. Continue to
suspend”? Did they even bother to read our proposal of
18 July 2005, which suggested:
S/PV.5612
1106-68094
“Allow the Agency to develop an optimized
arrangement on numbers, monitoring mechanism
and other specifics for an initial limited operation
at Natanz, which would address our needs and
allay [their] concerns”?
Did they ponder the far-reaching non-
proliferation potential of the proposal by the President
of the Islamic Republic of Iran in his address to the
General Assembly on 17 September 2005? Let me
refresh the memory of Council members. On that
occasion, he said,
“in order to provide the greatest degree of
transparency, the Islamic Republic of Iran is
prepared to engage in serious partnerships with
the private and public sectors of other countries
in the implementation of a uranium enrichment
programme in Iran”. (A/60/PV.10, p. 8)
Did they respond to the concrete proposal by the
Iranian Foreign Minster at the Conference on
Disarmament on 30 March 2006? Allow me to quote
what he said.
“In our view, one option to resolve the issue
could be the establishment of regional consortia
on fuel cycle development with the participation
of regional countries . . . Of course, countries
outside the region may also participate in such
regional arrangements . . . The facility would also
be jointly owned by the sharing countries, and the
work could be divided based on the expertise of
the participants.” (CD/PV.1015, pp. 6-7)
Were these suggestions not an exact replica of the
main proposal of the IAEA experts on multinational
approaches to nuclear fuel cycle activities published on
22 February 2005? For those members who may have
not seen the report, it suggests
“promoting voluntary conversion of existing
facilities to [multilateral nuclear approaches
(MNAs)], and pursuing them as confidence-
building measures, with the participation of NPT
non-nuclear-weapon States and nuclear-weapon
States, and non-NPT States . . . [and] creating,
through voluntary agreements and contracts,
multinational, and in particular regional, MNAs
for new facilities based on joint ownership,
drawing rights or co-management for front-end
and back-end nuclear facilities, such as uranium
enrichment”.
Did the Iranian readiness to implement these
ideas almost verbatim not present a unique opportunity
to create a global model to strengthen the NPT and
remove concerns about fuel cycle activities based on
the recommendation of the best international experts
brought together by the IAEA for this exact purpose?
Was any other country with similar technology
prepared to be as flexible as Iran? Did the United
States and its European allies seriously consider our
detailed reply of 22 August 2006, which, unlike their
practice, provided a point-by-point reply to their 6 June
package and made genuine proposals to address its
shortcomings? All I know is that they even refused to
refer to it in the present resolution.
Did they discuss the offer of an international
consortium which was presented by Iran in the course
of the September and October 2006 negotiations in
Vienna and Berlin and was initially considered very
promising, leading to public statements of progress
after those meetings — a prognosis that was rapidly
and astonishingly reversed even before the ministerial
meeting of the five-plus-one?
Many other similar questions may be asked. But
the answer to all of them will be the same, because
what the United States, and apparently the EU-3 — in
spite of what they told us during the negotiations —
wanted, and the only outcome that they were and are
ready to accept from these so-called negotiations,
was — and still is — that Iran should “make a binding
commitment not to pursue fuel cycle activities”, as it is
phrased in package proposed by the EU-3, of August
2005.
We are here because we did not accept that
unlawful demand, which, as many here already know,
would not have been their last demand. At the same
time, we were prepared to go to any length to allay
their so-called proliferation concerns, in spite of the
fact that we all know that these are no more than sheer
unfounded and self-serving excuses. Indeed, old-hand
proliferators and suppliers of chemical weapons and
nuclear weapon technology can hardly have
proliferation concerns.
The sponsors tell you that they do not trust our
intentions. But the problem is that their
“intentionometer” has a rather abysmal record of
chronic malfunction. Suffice it to say that the former
United States Director of Central Intelligence, Robert
Gates, in testimony before Congress in March 1992,
S/PV.5612
06-6809412
claimed that Iran was trying to acquire a nuclear
weapons capability and added that this goal was
unlikely to be achieved before the year 2000 — seven
years ago. Later, in November of the same year, a draft
National Intelligence Estimate by the same Central
Intelligence Agency concluded that Iran was making
progress on a nuclear arms programme and could
develop a nuclear weapon by 2000 — seven years ago.
Now, the same intelligence establishment is saying, not
before 2015.
Accusing Iran of having “the intention” of
acquiring nuclear weapons has, since the early 1980s,
been a tool used to deprive Iran of any nuclear
technology, even a light water reactor or fuel for the
American-built research reactor. I wonder which
“Iranian intention” or which “proliferation concern”
has prompted the main proponents of today’s
resolution to prevent Iran, for the past 27 years, from
even acquiring civilian aircraft — or even spare parts
for the civilian aircraft they sold to Iran, thereby
jeopardizing the lives and safety of Iranian civilians,
whom they hypocritically try to court these days —
and, I might add, to no avail.
As IAEA Director General ElBaradei recently
said,
“A lot of what you see about Iran right now is
assessment of intentions ... But one of the lessons
we learned from Iraq is that we really need to be
very, very careful coming to conclusions, because
these issues make the difference between war and
peace”.
As we are talking about intentions, while the
main proponents of the resolution may have self-
servingly claimed that they doubt ours, they
themselves have said and done plenty so that no body
in Iran or elsewhere in the world could have any
illusions about theirs: one need only read the recent
dangerously divisive statement by the Prime Minister
of the United Kingdom. Or take a look at the 23 August
report by the staff of the Intelligence Committee of the
United States House of Representatives on Iran’s
nuclear programme. That report was so dangerously
misleading and so illustrative of the extent to which
some war-mongers are prepared to go that it compelled
the IAEA to officially dispute its allegations against
Iran. In its letter, the IAEA called parts of the report
“outrageous and dishonest” and containing “incorrect
and misleading assertions”, and it offered evidence to
refute the report’s central claims. The Agency stressed
that the report even seriously distorted IAEA findings
on Iran’s nuclear activities.
Let me conclude by reiterating that the Islamic
Republic of Iran firmly believes that the days of
weapons of mass murder have long passed, that these
inhumane instruments of indiscriminate slaughter have
not brought about internal stability or external security
for anyone and that they will not be able to do so in the
future.
Unlike some who despise the NPT and
international law in general, we have a high stake in
preserving, fully implementing, strengthening and
universalizing the NPT. Today’s decision does exactly
the opposite; That should be no surprise because it was
championed by a non-member of the NPT, coupled
with its main benefactor, which made no secret of its
contempt for this and other disarmament instruments.
None of us has forgotten last year’s World Summit
when even the word “disarmament” was removed by
the famous “red pen”.
By the same token, we believe that the days of
bullying, pressure and intimidation by some nuclear
weapon holders are long gone. We are told that we
need to build confidence. Indeed, we all do in this
tumultuous world. But confidence can only be built
through respect for and the non-discriminatory
application of the law. Those are the only objective
criteria. Anything else would be to accept the whims of
the powerful. International law and international
treaties cannot be the subject of arbitrary, fluctuating
and self-serving reinterpretations, readjustments or red
lines even if they are connivingly imposed through
resolutions. Such a precedent is dangerous for
everyone.
The Security Council would go a long way in
addressing its own confidence deficit by truly acting on
behalf of the United Nations membership, as mandated
by Article 24 of the Charter. Nearly two thirds of them
are members of the Non-Aligned Movement or the
Organization of Islamic Conference which, at the
summit level, have reaffirmed that “States’ choices and
decisions in the field of peaceful uses of nuclear
technology and its fuel cycle policies must be
respected”, and have “expressed concern over ...
threats and pressures on Iran by certain circles to
renounce its inalienable right to develop nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes”. They have also clarified where
S/PV.5612
1306-68094
the real threat to international peace and security does
in fact lie, by, again at the summit level, “expressing
grave concern over the acquisition of nuclear capability
by Israel, which poses a serious and continuing threat
to the security of neighbouring and other States”.
That is the real issue that States Members of the
United Nations expected the Security Council to be
seized of.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council will remain seized of the matter.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.
