United Nations S/PV.5916
Security Council
Sixty-third year
5916thmeeting
Thursday, 19 June 2008, 10 a.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.
08-39069 (E)
*0839069*
President: Ms. Rice/Mr. Khalilzad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (United States of America)
Members: Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Michel
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Bassole
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Urbina
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Kosor
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Yade
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Natalegawa
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Scotti
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ettalhi
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Arias
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Churkin
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Dlamini Zuma
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . Baroness Scotland
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Le Luong Minh
Agenda
Women and peace and security
Letter dated 4 June 2008 from the Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2008/364)
S/PV.5916
08-390692
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Letter dated 4 June 2008 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2008/364)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Benin, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Mauritania, Mexico, Myanmar, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, the Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tonga, Tunisia and the United Republic of
Tanzania, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Srgjan Kerim, President of the General Assembly;
Major-General Patrick Cammaert, former Division
Commander of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo; and
His Excellency Mr. Yukio Takasu, Chairman of the
Peacebuilding Commission and Permanent Representative
of Japan.
It is so decided.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 18 June 2008 from the
Permanent Representative of South Africa, in which he
requests that His Excellency Mr. Ramtane Lamamra,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, be invited to participate in the consideration of
the item in accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure. Unless I hear any
objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to His Excellency Mr. Lamamra.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite His Excellency Mr. Lamamra to take the
seat reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/403, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada,
Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Latvia, Lichtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway,
Panama, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, San Marino Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United Republic of Tanzania and the United States of
America.
I should like to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2008/364, containing a letter
dated 4 June 2008 from the Permanent Representative
of the United States transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I should like also to draw attention to document
S/2008/402, containing a letter dated 16 June 2008
S/PV.5916
308-39069
from the Chargé d’affaires of the Permanent Mission of
the United Kingdom transmitting the report of the
Wilton Park conference, held from 27 to 29 May, on
“Women targeted or affected by armed conflict: what
role for military peacekeepers?”.
With the forbearance of my colleagues, I would
like to make introductory remarks on behalf of my
country in my national capacity. As I hear no objection,
I shall proceed; I promise to be brief.
Thank you all for joining us; I would especially
like to thank the Secretary-General for his leadership. I
should like to commend you, Mr. Secretary-General,
for your commitment to increasing the number of
women candidates for United Nations Special
Representative and Special Envoy positions. When I,
along with the members of the Women Leaders
Working Group, first began looking at this issue, we
realized that in the 60 years of United Nations
peacekeeping, only seven women had held the post of
Special Representative to the Secretary-General. You
immediately took the lead in helping to address that,
Mr. Secretary-General, and today Margrethe Løj of
Denmark is now the Special Representative for Liberia.
We applaud you for your commitment, and we look
forward to working with you on that critical issue.
I also want to commend all of you here today, my
fellow Council members, and I want to thank those
who have travelled from afar to show their dedication
to the important issue of ending the use of rape and
other forms of sexual violence as instruments of
warfare. Rape is a crime that can never be condoned.
Yet women and girls in conflict situations around the
world have been subjected to widespread and
deliberate acts of sexual violence. As many here are
aware, for years there has been a debate about whether
or not sexual violence against women is a security
issue for this forum to address.
I am proud that today we can respond to that
lingering question with a resounding “yes”. This world
body now acknowledges that sexual violence in
conflict zones is, indeed, a security concern. We affirm
that sexual violence profoundly affects not only the
health and safety of women, but also the economic and
social stability of their nations.
The draft resolution before us establishes a
mechanism for bringing those atrocities to light.
Specifically, the draft requests that the Secretary-
General prepare an action plan for collecting
information on the use of sexual violence in situations
of armed conflict and then report that information
periodically to the Council.
We already know of the unimaginable brutality
against women that exists in some parts of the world.
In Burma, for instance, soldiers have regularly raped
women and girls as young as 8 years old. I must note
that what is also tragic in that country is that instead of
being allowed to take the office of the elected leader of
Burma’s Government, Aung San Suu Kyi is marking
her birthday this very day under house arrest. We
cannot forget, as we examine that issue, other women
activists who struggle for freedom in violent
environments.
We are concerned about the issue of women
affected by violence across the world, in places such as
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Sudan and
many others.
As an international community, we have a special
responsibility to punish perpetrators of sexual violence
who are representatives of international organizations.
Last year, there were reports of sexual exploitation and
abuse by United Nations peacekeepers in several
United Nations missions and by staff at the United
Nations Mission in Liberia. The encouraging news is
that steps have been taken to address that. One of the
perpetrators is serving a sentence in his country, and
several other cases remain under investigation. That
situation should serve as a model for all countries
contributing troops to United Nations operations.
While the individual perpetrator is ultimately
responsible for the abuse, Member States are
responsible for disciplining and holding their troops
accountable.
Finally, we must work together to provide the
necessary protection and assistance to victims of sexual
violence. In recent years, the United States has
provided more than $40 million to protect women and
girls in Darfur and to provide for sexual violence
prevention in response projects worldwide. We have
also addressed the issue of sexual violence by devoting
$528 million over the last seven fiscal years to fighting
human trafficking, another grave abuse of human
dignity that is all too frequently committed against
women and girls, especially in conflict situations.
One of the most important ways in which we must
measure the value of our international community is by
how effective we are in protecting, and providing justice
S/PV.5916
08-390694
for, the most vulnerable of our members. When women
and girls are preyed upon and raped, the international
community cannot be silent or inactive. It is our
responsibility to be their advocates and their defenders.
We are taking an important step today that will enable
us better to meet that goal, and I want to thank you all
for being here to show your strong support.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
that they should limit their statements to no more than
five minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out
its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate the text in
writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.
I welcome in particular the participation today of
the Secretary-General, His Excellency Ban Ki-moon,
and I invite him to take the floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank the United
States for having taken the initiative to convene this
important debate. I congratulate Secretary of State Rice
for her leadership. It is critical that the Council devote
its full attention to this issue. I look forward to hearing
its views on the way forward.
Almost eight years after the Council adopted its
landmark resolution 1325 (2000), an increasing and
alarming number of women and girls are falling victim
to sexual violence in conflict. Sexual violence poses a
grave threat to women’s security in fragile post-
conflict countries and undermines efforts to cement
peace. It strikes women who are already struggling to
survive and to keep their families together in a
generalized climate of fear. The breakdown of law and
order makes women all the more vulnerable to attacks
and leaves them with virtually no recourse to justice.
Survivors are often so badly stigmatized that they can
hardly even hope for a normal life. Cast out by their
societies, they rarely seek redress. Even when they do
have the courage to come forward despite the
humiliation that that can bring, the justice system too
often fails, and perpetrators go free. That fuels a
culture of impunity that does nothing to discourage
more attacks. So, the vicious circle rolls forward.
But we can and must push back. This March, I
launched a global campaign to end violence against
women. The aim is to tackle all of its manifestations,
including the abominable practice of sexual violence in
armed conflict. I will soon appoint a Messenger of
Peace tasked entirely with advocacy for ending
violence against women.
Around the world, United Nations peace missions
are making a difference by monitoring the programme,
helping the victims and advocating an end to impunity.
The United Nations Mission in Liberia has built a safe
house for survivors and victims of sexual and gender-
based violence. In Haiti, our peacekeepers are
organizing meetings on women’s rights for members of
the judiciary and police. Our Rule of Law Unit in
Afghanistan is helping the country draft legislation to
eliminate violence against women. The United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo has created
a special unit to ensure that victims receive help when
they seek justice.
All of those initiatives are based on Security
Council mandates. When the Council adopts
resolutions with strong language on sexual and gender-
based violence, the United Nations can respond more
forcefully. Let us ensure that all future mandates have
clear provisions on protecting women and children in
conflict situations. When the Council authorizes
multidisciplinary missions, we can produce results.
When Member States send us qualified female
personnel, we can demonstrate the central role of
women in restoring stability to war-ravaged countries.
The concept paper before the Council cites the
all-female Indian civil police unit in Liberia as a
possible model. I believe that successful initiative
serves as an excellent example of the unique
contribution that female personnel can make. Through
their sheer presence, the members of that Indian
contingent are showing Liberian women that they, too,
can play a role in law enforcement. We have the
numbers to prove it. Since the female Blue Berets were
first deployed, there has been a marked increase in the
number of women applying for jobs with the Liberian
police.
I am eager to deploy more women worldwide, not
just as police, military and civilian personnel, but also
at the highest levels of mission leadership. Therefore, I
need Member States to come forward with more
women candidates. Send me your female troops, your
police, your civilian personnel and your senior
diplomats, and I will ensure that they all are
S/PV.5916
508-39069
considered, that qualified candidates are placed on
rosters and that the maximum number are deployed to
the field as quickly as humanly possible.
The troop-contributing countries are already
moving in that direction, and I appreciate all of their
contributions to United Nations peacekeeping. But at
the same time, I urge them to do more to provide
predeployment training for preventing and responding
to sexual violence. The Department of Peacekeeping
Operations is revising its standardized materials on that
project, and we look to the troop-contributing countries
to help ensure that United Nations personnel are part of
the solution and not the problem.
Let me be clear. The United Nations and I
personally are profoundly committed to a zero-
tolerance policy against sexual exploitation or abuse by
our own personnel. That means zero complacency.
When we receive credible allegations, we ensure that
they are looked into fully. That means zero impunity.
When allegations are found to have merit, all
personnel, whether military, police or civilian, are held
accountable on the basis of the applicable national
jurisdiction. I will strengthen the current code of
conduct by upholding the strictest discipline, whereby
not only the individual concerned but also supervisors
up the chain of command are held accountable in a
system of collective responsibility.
Violence against women has reached unspeakable
and pandemic proportions in some societies attempting
to recover from conflict. Responding to the silent war
against women and girls requires leadership at the
national level. National authorities need to take the
initiative to build comprehensive strategies, while the
United Nations needs to help build capacity and
support national authorities and civil society.
Responding to calls from women’s groups, rape
survivors and non-governmental organizations, we are
bringing together a dozen United Nations entities in a
concerted effort called the United Nations Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict. The initiative
brings together experts on issues such as peacekeeping,
development, HIV/AIDS, reproductive health, human
rights, humanitarian relief and gender concerns to help
stop rape and other sexual crimes in conflict-torn
countries.
We know what it takes for a strategy to succeed.
It takes awareness-raising. It takes effective security
measures, including training for national military and
police forces. It takes close monitoring of human
rights, and it requires prosecuting all perpetrators to the
full extent of the law.
At the same time, we must view this problem in
the broader context of women’s empowerment. That
means revising not only laws that deal with violence,
but also laws that affect women’s rights with respect to
other issues, such as poverty, inheritance or divorce. It
means creating conditions where justice can flourish,
because the best laws in the world will mean little if
they are not enforced through strong judicial and penal
systems.
Above all, we must do far more to involve
women in conflict prevention, peace negotiations and
recovery after the guns fall silent. We must have more
women participating in the process of seeking justice,
fostering reconciliation, supporting disarmament and
demobilization, shaping development policies and
rebuilding institutions. By creating a culture that
punishes violence and elevates women to their rightful
role, we can lay the foundation for lasting stability,
where women are not victims of violence but agents of
peace.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his remarks and I now give the floor to Her Excellency
Mrs. Olubanke King-Akerele, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Liberia.
Mrs. King-Akerele (Liberia): I bring you warm
greetings and felicitations from Her Excellency
Mrs. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, President of the Republic
of Liberia, the Government and the people of Liberia,
who are exerting all of their collective energies, pride
and national resources towards consolidating, nurturing
and sustaining our hard-earned peace.
We would be remiss if we did not take this
opportunity to express once again our deepest
appreciation to the United Nations, our multilateral and
bilateral partners, the Economic Community of West
African States and the African Union for standing
steadfastly with us through our darkest hour. Indeed, as
we move ahead, those same partners are with us even
now and continue to stand with us in partnership as we
slowly but surely persist in building a society of
sustained peace, stability, freedom, justice, economic
recovery and prosperity.
We are here today to address the very serious
issue of sexual violence in situations of armed conflict,
S/PV.5916
08-390696
a matter that this body first addressed some eight years
ago through the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
What progress have we made since then? We are here
to add the voice of my country in expressing the
seriousness of this matter and to appeal to the
collective conscience of the United Nations to move
expeditiously in addressing this matter, which has a
serious negative impact on our common humanity. Let
us reflect for a moment on this.
In adopting that resolution, the Security Council
recognized that protecting women and securing their
engagement in peace processes dramatically increases
the likelihood of success in peacemaking and peace
consolidation.
Much remains to be done to implement the vision
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security so as to ensure that women are protected from
the worst abuses in times of conflict and to empower
them. The resolution requires accountability — a
measurement mechanism; it needs benchmarks and
targets for implementation, with institutional structures
and focal points identified within the United Nations
system dedicated specifically to resolution 1325
(2000), along the lines, perhaps, of Security Council
resolution 1612 (2005) on children and armed conflict.
Women continue to be raped and trafficked with
impunity. Female genital mutilation is widespread.
Injuries and the medical and psychological
consequences of such violence, including depression,
post-traumatic stress syndrome, fistulas, HIV/AIDS
infections and unwanted pregnancies, are often
ignored.
In my own country, Liberia, widespread violence
against women and girls continues to be a major
concern. Rape remains at the top of the list of crimes
reported to the Liberian National Police. The majority
of rape cases reported involve children under the age of
18. Assessments carried out on the issue of rape and
other forms of sexual violence have indicated that
these are indeed embedded in cultural beliefs, practices
and behaviours that will have to go.
The maternal mortality rate in Liberia is a source
of great concern, as the latest data from the 2007
Liberian demographic survey reveals a significant
increase in maternal mortality: from 528 per 100,000
live births in 2000 to 994 per 100,000 live births in
2007. That alarming increase is the result of a lack of
access to quality reproductive health services and
information, as well as the scarcity of skilled birth
attendants. Recent interviews conducted with 150
women and girls who sought treatment for fistulas at
the fistula unit at John F. Kennedy Hospital in
Monrovia, established with the support of the United
Nations, revealed that 24 per cent of those women and
girls had developed fistulas between the ages of 11 and
16 and 54 per cent between the ages of 17 and 20, and
that 74 per cent of those who were married had been
rejected by their community.
In response, the Government of Liberia
established a special unit in the Ministry of Gender to
address the increasing incidence of gender-based
violence. Also, at the Ministry of Justice, in her annual
message earlier this year to the National Legislature,
President Johnson-Sirleaf sounded the alarm, noting
that the number of incidents of rape involving young
children continues to increase at an alarming rate. In
her own words, “We must prosecute all such criminals
without mercy. We must name and shame them. We
must help parents to expose them.” The Association of
Female Lawyers is working with us in Liberia in that
regard.
With the assistance of the United Nations family,
we recently signed — last week, on 12 June — a
two-year United Nations joint programme to address
gender-based violence in the country using
multidimensional and holistic approaches. We will
need funding for this programme. We also introduced a
rape law, enacted in early 2006. Adopted in November,
the national plan of action on gender-based violence is
also in the preparation stage.
With the support of the United Nations system,
the Government will soon have a special court in the
Temple of Justice that meets international standards
and that is dedicated to the prosecution of sexual
offences, including rape. This special court will
undoubtedly contribute to responding to the backlog of
sexual offences with which we are faced. It is time to
tackle this item very seriously, as we are doing in
Liberia. Together, with our partners, we are working
assiduously in that regard. The issue of geographical
accessibility and the other problems that confront us
are being addressed.
Yet the challenges are enormous: restoring the
rule of law, protecting human rights and ending
impunity for crimes committed against the people of
Liberia.
S/PV.5916
708-39069
We are convinced that the situation of gender-
based violence in Liberia is a microcosm of current
conflict-ridden environments, as well as post-conflict
environments.
At this point, we are indeed calling for
fundamental changes if resolution 1325 (2000) is to be
translated into effective action worldwide. We must
review the progress made under that resolution,
including field-based research on what has and has not
worked in key situations. We must identify constraints,
form partnerships, establish systematic funding and
bring together advocates of the forceful implementation
of the resolution.
We would like also to convey our special
appreciation to the Secretary-General for having
appointed a woman Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Liberia in response to the
resolution. We are working extremely well with her
and with the United Nations system at large.
Mr. Secretary-General, you mentioned the Indian
special peacekeeping force. Indeed, it is having a
significant effect in Liberia. We will be using that force
as a model to encourage Liberians, and Liberian
women in particular, to serve as peacekeepers
worldwide. We are, at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
for example, within the context of the Foreign Service
Institute, looking into how we can link up experiences
with peacekeeping. We want to thank the system at
large, as well as the Office of the Assistant Secretary-
General and Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, and the Assistant Secretary-
General herself, for their support. Indeed, we have no
alternative; we are morally obliged to support this draft
resolution. We want to commend most highly the
President of the Security Council for this initiative.
The President: I now give the floor to the
President of the General Assembly, Mr. Srgjan Kerim.
Mr. Kerim: May I begin by thanking Secretary
Rice for having convened this important meeting on
sexual violence in armed conflict situations. I would
also like to express my gratitude to Ambassador
Khalilzad for his invitation to address the Security
Council today.
Today’s debate focuses on a security issue that
has deep social consequences. As Secretary Rice
rightly pointed out in her introductory remarks, the
effectiveness of national institutions should be
measured by their ability to protect the most vulnerable
members of society, particularly women and children. I
would like to add, in the same context, that the
effectiveness of international institutions should also
be measured by the degree of protection they afford to
the most vulnerable members of society — women and
children — and that applies especially to the United
Nations.
During the General Assembly thematic debate on
human security, held in May, member States
emphasized the importance of more effectively
integrating human security perspectives into the peace
and security work of the United Nations. That is
particularly important as this year we are marking the
sixtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.
Comprehensive, integrated and people-centred
solutions at the crossroads of security, development
and human rights must be at the heart of our efforts to
fight gender-based crimes against women and girls in
conflict situations.
To that end, the Assembly adopted a
groundbreaking resolution during that session urging
all member States to take special measures to eliminate
rape and other forms of sexual violence in conflict
situations. Among other measures, the resolution calls
on the United Nations system to integrate programmes
to eliminate violence against women throughout its
work.
The Security Council took a principled view of
some of those issues in 2000 by adopting resolution
1325 (2000), which, for the first time, specifically
addressed the impact of war on women. It also
acknowledged that women’s contribution to conflict
resolution had been undervalued and underutilized.
While some progress has been made in a number
of areas covered by the resolution, several reviews
have revealed that much stronger and more coordinated
efforts are needed to fully implement its provisions.
We all have to do more to prevent human rights
violations against women and girls in situations of
armed conflict, to do more to punish the perpetrators
and to end the impunity of those who commit war
crimes.
Armed conflict has a disproportionately negative
impact on women. Sexual violence against women is
not only an affront to our human dignity but an
inherent and grave threat to our human security. When
S/PV.5916
08-390698
it is authorized and perpetrated as an instrument of war,
one cannot express in words the utter indecency of it.
It is my strong belief that women must be
guaranteed equal and full participation in conflict
resolution and peacebuilding processes and be
represented in the structures and institutions born of
any peace dividend in order to ensure that it lasts.
The interconnected nature of the issues we are
discussing today were highlighted at the General
Assembly’s recent high-level debate on human
trafficking, which also considered aspects of sexual
violence against women and girls. Our discussions
illustrated that in many instances human trafficking for
sexual exploitation is intrinsically linked with conflict
situations. Human trafficking thrives against the
backdrop of conflict, poverty and discrimination.
Members of the General Assembly all committed
themselves to do more to put the existing normative
framework into practice globally.
I would also like to highlight the General
Assembly’s work on the rights of the child, which lead
to the establishment of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and the Security Council’s
working group on this issue, which demonstrates that
together we can effectively tackle issues that span
security and human rights.
It is clear that when the General Assembly and
the Security Council take a principled stand and
increase our visibility and coordination on cross-
cutting issues, such as sexual violence in armed
conflict situations, the overall effectiveness and
credibility of the United Nations is strengthened.
I hope that we can continue to engage in a
productive policy dialogue on this and other human
security issues that affect our work and our common
mission.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro, Deputy Secretary-
General.
The Deputy Secretary-General: Let me join the
Secretary-General in commending the United States for
its initiative to convene this very important meeting. I
want to pay special tribute to you, Madam President,
for your leadership and commitment in this regard.
Under the guidance of the Secretary-General, the
United Nations has been vigorously working to prevent
sexual violence in situations of armed conflict. Just last
month, the United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO), on behalf of the United Nations
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict, to which
the Secretary-General has referred, hosted a high-level
conference on the role of military peacekeepers and
others in responding to this scourge. A number of
former Force Commanders participating in that
conference conceded that more needs to be done to
protect women and children from widespread and
systematic sexual violence in conflict situations. We
are taking measures, conscious of the challenge we are
facing in addressing the problem. The conference
agreed that the credibility of peacekeeping operations
ought to be measured by how successful they are in
this respect, and it reached broad agreement on the fact
that the profound insecurity perpetuated by sexual
violence must be addressed at the political and tactical
levels.
The adoption in 2000 of resolution 1325 (2000)
demonstrated that sexual violence in conflict is not just
a gender issue; it is a fundamental security concern.
And the fact that the Security Council is holding this
meeting today sends another clear signal that sexual
and gender-based violence in conflict is within the
remit of the Council.
That fact is critical to improving our operational
approach. When the Council renewed the mandate of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo last December, it
adopted strong language, setting a precedent for
requiring specific responses to and reporting on sexual
violence.
Gender units in most peacekeeping operations are
working with key stakeholders, including uniformed
peacekeeping personnel, national authorities, women’s
organizations and other sectors of civil society in
efforts to combat sexual and gender-based violence. All
missions have underlined training as an important
strategy to mobilize priority attention to this problem
among peacekeeping personnel and national partners.
The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights is undertaking
numerous measures as well, including monitoring,
S/PV.5916
908-39069
investigating and documenting sexual and gender-
based violence as a human rights issue.
These critical activities are part of our broader
efforts to change attitudes to sexual and gender-based
violence. This will require re-evaluating cultural
practices and judicial systems to ensure that they are
fully inclusive and that they guarantee the protection of
women against all forms of abuse.
Sexual violence has not only grave physical,
psychological and health consequences for its victims
but also direct social consequences for communities
and entire societies. Impunity for sexual violence
committed during conflict perpetuates a tolerance of
abuse against women and girls and leaves a damaging
legacy by hindering national reconciliation.
Tackling this complex problem on all fronts will
require the combined effort of all, including
Governments, the United Nations System, civil society
organizations and non-governmental organizations. In
this regard, one of our greatest assets are women
themselves. If we promote the full and equal
participation of women in the security sector, we can
ensure that security services effectively identify and
respond to their needs.
The road ahead is long, but today’s Council
meeting is a crucial step forward. Let us maintain this
forward momentum not only to protect women in
conflict situations, but to secure lasting peace for all.
The President: I would like to take this
opportunity to thank Ms. Migiro for her leadership on
this issue.
I shall now give the floor to former Division
Commander of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Major General Patrick Cammaert.
Major General Cammaert: First of all, I would
like to thank Ambassador Khalilzad and the Security
Council for inviting us here today and for taking the
time to reflect on sexual violence in conflict and post-
conflict situations.
My name is Patrick Cammaert. I retired last year
as a major general after 39 years of service. My last job
was general officer in command of the eastern division
of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). I spent
a large part of my military career operating in conflict
zones, including the years I served with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO).
I have witnessed that violence directed at women
and girls can be a particularly potent tool of war.
Armed groups persecute communities by dehumanizing
women and girls, which is considered to be an attack
against the values or honour of a society. Even when a
war is formally over and a United Nations
peacekeeping force is deployed, women and girls
remain targets for violence.
The current climate of impunity in most of the
post-conflict contexts allows the many forms of
gender-based violence, including sexual violence, to
flourish. Often the political will to end the vicious
cycle of impunity does not exist. Impunity thus
remains an important impediment to the prevention of
sexual violence.
It has probably become more dangerous to be a
woman than a soldier in an armed conflict. Testimonies
of survivors of sexual violence reveal shocking
brutality. Many of them suffer from grave long-term
psychological and physical health consequences,
including traumatic fistula and HIV. They remain
disabled for life.
Survivors of sexual violence face enormous
barriers in securing justice through the courts or
through more informal, community-based mechanisms.
Given the lack of adequate and responsive law
enforcement, women in particular are reluctant to seek
justice and to file complaints against attackers.
Survivors usually prefer to suffer in silence, fearing
stigma or ostracism. Today, several armed groups
continue to use sexual violence as a weapon of war in
Africa in various forms, including sexual slavery,
kidnapping, forced prostitution and rape. The scale and
brutality of the sexual violence faced by women and
girls in armed conflicts amounts to war crimes and
crimes against humanity.
Sexual violence must be perceived as a threat to
peace and security in the entire world, and in Africa in
particular.
The Security Council has an important role to
play in fighting sexual violence against women and
girls. The United Nations and the international
community need to continue their campaigns to
intensify actions to end violence against women and
girls. Peacekeepers can play an important role in
S/PV.5916
08-3906910
preventing and addressing sexual violence in conflict
and post-conflict zones.
It is important that the Council continue to
provide modern and multidimensional United Nations
peacekeeping missions with a mandate to protect
civilians under imminent threat of physical violence.
Visible United Nations military presence on the ground
proved to be effective in preventing sexual violence in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Darfur.
To be effective in the protection of civilians, a
United Nations peacekeeping force must have a clear
mandate, strong rules of engagement, sufficient robust
armament and well-trained and well-equipped troops.
However, equally important is the willingness of
United Nations commanders to take swift decisions
when the presence of armed groups is reported.
The deployment of female military and police
personnel has proven to be effective. A critical mass of
women in peacekeeping missions can enhance
confidence-building with the host community by
presenting an organization that looks more like a
civilian society than a military occupation force. Local
women who already live in fear of men due to repeated
sexual violence, often perpetrated by men in uniform,
may feel more confident talking to other women.
You seated around this table are the United
Nations, and you play an important role in ensuring
that the United Nations and the international
community continue to intensify actions to end
violence against women and girls. We understand how
many issues are before you at this moment, each
needing great care and attention. However, woman and
girls around the world are suffering. You have the
responsibility to protect them and to take real and
effective measures to put an end to this.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Mrs. Jadranka Kosor, Vice Prime Minister
and Minister of the Family, Veterans Affairs and
Intergenerational Solidarity of Croatia.
Mrs. Kosor (Croatia): Thank you, Madam
Secretary of State, for presiding over this meeting
today. I would also like to welcome the presence of His
Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, His
Excellency Mr. Srgjan Kerim and other distinguished
colleagues around the table.
At the outset, Madam President, I wish to thank
you and the United States presidency for the
opportunity to discuss the issue of sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict. Croatia, as a country
which has been exposed to the horrors of war, strongly
believes that the Council must give its undivided
attention to this phenomenon, which poses a serious
threat to international peace and security.
Rape and other forms of sexual violence against
women are heinous crimes that in past decades have
often been used as a method of warfare. The existing
culture of impunity must be overcome. Today, from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to the Sudan and
Somalia, and elsewhere, women continue to be targeted
by warring parties during war and in post-conflict
periods.
The Council had the opportunity to witness the
plight of civilians, including women and girls, during
its recent mission to Africa. Having been briefed by my
ambassador, I am all the more certain that more needs
to be done by all of us in order to find justice and a
decent life for victims of conflict.
The use of sexual violence creates an atmosphere
of insecurity and helplessness, with devastating effects.
The number of girls in school continues to fall and
women and girls are exposed to HIV/AIDS and are
stigmatized in their communities. The persistence of
rape in situations of armed conflict is a sad reminder of
our obvious failure to provide security and protection
to women and girls in conflict and post-conflict
countries.
Speaking from the experience of Croatia, it would
be remiss of me not to mention what we, Croatian
citizens, have witnessed of this heinous practice. Even
on Croatian territory, in the heart of Europe, rape was
used as a method of intimidation and terror during the
aggression to which Croatia was exposed at the
beginning of 1990s. Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
had been tormented by the same source of aggression,
suffered the use of rape and sexual violence as an
instrument of ethnic cleansing.
I therefore believe it is my obligation to warn the
Council that these crimes must never — I repeat:
never — escape the arm of justice. For this reason, the
International Criminal Court at The Hague, as well as
local courts, must be the last instance of justice for the
victims and a reminder that there can be no tolerance
for the crime of rape.
S/PV.5916
1108-39069
We are aware that the response of national
communities in conflict areas to sexual violence
against women and girls has been inadequate.
Combating sexual violence requires well-planned
preventive measures at a national and international
level. We are of the view that Governments should
ensure the participation of women from the early
stages of negotiating peace and in reconstruction
efforts. Women must also be given the possibility of
being elected to political office, while support
mechanisms for newly elected women must be ensured.
However, without ensuring women’s physical
safety and economic security through social norms,
efforts to engage them in decision-making processes
will not succeed. Due to a lack of such norms, we have
witnessed the assassination of many women human
rights defenders worldwide.
My delegation would also like to reiterate the
commitments set out in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome Document (General Assembly resolution
60/1) as well as in Security Council resolution 1674
(2006). Peacekeeping missions must have strong, clear
and goal-oriented mandates, including the
authorization to use force if necessary to protect
civilians.
In this context, Croatia strongly condemns all
acts of sexual exploitation and abuse by all categories
of personnel in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We call upon all troop-contributing
countries to take preventive measures, including
predeployment awareness training, and to investigate
and prosecute all perpetrators of sexual violence.
In the framework of its commitment to
international peace and stability, Croatia is increasingly
involved in contributing to international peacekeeping
missions, currently 15 in all. Moreover, Croatia has
specific guidelines that regulate its participation in
peacekeeping operations. We are strongly committed to
a zero-tolerance policy towards sexual exploitation by
peacekeeping personnel.
Woman’s role in peacekeeping is unique,
prompting an increasing demand for its presence. It is
our policy to deploy women to missions, either as
members of the Croatian armed forces or the Croatian
police. Women have been engaged on a range of issues
where the female point of view or their presence makes
a difference, including providing support for civil
society or addressing problems of family violence.
Allow me now to inform the Council about
progress achieved at the national level. Following our
election as a non-permanent member to the Security
Council for the period 2008-2009, we are ready to take
a proactive role in the promotion of the initiative of
safeguarding women’s right in conflict situations and
strengthening women’s role in post-conflict
peacebuilding. Furthermore, through our national
policy for the promotion of gender equality, special
measures for achieving the integration of the gender
perspective in national security policy and the
promotion of resolution 1325 (2000) are being
implemented.
Also, as a example of good practice between the
Government and the non-governmental sector, I would
like to mention that the Government Office for Gender
Equality has given support to the non-governmental
organization project on women’s experiences of war,
entitled “Women recollecting memories: the gender
dimension”.
At the regional level, we would like in particular
to stress the experience we gained in wartime. As is
known, among the refugee population more than 50 per
cent of the people are women and girls. In July 1992,
Croatia was hosting 341,000 refugees, among whom 80
per cent were women, children and elderly people.
Croatia provided for all shelter and food, as well as
providing temporary protection status and medical
insurance. Assistance from specialized agencies such
as the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and UNICEF was
valuable. As a consequence of war atrocities, we in
Croatia still host 1,600 refugees from Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Croatia is a part of a region that in the recent past
has suffered as a result of armed conflict. We are fully
aware of the role that both the Security Council and the
international community can play in addressing sexual
violence against women and girls, especially when this
is used by political or military leaders as a means of
achieving political or military objectives.
We believe that the Security Council needs to
provide strong and effective leadership on this issue,
including by taking concrete action when necessary,
with the ultimate aim of eradicating this abhorrent
behaviour.
S/PV.5916
08-3906912
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of South Africa.
Ms. Dlamini Zuma (South Africa): We commend
the United States for organizing this open thematic
debate on sexual violence in conflict situations, and we
thank Secretary Rice for presiding over the meeting
today.
Since its creation, the United Nations has
grappled with the issue of sexual violence committed
against women and girls in conflict situations. As a
result, an international framework specific to women
and girls was established and strengthened over time to
protect women and girls from all forms of violence,
including sexual violence in armed conflict. But, of
course, we recognize that violence against women,
including rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution,
forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization and many
other forms of sexual violence, still remains today.
Sexual violence constitutes a war crime and a crime
against humanity when committed as part of a
widespread and systematic attack on a civilian
population by State or non-State actors. It was for this
reason that, when the International Criminal Court was
created, South Africa recommended that sexual
violence be among the crimes to be referred to the
Court, which is a tool against impunity.
Yet, despite these milestones, more work still
needs to be done to support and protect women and
girls in conflict and post-conflict societies. Women and
girls continue to make up a disproportionate number of
the victims in situations of armed conflict. Those who
survive conflict are traumatized, stigmatized and
victimized yet again, just because they are women. As
a result, women and girls are afraid to speak out about
their ordeal or even to believe that there could be any
recourse for their suffering.
The silence around sexual violence in conflict
situations must be broken. During South Africa’s
presidency of the Council in March 2007, we adopted a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2007/5) expressing the
need for specific measures to be taken to ensure
protection against sexual violence and to put an end to
impunity. We further recognized that, while the
situation of women and girls, particularly in conflict
areas, remains desperate and unacceptable, the silence
around sexual violence can be broken when we resist
seeing women and girls as passive victims. While
women may be the first casualties of war, they remain
active agents of change and play a meaningful role in
the recovery and reintegration of their families and
communities. Where women are policymakers , they
have been instrumental in bringing about democracy
and reconciliation in post-conflict societies.
Sexual violence in conflict situations is
inextricably linked to gender inequality, and we
therefore need to advocate more strongly for the equal
participation and full involvement of women in all
efforts for the maintenance and promotion of peace and
security. In that regard, Member States must
continually look at measures to strengthen full and
effective implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
particularly by forming partnerships with civil society,
the private sector and community-based organizations.
Equally important is the need to ensure that the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations
include clear guidelines for the protection of civilians
from sexual violence. Gender-sensitive training, the
deployment of more women peacekeepers and the
appointment of more women special representatives
and envoys of the Secretary-General should be
implemented. There is practical evidence that the
deployment of women enhances the impact of
peacekeeping, especially for women and children in
conflict areas. The deployment of women facilitates
engagement with local women through the setting up
of women’s desks in camps for internally displaced
persons and refugees, which assist women to talk about
their needs and traumas, including information-sharing
on sexual harassment, abuse and rape.
Furthermore, the presence of women
peacekeepers has a positive transformational impact in
terms of redefining the roles that women can play in all
aspects of peace processes and of national
reconstruction and development. South Africa is proud
of its contribution to the representation of women in
United Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa,
which is rooted in our mainstreaming of gender and
human rights in predeployment training.
The security sector of conflict and post-conflict
countries must be reformed to prevent and better
respond to sexual violence. In order to build effective,
non-discriminatory and representative security
institutions, it is essential to provide personnel with
effective and sustainable gender training and capacity-
building. Women’s access to justice and their
S/PV.5916
1308-39069
participation in the legal system would also contribute
meaningfully to a well-functioning and gender-
sensitive security framework.
We are pleased that the United Nations system
has become more coordinated in its efforts to address
all forms of violence, including sexual violence against
women and girls in armed conflict. A better-
coordinated United Nations system would ensure that
adequate information collection and management
systems would be in place in conflict situations to
collect data on sexual violence and feed it to the
Secretary-General.
Finally, we note with satisfaction that the draft
resolution before us reaffirms the primary
responsibility of the international community to ensure
that adequate resources are made available to address
the immediate and long-term needs of women and girls
who have endured sexual violence. Perhaps even more
important, the draft resolution reaffirms the
implementation of the obligations of Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
the Optional Protocols to both conventions, aimed at
addressing discrimination against women and girls.
We must work for a non-discriminatory and non-
sexist society in which all women and girls are treated
as equal citizens. The end of discrimination against
women will go a long way towards addressing the root
causes of sexual violence. This is the least we can do
for women and girls everywhere.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Djibrill Yipènè Bassole, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso.
Mr. Bassole (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
Violence against women in areas of conflict is
continuing, in spite of the Security Council’s adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000) and all other relevant
instruments. The phenomenon is worsening, becoming
systematic and a genuine war strategy for some
combatants. Victimized women and girls are
deliberately targeted for abominable acts of violence.
That is an unacceptable violation of the most
fundamental human rights — in other words, a crime
against humanity. Unfortunately, it seems that our
repeated calls and recommendations have yet to be
heeded.
Sexual violence in conflict zones highlights the
vulnerability of young girls and women. That is
especially true in certain parts of Africa where certain
sociological factors continue to hinder their
emancipation. When the violence itself does not
outright kill the victims, its consequences take a heavy
toll, leading to physical and psychological trauma,
unwanted pregnancies and the spread of sexually
transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS. How, then,
can we effectively combat those degrading practices
and ensure that women are better protected against
such atrocities?
First of all, we must work to prevent conflict. We
must make every effort to ensure that democracy and
the rule of law take root, as well as to promote good
governance and effective development policies. We
must also devote resources to educating women and
young girls. Education and training are the primary
tools we must give them to help them empower
themselves and participate in every aspect of the
social, political and economic arenas, including even
the military.
If conflict does erupt, several actions must
follow. In particular, the Council must have at its
disposal precise, relevant and credible information
about the nature of the violence in all its aspects,
including information about those who planned and
carried it out. Moreover, justice must be done when it
comes to prosecuting and punishing perpetrators. There
must be absolutely no impunity when it comes to this
issue.
Other complementary actions must also be taken
at the social level. We must make sure that in situations
of conflict, women and children, who are usually left to
fend for themselves, are protected by peacekeeping
operations.
In conclusion, I should like to welcome the
efforts of the Secretary-General and of the United
Nations system to combat this scourge. Lastly, I would
like to thank and congratulate you personally, Madam
President, for your leadership, as well as for having
made it possible for the Security Council to deliberate
this morning on this important issue.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Patricia Scotland, Baroness Scotland of
Asthal and Attorney General for England and Wales of
the Government of the United Kingdom.
S/PV.5916
08-3906914
Baroness Scotland (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes the leadership shown by
the United States in holding this debate during its
presidency of the Council. Your presence here today,
Madam President, demonstrates just how important it
is for us all to tackle the growing problem of sexual
and gender-based violence if we are serious about
resolving conflict. I rejoice at the sight and the fact that
of the 20 representatives around the Council table,
seven are women, who are here to add their voice to
the wise counsel given by their male counterparts and
colleagues, adding substance and support to the draft
resolution before the Council, which focuses on the
plight of women caught in the pernicious tentacles of
conflict.
May I also commend the Secretary-General for
his vision and for his determination to increase the
number of women who will be able to make their
contribution to the Council’s work and the reduction of
conflict.
Before I turn to the issue of sexual violence, I
would like to say a few words about Aung San Suu
Kyi, who, as you rightly reminded us, Madam
President, today spends a further birthday under house
arrest. The Burmese people have suffered under
military rule since 1962. It is fitting that we remember
Aung San Suu Kyi as we talk about women, peace and
security in today’s debate, and remember, too, the
many ordinary women of Burma, who have often borne
the brunt of the violence, persecution and economic
deprivation imposed upon them by the military
Government. We call for Aung San Suu Kyi to be
released immediately and for her to be allowed to play
full part in Burma’s political process.
In conflict, women and children suffer
disproportionately. Sexual violence is among the very
worst of the atrocities that they face, and it is
increasingly being used as a deliberate method of
warfare. Every day we hear reports from the United
Nations, non-governmental organizations and the
media — and most recently from the International
Criminal Court — about the systematic use of sexual
violence to terrorize civilian communities and
populations, to drive forward ethnic cleansing and to
destroy communities. We have seen it in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where the
ex-genocidaires from Rwanda are primarily
responsible. We see it in Darfur, in Somalia and
elsewhere. In Zimbabwe, the hired thugs of Mugabe’s
regime brutalize and murder the wives and children of
leaders of the opposition Movement for Democratic
Change. Only yesterday, the wife of the newly elected
mayor of Harare was savagely beaten and killed by the
so-called war veterans, in order to intimidate the
opposition party in next week’s elections.
In all those places we see the physical and
psychological scars of the survivors of sexual violence
and, chillingly, the silent testimony of the horribly
disfigured bodies of those who did not survive. And we
see the empty, burned-out villages from which the
population has fled to avoid further attacks. And that is
the point. The trauma and injuries caused by sexual
violence are designed to cripple communities, trigger
revenge attacks and cause lasting bitterness. In that
way, gender-based violence feeds the fires of conflicts
that the Council is dedicated to extinguishing.
But some, of course, will say, what is new about
this? After all, it is true that rape and sexual violence
have been associated with conflict since before records
began to be kept. Three things have changed. First,
sexual violence is now being used as a tool of warfare,
rather than it being just a tragic by-product of conflict,
and it is taking place on a much larger scale than we
have seen before. Secondly, we now better understand
how sexual violence damages the prospects of post-
conflict recovery. And, thirdly and perhaps most
important, we have the means to tackle this problem
within our reach.
Resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, and resolution 1674 (2006), on the protection
of civilians, have provided an important foundation.
Many nations, international organizations and
non-governmental organizations are doing valuable
work to tackle sexual violence.
But sexual and gender-based violence is
evolving, and the Council’s response must also evolve.
My Government believes that the Security Council
should show leadership on the issue of sexual violence,
first, by recognizing that widespread and systematic
sexual violence can pose a threat to international peace
and security. Secondly, the Council shall ensure that
we provide for women’s participation in all processes
relevant to conflict resolution and peacebuilding. The
proliferation of sexual violence against women is, in
part, aimed at excluding and marginalizing women’s
roles in society and in rebuilding communities. We
have to correct that.
S/PV.5916
1508-39069
Thirdly, the Council should propose practical
measures that parties to armed conflict can take to
prevent sexual violence and ensure that those who
commit such crimes are brought to justice. That
includes peacekeepers as well as belligerents. Fourthly,
but not least, the Council should require regular
updates about sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict so that we can better understand how to
prevent it.
We are realistic. Sexual violence will, sadly, not
go away overnight. But resolution 1325 (2000) is a
crucial building block to tackling that growing
problem. The civil populations of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Darfur, Somalia, Zimbabwe
and elsewhere need the Council’s continued efforts to
tackle the growing scourge. The United Kingdom
support the draft resolution before the Council in
document S/2008/403 without reservation. We thank
you, Madam President, and all those around this table
who have lent their voice to that end.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Charles Michel, Minister of Development
Cooperation of Belgium, to take the floor.
Mr. Michel (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by joining with those who have welcomed
the initiative to hold this debate in the Security
Council. I think it is both fundamental and urgent to
speak out to express our indignation, to speak out to
express our disgust at these tragedies within tragedies.
The stories that we are hearing show that we are going
beyond the borders of humanity. It is behaviour that is
more bestial in nature than anything else. Like others
here, I have had the opportunity to meet with
victims — women, small girls — who have been
affected by those atrocities.
It is a question of peace and security, Madam
President, as you yourself rightly said at the outset. It
is our conviction that this issue also involves our
concept both of the human being and of humanity; our
joint responsibility through a debate of this kind is to
conduct our fight at the highest political level to deal
with the unacceptable phenomenon of sexual violence
in armed conflict.
I should like to divide my comments into three
points: prevention; assistance to victims; and the fight
against impunity.
Others have already referred to prevention.
Obviously, war and a lack of security create horror and
dread. Above all, we are fighting war against war. That
is key in preventing this kind of violence and in
mobilizing our will. We need to engage in enormous
prevention work and awareness-raising work in areas
at risk, the conflict areas. That is indispensable. Also, it
can be seen in the field that there is a danger of such
violence becoming viewed as commonplace, and then
being exported beyond the areas that are directly
affected by conflicts, into post-conflict situations. We
have to be alert to that.
The second element is assistance to victims.
Behind the statistics printed on glossy paper, there are
tens of thousands of women, tens of thousands of
young girls, whose lives have been affected in their
very flesh and in their minds for the rest of their lives.
There are families who have been dismantled, torn
apart, torn to pieces by those horrific events. We have
the responsibility to act to meet the medical needs, the
social and psychological needs and the need for legal
assistance, and to provide assistance to families and
others to those near them. We must commit ourselves
to reintegrating them into society, into economic life.
Reports from the field lead me to believe that the
extreme urgency of radically improving the
coordination of international aid is a determining
factor. We have to get closer to the victims in the field.
We cannot simply content ourselves with a
humanitarian presence in a few major centres. I believe
that this is a very specific and important issue.
The last point, and probably the most important,
is the fight against impunity. To punish the perpetrators
is the task of the justice system. This fight requires the
rejection of inevitability, the condemnation of letting
these crimes become commonplace and the
rehabilitation of the victims. That is the best way to
engage in prevention. Every combatant, every fighter,
every potential perpetrator needs to know that one day
he will be called to account and will pay the price for
his infamous crimes.
To be sure, the task is immense and complex.
There are several aspects to our response. We must
strengthen national judicial capacity. We must therefore
have the commitment of national Governments to
assume their responsibilities. Punishments must be
decided upon, and they must be carried out. Recently,
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, prisoners
were able to escape shortly after their sentencing. That
S/PV.5916
08-3906916
is not acceptable. We must have strengthened
cooperation in that area. We also need to support an
international response in the judicial sphere. Belgium
is gratified at having been able, together with others, to
set up the International Criminal Court, whose statute
is unequivocal about the nature of these crimes.
In conclusion, I would like to argue on two
particular elements. First of all, we have to mobilize
our efforts to make the International Criminal Court
more accessible to victims. I would like to draw
attention to the strengthened role that could and should
be played by the Trust Fund for Victims. It must be
effective and must meet the needs of victims where
other initiatives are lacking. In that context, I would
like to encourage the Executive Director and the Board
of Directors of the Fund not to hesitate to appeal for
specific contributions where the situation so justifies.
The second element — and this perhaps
complements the Secretary-General’s initiative to
designate a messenger for peace, of which he spoke
earlier — relates to documenting the magnitude of this
phenomenon, its roots, its evolution and the
preparations for the work that must be done by the
courts, whether national or international. Here, I would
like to suggest that the Secretary-General might
appoint a woman special investigator on sexual
violence in armed conflict to carry out the systematic
collection of information and to gather all the material
that is already available in the field, whether from
peacekeeping operations, the United Nations agencies
or others operating in the field. All of this should lead
us towards zero impunity, and we must clearly affirm
the United Nations commitment to peace and security.
That must be translated into efforts to tirelessly and
determinedly hunt down the perpetrators of these
crimes so that those monsters will never again be able
to sleep in peace.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Rama Yade, Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs and Human Rights of France.
Ms. Yade (France) (spoke in French): The history
of men has long been the history of their violence. In
that intermarriage of blood and history, the war of men
has all too often also been the story of violence against
women.
This year, we are celebrating the sixtieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, which drew its inspiration from one man and
one woman, one Frenchman and one American woman,
René Cassin and Eleanor Roosevelt. Before man’s
baffling and barbaric violence, before such inhuman
acts, the Declaration affirms the inviolable dignity of
human beings, of men and women. That is the principle
that we are reaffirming today in this public debate on
sexual violence in armed conflict, and I thank you,
Madam Secretary of State, for taking the initiative of
holding this meeting.
Doubts have at times been raised: should a debate
on the issue of sexual violence in armed conflict be
included on the agenda of the Security Council, which
debates issues of peace and war? For France, that
debate has been decided. One cannot establish peace
while remaining silent on the subject of rape and the
violence done to women.
While such violence has, in the recent past and
even today, reached shocking levels — in the former
Yugoslavia, Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Liberia, Sierra Leone and the Sudan — and
while entire populations are being hunted down and
massacred, we continue to witness the unbearable
procession of mutilated and sexually tortured women
and hear the endless and appalling litany of eyewitness
testimonies, which sear our conscience. When sexual
violence becomes a weapon of war, when rape is
carried out in a planned and systematic campaign of
terror and subjection, our Council is right to intervene.
Not to do so would be a crime against conscience. We
must act urgently.
The figures alone do not give the complete
picture of the terror and horror that each violated and
battered woman experiences in her innermost being,
but they do, in their grim tally, show the extent of the
tragedy.
I have just returned from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where I travelled to the Kivus.
In 2007, over a period of six months, nearly 30,000
women were raped in eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I met several of them in Bukavu and Goma.
I listened to their raw, tragic stories, from which any
trace of humanity seemed to have been erased. The
testimonies are unbearable. One’s spirit is
overwhelmed with pain.
One of the women I spoke with was a 15-year-old
girl from a village near Bukavu. She had been in Panzi
hospital for several months. She had gone out to buy
bread when several armed attackers fell upon her. She
S/PV.5916
1708-39069
was raped by several of them in front of her family.
They then took her with them into the woods, where
for several months she was gang-raped, until she
became pregnant and was infected with AIDS. After
being kidnapped and brutalized a second time, she
returned with a second child. Her life has been
destroyed, especially since her family and community
have ostracized her. That young girl is afraid to go
home because she is afraid that the army could capture
her again and the same thing would happen again.
When I saw those women and their distress, I
wanted to let them know what we, the international
community, are doing about this. In terms of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), for example, which
is the largest United Nations presence in the world,
those women are asking: what good is that presence to
us, when we continue to be kidnapped and raped? I
spoke about the establishment of the International
Criminal Court, which has brought about the arrest of
Jean-Pierre Bemba. These women who had been raped
welcomed that news, but asked: why are the armed
groups still at large? You see, the 200,000 women who
have been raped in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are expecting more concrete and timely results.
They are asking me to present their petition to you. We
must therefore take action. What can we do? For the
Congolese women, the answers are simple.
First of all, we must disarm the armed groups and
put an end to the illegal trafficking that provides them
with weapons. Secondly, we must ensure that those
armed groups are kept away from the Kivus, so that
they do not cross paths with their victims again.
Thirdly, we must make sure that they are punished, so
that impunity does not encourage other men to rape,
knowing that they will never be punished. We must
also find work for those who have not yet become
criminals. That is what Congolese women are
proposing. It sounds simple, but it is crucial. Let us
therefore heed their cry.
What have we done so far? As there is no peace
without justice, we welcome the progress achieved in
the field of international justice, which has made
sexual violence a crime against humanity and, in some
cases, an act of genocide. France also welcomes in that
regard the investigation that has just been opened by
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court into
the atrocities committed in the Central African
Republic, including sexual violence on a massive scale.
By charging Jean-Pierre Bemba with acts of rape that
constitute, by their magnitude, war crimes and crimes
against humanity, the International Criminal Court sent
a strong signal to perpetrators of such crimes. Any
perpetrator of such crimes, regardless of rank, will
have to answer for his actions.
At the political level, the post of Special
Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and
consequences was established in 1994. That
mechanism has played a significant role in sounding
the alarm and increasing awareness. That is why I wish
to pay tribute to the work of the current Special
Rapporteur, Ms. Erturk. We also welcome the work of
the United Nations to increase awareness on the issue
and the remarkable work of non-governmental
organizations on the ground.
All of that, however, is not enough, and we must
scale up international mobilization efforts. First of all,
as I said, we must intensify the fight against impunity
more than ever before. That is how we will be able to
bring peace and redress to the victims. Without real
punishment, there will be no prevention or deterrence.
Of equal importance is the need to include a
detailed examination of the issue of sexual violence in
reports by peacekeeping operations and in a
comprehensive report of the Secretary-General. We
need detailed information on this scourge in order to
methodically attack the issue, particularly by
integrating the consideration of this question in
peacekeeping mandates, based on the example set by
MONUC. Of course, we must make sure that
peacekeeping forces themselves set the example
Finally, we must strengthen the practical
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). There will
be no effective fight against sexual violence if women
are not represented in sufficient numbers in
peacekeeping operations, in security forces such as the
army and police, and among the ranks of judges in
States directly affected by those crimes.
Forty per cent of women raped in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo are minors. With
that knowledge, we believe that we should take
advantage of the opportunities offered by the Working
Group of the Security Council on Children and Armed
Conflicts, expanding its mandate to include sexual
violence perpetrated against children, regardless of
whether or not there are child soldiers in the country in
question. We must also continue to develop victim
S/PV.5916
08-3906918
treatment programmes and strengthen rehabilitation
services, while working with local communities so as
to avoid stigmatization of the victims.
Lastly, the European Union will continue to make
this issue a priority. That is why France will seek the
adoption of guidelines on violence against women,
including sexual violence, during its European Union
presidency, which begins on 1 July. Such guidelines
will enable our embassies to take action and to directly
finance rehabilitation programmes.
I am hoping that a robust resolution,
incorporating as many of our suggestions as possible,
will be adopted after this debate. Sexual violence, in
particular rape, is unacceptable, whether it takes place
today or tomorrow, no matter who commits it or what
continent it is committed. That is my profound
conviction, and I have no doubt that everyone in this
Chamber shares it.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Vincenzo Scotti, Under-Secretary of
State for Foreign Affairs of Italy.
Mr. Scotti (Italy): First of all, allow me to fully
align myself with the statement that will be delivered
by Slovenia in its capacity as President of the European
Union.
The issues that we are addressing today —
women and peace and security — deserve the
international community’s utmost attention and
unequivocal support. I will therefore begin by stressing
Italy’s commitment to the full implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), which
provides a comprehensive framework for addressing
every aspect of the relationship between women and
peace and security. It recognizes a key concept that
should guide all of our actions in this field: women
cannot be protected unless their participation at the
decision-making level in all peace and reconciliation
processes is ensured. At the same time, the protection
of women from the violence of war is a necessary step
towards empowering them to participate in the
rebuilding of their societies.
Our success in implementing resolution 1325
(2000) must be judged on the basis of the
improvements that we have already secured relating to
the status of women. In our opinion, only one
conclusion can be drawn: not enough has been done.
Hence our conviction that the time has come to identify
achievable and specific goals, without losing sight of
the general picture.
From this perspective, countering the
unspeakable horrors resulting from the use of sexual
violence as a weapon of war is a clear priority. I am
therefore particularly grateful to the Government of the
United States of America and to you, Madam
President, for having organized today’s open debate
and for having submitted the draft resolution that will
be adopted later and that Italy is honoured to
co-sponsor.
The situation before us is appalling: 70 per cent
of the casualties in recent conflicts have been civilians
or non-combatants — most of them women and
children. Women’s bodies have been increasingly
targeted during conflicts. Evidence shows that in many
cases this represents a deliberate method of warfare
and, sadly, a particularly devastating one. Rape and
sexual violence are used to achieve political and
military aims; to dominate, terrify and humiliate
opponents; and to uproot communities and ethnic
groups, thus contributing to the collapse of entire
societies for generations to come.
Concrete information and precise evidence is,
unfortunately, hard to come by, since the victims are
often unreasonably and unacceptably stigmatized and
too traumatized to come forward and denounce the
violence to which they have been subjected.
Nevertheless, what we do know is truly appalling:
millions of women and girls have been raped, gang-
raped, sexually tortured and abused, often in
particularly atrocious ways.
From that perspective, the link between sexual
violence and the maintenance of peace and security
becomes evident; it demands immediate action by the
international community and is therefore very much
the business of the Council. All mandates for United
Nations missions should ensure that whenever and
wherever the United Nations is in the field — be it in
peacekeeping or humanitarian operations — its staff is
trained to prevent, recognize and respond to sexual
violence. A collection and analysis of existing best
practices could be an important exercise, leading,
hopefully, to the formulation of a United Nations
doctrine that sets training standards for all military and
police personnel deployed by the Organization.
The Council’s demand in today’s draft resolution
is clear: all parties to armed conflict must immediately
S/PV.5916
1908-39069
cease all acts of sexual violence and take special
measures to protect women and girls. The Council will
have to follow up its demands by monitoring the
parties’ implementation of those obligations.
Accountability is a key element. We have to identify
the parties that continue to use sexual violence as a
tactic of war, and we must build on the example set by
resolution 1807 (2008).
We therefore need an efficient system to gather
accurate information. We hope that the report requested
in the draft resolution will meet this need. We also
need to fight impunity for such acts, defined as a crime
against humanity and a war crime by the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court. We must devote
more time and resources to strengthening the activities
of national and international tribunals, including in
post-conflict situations, to building a gender-sensitive
transitional justice system and a gender-sensitive
security sector.
In this regard, I am very pleased to announce that
Italy is in the process of disbursing a specific
contribution of €1 million to fund a United Nations
Development Fund for Women programme on
resolution 1325 (2000) in Liberia, in addition to
several other initiatives that it has financed in recent
years.
Today’s resolution will be a major step forward,
much like resolution 1325 (2000) was eight years ago.
The Security Council has the moral and legal
responsibility to send a clear message to the
international community that it is determined to put an
end to this scourge; to the perpetrators of crimes
against women that they will no longer go unpunished;
and to women that they will no longer be the victims of
armed conflict, but rather the main agents of life and
peace in their societies.
The President: I invite Mr. Liu Zhenmin, Special
Envoy of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of China, to
take the floor.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Ms. Rice, Secretary of State of the
United States of America, for having come to New
York to preside over today’s meeting. I am
participating in this discussion on behalf of Yang
Jiechi, Minister for Foreign Affairs. At the outset,
please allow me to convey to Ms. Rice the Minister’s
cordial greetings. I would also like to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and Mr. Kerim, President of the
General Assembly, for their statements.
Nearly eight years have passed since the Security
Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000), which
constitutes a basis for cooperation among all the parties
concerned in the area of women and peace and
security. However, given the changing features of
conflicts and the various complex and cross-cutting
factors involved, the resolution has yet to be
implemented fully. In the many conflicts under way
today, women continue to be the most direct victims,
and violence against women remains an extremely
grave concern.
China condemns all violence against women,
including acts of sexual violence, and urges all parties
involved in conflict to comply with international
humanitarian law and human rights law. We call upon
the Governments concerned to investigate and bring to
justice those responsible for crimes against women.
China urges all countries that have not done so to take
measures aimed at an early accession to the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women. We support the
Secretary-General in his pursuit of the policy of zero
tolerance for sexual exploitation committed by
peacekeepers, and we hope that the troop-contributing
countries will step up the training and monitoring of
their peacekeepers, so that the relevant United Nations
code of conduct can be complied with and
implemented.
On this occasion, I wish to emphasize the
following points in relation to the protection of women
in armed conflict.
First, while the Security Council has a unique
role to play in response to violence against women,
United Nations organs and agencies should strengthen
their coordination and cooperation. The issue of sexual
violence in conflict is closely related to that of armed
conflict itself. As the Security Council bears primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Council should focus its efforts
on the prevention of conflict, peacekeeping and post-
conflict reconstruction. Sexual violence should be
addressed through a comprehensive approach in the
context of the peace process and the political situation.
It should not be treated as a stand-alone issue; nor
should attention be given to its symptoms only. In
addition, the Security Council should enhance its
S/PV.5916
08-3906920
consultation with the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the Secretariat and the relevant
treaty bodies in a joint effort to address violence
against women.
Secondly, national Governments bear primary
responsibility for the protection of women. The
international community should provide substantial
support and assistance. The responsibility for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and for the
protection of women lies first and foremost with the
Governments concerned. However, countries in
conflict and those emerging from conflict are often
beset with difficulties and thus require generous
contributions from the international community to help
them build their capacity. Meanwhile, external
assistance should be provided in compliance with the
Charter of the United Nations, respecting the will of
the country in question and avoiding any undermining
of its sovereignty.
Thirdly, the participation of women in every
stage of the peace process should be enhanced. Their
status and role should receive greater attention.
Respecting and protecting women is the hallmark of a
civilized society and of social progress. It is also an
important element of a mature social system. Respect
for and protection of women’s rights should be
mainstreamed throughout the peace process. Their
special needs and concerns should be accommodated.
Women should be further empowered to participate and
to make decisions that concern them. In recent years,
we have witnessed a great number of positive measures
taken by the Secretariat to increase the ratio of women
in senior positions, at the head of peacekeeping
missions and in the staff in general. More efforts are
needed in this direction in the future.
Fourthly, civil society should continue to be
encouraged to join the efforts to protect women. Many
of our colleagues in the non-governmental organization
(NGO) community deserve our appreciation for the
work they have carried out in the field to protect the
rights and interests of women under difficult
circumstances. China supports the constructive role
that NGOs continue to play in the protection of women
in armed conflict and encourages them to increase their
communication with United Nations agencies,
especially those with a special mandate on women’s
issues, and to offer proposals in this area.
We are pleased to note that, under the personal
guidance of Secretary of State Rice, the United States
delegation has submitted a draft resolution under this
agenda item on elimination of all forms of sexual
violence. China supports its adoption. The draft
resolution requests the Secretary-General to submit a
report on its implementation before 30 June 2009.
I would like to point out that, a few months ago,
at its sixty-second session, the General Assembly
adopted resolution 62/134 on the same issue. In that
resolution, the General Assembly requested the
Secretary-General to submit a report on the resolution’s
implementation at the sixty-third session. To save
resources and avoid duplication of labour, we hope the
Secretary-General will strengthen coordination and
make good use of all the information available so as to
submit high-quality reports to both the Security
Council and the General Assembly.
The 2005 World Summit Outcome (General
Assembly resolution 60/1) reaffirms that the progress
for women is progress for all. The same is true in the
field of peace and security. The comprehensive
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) would be an
important guarantee for achieving this target. We
support the Secretary-General in his continued efforts
to implement the System-wide Action Plan. The
Chinese Government has always attached great
importance to the protection of the rights and interests
of women and to the advancement of women. We are
ready to work with the rest of the international
community in a joint effort to reduce sexual violence in
every corner of the world and achieve all targets
related to the issue of women and peace and security.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Giadalla Ettalhi, Permanent Representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, to take the floor.
Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): Let me convey our appreciation to Secretary
of State Rice who, earlier, personally presided over this
meeting. Let me also thank you, Mr. President, for your
proposal to hold this open debate on such an important
issue.
Libya is concerned at reports of sexual violence
against women and girls in many conflict areas. We are
even more concerned at the use of sexual violence
against women as an instrument of war in some
conflict situations. I do not believe that anyone would
argue that such acts are not a heinous crime whose
S/PV.5916
2108-39069
perpetrators must be brought to justice and must not
enjoy impunity.
Resolution 1325 (2000) took up the issue, and in
its paragraph 10 it called on all parties to armed
conflict “to take special measures to protect women
and girls from gender-based violence, particularly rape
and other forms of sexual abuse”. In its paragraph 11,
the resolution emphasized
“the responsibility of all States to put an end to
impunity and to prosecute those responsible for
genocide, crimes against humanity, and war
crimes including those relating to sexual and
other violence against women and girls”.
It is regrettable, indeed it is a stigma for mankind,
that these crimes continue to be perpetrated on a daily
basis. For example, it is reported that more than 880
rapes were committed in April alone in North Kivu in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Some estimate
that that number reflects no more than 10 per cent of
the true figure.
We note that heinous crimes of sexual violence
against women in armed conflict, are perpetrated by
three categories of people — armed forces personnel of
States involved in conflict; personnel of the
United Nations peacekeeping forces; and non-State
actors that are parties to a conflict.
Due to the varying nature of the perpetrators of
these crimes, it is natural that our approach to the
problem should be adapted to the perpetrator. We
believe that greater awareness of international
humanitarian law through education in military
institutions could help to alleviate the problem.
However, this alone is not sufficient, as law is
generally taught only to officers and not to ordinary
soldiers, who are responsible for most of these crimes.
Furthermore, some soldiers, even when aware of the
relevant international law and because of the difficult
circumstances of a conflict, do not in general pay much
heed to the consequences of their acts. Therefore,
Member States, with the assistance of the United
Nations, must seek other means to deal with the
problem and to raise the awareness of soldiers about
the gravity of sexual violence against women and its
moral abhorrence.
In this regard, we believe that in many societies
religion has more effect than law. We do not believe
that there is a single religion on Earth that lacks moral
norms dealing with relations between soldiers and
non-combatants in situations of war. Let me stress that
Islam, for example, has deterrent moral norms related
to the behaviour of combatants and their treatment of
civilians. Those norms prevent and prohibit all crimes
against civilians, including sexual crimes against
women and girls.
We therefore propose that the Security Council
urge all Member States to concentrate more on the
moral and religious aspects of the training of military
personnel, including peacekeeping forces. We also
suggest the preparation of booklets setting out moral
and religious norms related to the treatment of civilians
in time of war, in addition to the norms of international
humanitarian law. These could be distributed to
soldiers in peacekeeping operations. Moreover, we
believe that appropriate mechanisms must be created to
address complaints by civilian victims of abuse by
soldiers, including sexual violence against girls and
women. This would also serve to deter such crimes.
Let me recall that all member States bear the
responsibility to enact effective legislation against
impunity, to conduct education and media campaigns
enhancing awareness on women’s rights and training
programmes to help eliminate cultural prejudice
against women.
We believe that the Security Council can play a
vital role in taking the measures necessary to protect
women and girls from sexual violence in conflict
situations. It can also urge States to prosecute the
perpetrators of such crimes, particularly because
impunity can put at risk hard-earned national
reconciliation and peace.
In conclusion, let me stress that the complete
solution to sexual violence against women and girls in
conflict situations lies in resolving conflict, attaining
peace, creating an accountable, transparent and
effective security sector, encouraging development in
post-conflict countries and promoting women’s
participation in many fields.
Through its specialized agencies, the United
Nations can contribute by supporting national efforts to
advance women and by funding training and education
programmes for women and children, in particular in
rural areas.
S/PV.5916
08-3906922
Finally, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for
having submitted the draft resolution before us, which
we support.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Le Luong Minh, Permanent Representative of
Viet Nam, to take the floor.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Mr. President, and the United States delegation for
convening this important debate on sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict as a follow-up to Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace
and security, an issue to which my country attaches
great importance. I thank Secretary of State Rice for
personally presiding over the Council’s deliberations
earlier today. I also thank Their Excellencies the
Secretary-General, the Deputy Secretary-General and
the President of the General Assembly for their
participation and their statements.
Commitments to resolve the issue of sexual
violence against women are contained in major
documents such as the 2005 World Summit Outcome
Document (General Assembly resolution 60/1), the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and the Convention on
the Rights of the Child.
These, together with the 2008 adoption by the
General Assembly of resolution 62/134 on
“Eliminating rape and other forms of sexual violence
in all their manifestations, including in conflict and
related situations” and the Secretary-General’s launch
this year of a multi-year global campaign to end
violence against women, manifest the concern of
Member States about the widespread nature of this type
of inhumane acts against the “better half” of
humankind as well as their determination to tackle it.
My delegation is deeply concerned by the grave
sexual violence in many conflict areas, which
continues to occur despite repeated strong
condemnation and calls for the parties concerned to
take measures to prevent and put an end to such acts,
whose consequences are not only the personal suffering
of women and girls, but very often also the breakdown
of their families and the spread of contagious diseases
such as HIV/AIDS, which adversely affect whole
communities and their post-conflict reconstruction
processes. The consequences are even more severe
when victims are under-age girls.
Viet Nam holds the view that the most effective
way to protect women and girls from sexual violence,
including sexual violence in armed conflict, is to
empower women and girls, help them understand their
fundamental rights and raise their awareness and their
capacity to protect themselves. We fully endorse the
women’s empowerment and advancement measures set
out in the Beijing Platform for Action. As sexual
violence, including sexual violence in armed conflict
situations, has been a major topic intensively debated
by other pertinent United Nations bodies, it is
important to enhance the efficiency of those existing
mechanisms and improve coordination and cooperation
between the Security Council and those bodies, while
avoiding duplication of their work.
The inter-agency United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict should serve as a tool to
enhance such coordination. At the same time, we must
make sure that any new mechanism to be established
will be given careful consideration so as not to create
unnecessary administrative and financial burdens for
Member States and United Nations agencies.
I wish to further emphasize that States bear the
primary responsibility to protect their own civilians
and deal with violence against them, including sexual
violence.
As far as peacekeeping missions are concerned,
we support the recommendation contained in the draft
resolution presented for adoption by the Council today
that the Secretary-General, in consultation with the
Security Council, the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and its Working Group and
relevant States, develop and implement appropriate
training programmes for all peacekeeping and
humanitarian personnel deployed by the United
Nations in the context of missions, as mandated by the
Council, to help them better prevent, recognize and
respond to sexual violence and other forms of violence
against civilians.
This and the empowerment of women and girls
are essential measures of prevention, which is, in my
delegation’s view, always more effective and less
costly than cure.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Jorge Urbina, Permanent Representative of Costa
Rica, to take the floor.
S/PV.5916
2308-39069
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
and your delegation for convening this important
debate. I also thank the Secretary-General, the
President of the General Assembly and the ministers
that have taken part in this debate for their presence. I
would like to welcome the presence of Deputy
Secretary-General Asha-Rose Migiro and Her
Excellency Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of South Africa.
Without a doubt, the twenty-first century should
be the century of women. Despite all the progress made
during the last century, women crossed the threshold of
the third millennium bearing the heaviest of all human
burdens. We are very clear that this is not the forum in
which to advocate for the emancipation and
empowerment of women, but we welcome today’s
meeting as an opportunity to debate the issue of
violence against women in situations of armed conflict.
On this day and in this place, we are witnessing a
convergence of efforts to make war more humane and
to ensure that women everywhere enjoy their full status
as human beings.
Two weeks ago, a group of Council
representatives visited a number of camps for refugees
and internally displaced persons (IDPs) in Darfur,
Chad and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
There we heard the voices of women who spoke of the
sufferings of war, the murder of their comrades, the
massacre of their children and the violation of their
bodies. Their experiences oblige us to ensure that
today’s debate does not conceal the reality of the pain,
humiliation and outrage behind technical language.
This must be a debate that truly responds to the
wish expressed by those women. None of them spoke
to us of revenge; rather I recall them speaking to us of
their hopes, their desire to return to their homes and
their dream of living in a safe and secure environment.
I also recall them expressing the hope that they will
never again be victims of further violations and
outrages.
We must come away from today’s debate
prepared to learn to prevent. Hitherto we have focused
our efforts on suppressing violence against women in
situations of armed conflict and on fighting impunity.
We have limited ourselves to seeking to carry out
security sector reform — and not always with great
success. Although our efforts to end impunity through
action by the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
the ad hoc tribunals, are important and indeed
indispensable, they are not sufficient. We must now
enhance what we have been doing and must learn to
create prevention mechanisms; that will be a complex
and difficult process.
If we truly want to be effective and to help
women in times of conflict — women in Africa,
women in the Balkans, women everywhere, the women
of today and tomorrow — we must undertake the
difficult task of engaging in prevention. I say it is
difficult because prevention is not the same in all
places or in all cultural contexts. I say it also because
prevention cannot be tackled only from the standpoint
of the woman: that would amount to making her out to
be guilty of her own pain. Violence against women in
war and in all other contexts can be prevented only
from the standpoint of the perpetrator.
Violence against women in situations of armed
conflict cannot be understood or prevented if it is
analysed only through the prism of sexual violence. We
are witnessing abhorrent methods of warfare; these are
weapons of terror whose victims are not only the direct
casualties but also their families and their
communities. We must not trivialize this phenomenon,
for that would be to continue to fail to prevent it and to
respond to it effectively. It is indisputable that sexual
violence, when carried out in a systematic and
widespread manner and is part of an attack against
innocent populations, exacerbates an armed conflict
and becomes an enormous obstacle to its resolution and
to peacebuilding.
For that reason, Costa Rica pointed out during
last month’s debate on post-conflict peacebuilding
convened by the United Kingdom (see S/PV.5895) the
need for all peacekeeping operations to be conceived as
integrated missions bringing together all United
Nations efforts, including the contribution of the
Peacebuilding Commission. Only in that way will we
be on the road of prevention, able to provide an
enduring response to this problem, one which has
prevented women from fully playing their important
role in preventing and settling conflicts and in building
peace.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Marty Natalegawa, Permanent Representative of
Indonesia, to take the floor.
S/PV.5916
08-3906924
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Today thousands of
women continue to be suffer sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict, in violation of their human
rights and international humanitarian law — in
violation, indeed, of our conscience and human dignity.
These practices, wilful or wanton, horrify us and give
us pause. They must be stopped.
We are grateful, therefore, to the delegation of the
United States for convening today’s debate on this
critical topic. And we were pleased to see the Secretary
of State presiding over this very important meeting. We
also deeply appreciate the leadership of the Secretary-
General and the Deputy Secretary-General on this
issue.
This meeting serves not merely as a forum to
condemn various forms of violence against women in
armed conflicts. Likewise, it is more than a showcase
of the strength and indestructibility of our
determination to end impunity and protect women in
situations of armed conflicts. This meeting is, first and
foremost, about fulfilling the full potential of women
in time of peace and in time of war.
It is from that broad perspective that Indonesia
views this meeting. All States, all societies, have
common interests, common core values and the
common objective that women should and must be
protected at all times, including in situations of armed
conflict. It is therefore imperative that we, the
international community, tackle these crimes with
vigour and with iron determination. No shadow of
ambiguity should cloud our action to end these
atrocities. Indonesia believes that the international
community has to continue to develop and implement a
variety of comprehensive strategies to address this
issue.
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) is a
guidepost for our actions. The resolution calls for
parties to armed conflict to protect women from
violence and to end impunity for war crimes. However,
much remains to be done.
Rape and sexual violence are indisputably
violations of the laws of war and constitute a crime
under international humanitarian law. But another
problem that women face as survivors of sexual
violence is the existence of barriers to achieving justice
through the courts or through more informal
community-based mechanisms. Many survivors face a
great deal of exclusion in their communities if they
publicly reveal the sufferings they have endured.
Women victims are frequently shunned and ostracized.
Furthermore, the judicial systems in many armed
conflict areas are far from well functioning due to
structural inadequacy. Thus, the legal capacity of
national and local governments to act swiftly when
reports or warnings come in must be strengthened. The
judiciary plays the critical role of bringing to justice
the perpetrators of sexual crimes in armed conflict and
in ensuring reparations for the victims.
Security and police sector institutions play an
important role in responding to sexual violence in
armed conflict. Police sector reform should be
considered in places where sexual violence is
prevalent, and it should include an assessment of how
police services can best assist victims and prevent and
investigate these crimes, as well as of how police
officers themselves can be made more gender-
sensitive, how their activities can be regulated and how
they can be punished for engaging in these types of
crimes.
Peacekeepers also play an important role in
protecting women and girls from sexual violence where
they serve. More women should play key roles,
including as military observers, civilian police and
envoys and special representatives of the Secretary-
General.
Many survivors of sexual violence suffer from
grave long-term psychological and physical health
consequences, even once the brutality is over. There is
a great need for adequate medical services to meet the
needs of this population.
The greater United Nations system has to target
the needs of women for health care and treatment, as
well as other indicators of development that not only
help to treat the victims but also play a role in
preventing the worsening of a conflict and its ill effects
on women. Identifying the perpetrators is also essential
in order to shift the balance from victims living in
shame to shaming the perpetrators. For this, it is
crucial, as a part of a comprehensive attack against
these heinous crimes, that United Nations missions
conduct wide public awareness campaigns in their
respective mandate areas.
The protection of women in armed conflict
should be further strengthened; that much is clear.
Ultimately, however, our aim should be the prevention
S/PV.5916
2508-39069
of armed conflict itself. Here, the Security Council, in
cooperation with regional organizations, should play its
role in promoting the prevention of conflict and the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Ricardo Arias, Permanent
Representative of Panama.
Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, allow me to congratulate your Government,
Mr. President, for having convened this important
meeting. I would also like to acknowledge the presence
in the Chamber of the Secretary-General and the
President of the General Assembly at the beginning of
the meeting. I would like to thank them and the
Council’s special invitees for their important
statements.
The annals of modern history document the use
of sexual violence as a weapon of war. The conflicts in
the former Yugoslavia, Rwanda, Darfur and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are but the most
recent and notorious examples. The recurring nature
and increase in the number of acts of sexual and
gender-based violence mean that such violence has
gone from being a weapon of war to an epidemic. That
is especially true in countries where the absence of the
rule of law makes it impossible for the State to provide
the necessary protection to millions of women and
girls.
Moreover, it is generally accepted today that
systematic acts of sexual and gender-based violence
are violations of human rights, affect human security
and development and represent an assault on
international peace and security. As a result, the
international community has classified such criminal
behaviour as crimes against humanity and given the
special courts established by the Security Council and
the International Criminal Court jurisdiction in trying
and convicting those guilty of committing such crimes.
However, despite those efforts and other
normative progress made in this area, in particular the
Security Council’s adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
women and girls continue to be subject to all sorts of
discriminatory violence. It is therefore essential that
the Security Council duly consider the use of sexual
and gender-based violence as a weapon of war and
devise mechanisms to mitigate, eliminate and
effectively punish that practice. In doing so, it is
imperative to recognize that justice is the main
guarantor of human rights. The Security Council must
therefore send a clear warning that acts of sexual
violence against women and girls in situations of
armed conflict will not go unpunished. It must also
provide special support for the International Criminal
Court to ensure that the perpetrators of such crimes are
tried and convicted.
The Council must also establish clear, convincing
and viable mandates for peacekeeping operations that
ensure the protection of civilians, especially women
and girls. Where appropriate, the Council must also
reassess the effectiveness and scope of such mandates.
In that regard, the Council should also support the
Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy for personnel
working in peacekeeping operations.
Likewise, the Security Council and the rest of the
Organization should redouble their efforts to provide
victimized women and children with adequate health
services — including free and confidential testing for
HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases, as well as
the appropriate treatment, psychological care and post-
trauma evaluation, rehabilitation and social
reintegration services and effective and sufficient
compensation. Those efforts should be supported by
awareness-raising and education campaigns on the
human rights of women and children and the impact
that sexual violence has both on its victims and on
society in general.
In order to improve the ability of the Security
Council to react effectively to this challenge, we need
credible and relevant information about sexual
violence. It is therefore imperative that the Secretary-
General provide the Council with periodic reports
highlighting the deep-rooted causes of the
phenomenon, as well as the most effective strategies to
combat it. In relevant cases, the Secretary-General
should also include more detailed information about
the issue in his reports on specific conflict situations.
In conclusion, allow me to emphasize the need to
acknowledge that women and girls are crucial pillars of
society. Ending the cycle of violence against them
before, during and after armed conflict depends in
large part upon their empowerment and active
participation in all areas of the political, social,
economic and cultural life of their countries. To put it
slightly differently, women and girls require peace, and
peace requires them.
S/PV.5916
08-3906926
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Vitaly Churkin, Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): In conflict as in peacetime, sexual violence is
a detestable crime that requires condemnation and
strict sanctioning. We are especially concerned about
situations in which that phenomenon is widespread and
systematic. It is also unacceptable for violence and
sexual exploitation to be committed by the personnel
of peacekeeping operations, that is, by the very people
called upon to protect civilians.
We must also consider this issue in a
comprehensive manner and in the context of all the
other complex problems that arise in the process of
conflict resolution and post-conflict reconstruction.
We should not forget that women and children
continue to be the victims of deliberate attacks,
including terrorist acts, indiscriminate and excessive
violence and violations of international humanitarian
law. Given the various types of violence involved, we
must pay attention to all the categories. The issue of
women and peace and security should not be reduced
to that of sexual violence alone. That balanced
approach is at the heart of resolution 1325 (2000),
which is an important point of reference in terms of
protecting women and ensuring their rights in conflict
situations.
The issues of violence and of women in conflict
situations must be discussed in the Security Council as
well as in the General Assembly, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Human Rights Council and many
other bodies. It is a priority for the United Nations to
respond to widespread and systematic violence against
women and children. Those goals are all part of the
gender component in the reports of the Secretary-
General to the Security Council on the subject of
today’s meeting, and also of the annual thematic
reports on women and peace and security, the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, children and
armed conflict, and others.
The situation is hardly optimal when we ask the
Secretary-General for a report on sexual violence only
to find that the same request has been made by a body
other than the Security Council. In particular, we have
asked him for a report on women and peace and
security. We must recall that the General Assembly
adopted resolution 62/134 — on eliminating rape and
other forms of sexual violence in all their
manifestations, including in conflict and related
situations — which also required an appropriate report
of the Secretary-General on the issue of sexual
violence.
Women’s full participation in peace negotiations
an post-conflict recovery efforts is an important
precondition for the elimination of violence against
women. In those processes, we must consistently
implement the provisions of the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
women, the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination and similar instruments in the area of
human rights. Ensuring the social and economic
development of States is a main factor in preventing
conflict and violence.
In conclusion, I should like to emphasize that the
delegation of the Russian Federation shares the
understanding on today’s topical issue of sexual
violence in conflict and post-conflict situations. We
therefore support the draft resolution to be adopted
today by the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Yukio
Takasu, Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission
and Permanent Representative of Japan.
Mr. Takasu: I would like to commend the
leadership of the United States for organizing this open
debate, and I thank you, Mr. President, for inviting me
to participate in my capacity as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
The landmark resolution 1325 (2000) on women,
peace and security calls upon all parties involved to
ensure the protection of and respect for the human
rights of women and girls and provides a solid
framework for women’s equal and full participation in
every stage of building peace and ensuring security.
The challenge we face is to generate stronger political
will and spur greater concrete actions.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
steady progress has been made in helping more women
to participate in post-conflict decision-making.
Significant percentages of the national parliaments of
many post-conflict countries are now women. More
women are taking leadership positions in the executive
branch. Several female Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General have been appointed. The
S/PV.5916
2708-39069
international community has been gaining more
understanding of the unique impact of armed conflict
on women and girls and a growing recognition that
women’s participation is essential to ensuring conflict
resolution, inclusive reconciliation, peacebuilding and
sustainable peace.
However, we have been less successful in
protecting women and girls from gender-based
violence in situations of armed conflict. Many women
still suffer from a sense of insecurity. They remain
particularly vulnerable to sexual violence and
exploitation, both in the midst of conflict and in its
immediate aftermath. We need only look at the
situation of sexual violence and abuse in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo or Darfur to
understand the horrific magnitude of the problem and
how urgently we must address it. We must admit that
our collective response to gender-based violence has
been inadequate thus far, and this failure to respond is
magnified over time, because the effects of sexual
violence linger long after the fact, undermining and
threatening the potential for peace and stability. Every
effort must be made to promote the human security of
women and girls in a fragile situation by physically
protecting and empowering them.
In order to take effective measures to meet those
challenges, there are several actions that the Security
Council may wish to consider. First, collecting actual
data on the impact of sexual violence on women and
girls and on perpetrators is an important first step to
establishing a strategy to meet their needs on the
ground. Secondly, ending impunity and prosecuting
those responsible for such sexual crimes cannot be
overemphasized and will facilitate communal
reconciliation in post-conflict situations. Thirdly,
gender-sensitive training programmes for peacekeeping
and humanitarian personnel must be strengthened, at
both the national and international levels. Fourthly, the
mandate of peacekeeping operations could reflect more
concrete actions in implementing resolution 1325
(2000), in order to mainstream a gender perspective
and provide protection from gender-based violence.
The Peacebuilding Commission, which is a very
new body, has been ensuring, through its advocacy role
and resource mobilization efforts, that a gender
perspective becomes an integral part of any
peacebuilding process. Significant efforts have been
made to engage women and gender equality groups at
various levels of the Commission’s work, fully
reflecting the priorities and issues of relevance to
women’s groups. Gender perspectives have been
included as a critical and priority issue in the integrated
peacebuilding strategies for Burundi and Sierra Leone.
Commitments to be undertaken by the Governments
and the international community are clearly articulated
in order to combat gender-based violence, ensure
greater participation of women at all levels of decision-
making and build the capacity of women’s groups and
national gender-equality institutions.
The working group on lessons learned also
considered the issue of gender and peacebuilding
earlier this year and concluded that the gender issue
should be viewed not just as a women’s issue. It is an
imperative in any peacebuilding effort, including
security sector reform. We cannot effectively deal with
this complex problem if the burden of responsibility
for doing so rests only with women. The existence of
legal frameworks and policies is not enough, because
they will not end violence by themselves. Compliance,
implementation and enforcement are critical. The issue
should be tackled in a holistic manner, including not
only security and justice sector reform, but also basic
social services such as education and health services,
employment and income generation, in order to
empower women and girls.
In countries emerging from conflict, national
Governments and other local stakeholders are ready to
address the root causes of conflict, including the
marginalization of women. But they often do not have
the sufficient resources and capacities to do so
effectively. On the ground, that requires a range of
integrated efforts for multiple stakeholders such as
government institutions, United Nations entities and
civil society organizations. We need stronger support to
improve the operational capacity of all of those players
in order to fully meet gender equality commitments.
We must also work with local women’s groups to
fight prejudice and stigma and advance efforts to end
impunity for such crimes. The roles of
parliamentarians, non-governmental organizations and
the media are also important to enhance the
accountability of the authorities and those in power for
their actions — or, sometimes, their inaction.
With that recognition, I assure the Council that
the Peacebuilding Commission will continue to make
every effort to raise the international profile of the
needs of women and girls in peacebuilding efforts and
S/PV.5916
08-3906928
to mobilize the necessary support and resources in a
coordinated and integrated manner.
It is my sincere hope that today’s open debate
will help to generate more political will and greater
action. We must all do our part to match the fine words
of the Security Council’s resolutions, with concrete
actions that make a real difference for the women and
girls whom the Council has pledged to protect and
empower.
The President: I now invite Her Excellency
Ms. Philomene Omatuku, Minister of Gender, Family
and Child of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
take the floor.
Ms. Omatuku (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) (spoke in French): First of all, on behalf of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, I would like to
thank the United States of America for having taken
the initiative to convene this important thematic
Security Council debate on women and peace and
security and for having prepared the concept paper
before us (S/2008/364, annex).
As a citizen of the country that is suffering under
the greatest humanitarian crisis since the Second World
War, I am particularly grateful to you, Mr. President.
This current meeting, indeed, once again places the
question of sexual violence against women at the heart
of the concerns of the Security Council. I am
convinced that it will show us the way forward to
eradicate this detestable phenomenon.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo expresses
its appreciation and thanks to the Secretary-General,
who has placed the suffering of Congolese women and
girls at the centre of his concerns. His presence here in
the Chamber today testifies to that.
My gratitude also goes to the members of the
Security Council. They recently visited my country,
showing once again the great importance that this
principal organ of the United Nations, charged with the
maintenance of international peace and security,
attaches to this thorny question.
I also welcome and am very thankful for the
invaluable help that the entire United Nations system
gives to my country as its searches for solutions on the
ground to the issue of violence against women and
girls in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Violence against women in situations of armed
conflict is an outrage that requires an appropriate and
substantial response from the international community.
That is why my country did not hesitate to sponsor the
resolution presented to the General Assembly by the
delegation of the United States on the elimination of
rape and other forms of sexual violence in all its
manifestations, particularly in armed conflicts and
similar situations (General Assembly resolution
62/134).
Thus, wars and armed conflicts in modern times
have made rape an unprecedentedly cruel weapon of
war, in order to obliterate the enemy and destroy the
family, whole communities and, above all, the dignity
of women.
Sexual violence weakens women and girls, as
much in terms of their moral, physical and
psychological health as in terms of their economic
health. Female victims of this type of violence are
stigmatized, repudiated as wives and excluded from
their community. This violence also promotes the
spread of HIV/AIDS. Moreover, 50 per cent of the
victims of sexual violence are less than 18 years old:
they are children. I am very happy to report that our
child protection code will be adopted in the Senate next
week after it has gone through the National Assembly,
with a view to providing security for girls.
Sexual violence is leading to a feminization of
poverty and is adding to the growing problem of food
insecurity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Women victims are no longer able to work the land.
Women victims are simply no longer able to work.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo, under the
leadership of His Excellency President Joseph Kabila
Kabange, has been resolutely following a multisectoral
approach in fighting violence against women and girls,
concentrating on three priority areas: care,
compensation and prevention. Care involves
psychological and medical care in specialized units.
We have the option of renovating existing hospital
buildings rather than building new ones for that
purpose. Another element is socio-economic help for
reintegrating victims into society and providing
training on how to become independent. We wish also
to provide more legal aid, to encourage victims to
bring their cases to court by paying their legal fees, and
protecting them from their rapists, who are often
extremely threatening. Care also involves the return to
S/PV.5916
2908-39069
school of girls who have been victims of sexual
violence, and taking care of the orphans, unwanted
children and children who have been abandoned by
their parents.
Compensation involves the application of the law
and the effective implementation of judicial decisions
with a view to compensating victims and ensuring their
security. We plan to establish a compensation fund
managed in collaboration with public and civil society
partners.
Prevention — by no means the least important
issue — chiefly concerns the fight against impunity,
including the fight against ignorance by disseminating
the relevant international legal instruments available
and the laws on sexual violence, so that women victims
know their rights and so that the judges know what
their powers are.
The judicial and penal infrastructure, which have
been ravaged by years of war and pillaging, should be
improved and better equipped in order to prevent
breakouts of the rapists who have been sentenced or
are in detention. Another element is strengthening the
capacity of judges in this area and training women
judges in order to provide legal assistance to victims.
Prevention also involves increasing the number of
female military, police and civilian officers in order to
enhance the collection of information on violence
against women. This list is not exhaustive, but it also
includes a procedure to prevent rapists from being able
to hold positions of responsibility and, if necessary, to
relieve them of their functions.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo feels that
we must enhance the status of women, because if men
do not realize that women are their equals, they will
not think that rape is disgraceful. We have to continue
to implement the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women and the
Declaration on the Elimination of Violence Against
Women. Moreover, article 14 of the constitution of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo provides for the
implementation of gender equality in all institutions. I
am happy to report that a draft text from my ministry
relating to the implementation of parity has been
prepared and is following the necessary procedures.
In resolution 1325 (2000), the Security Council
called on all parties to armed conflict to take all
measures to protect women and girls against acts of
gender-based violence, in particular, rape and other
forms of sexual abuse, as well as all other forms of
violence in situations of armed conflict.
Thus, we would stress that the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) will lead to the recognition of
the role of women in peacebuilding and peacekeeping.
It is important to involve women in the mechanisms for
the prevention and resolution of conflicts so that they
can lend to humanity their capacity to create
consensus, to resolve conflicts and to build peace.
Internationally, the fight against sexual violence
can be supported by strengthening the mandates of
peacekeeping operations, with a view to protecting
women and children against violence.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo feels the
full force of this problem and will spare no effort to
fight against the scourge of sexual violence, with its
attendant suffering, including the use of women as
sexual slaves, held hostage by armed groups in forests.
My country makes an impassioned appeal to the
international community for a return of sustainable
peace. This is a sine qua non condition for the
complete eradication of sexual violence.
Indeed, a political consensus is emerging
following free, democratic and transparent elections.
Thus, the conflicts in eastern the Democratic Republic
of the Congo are lamentable. All power in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must go through the
ballot box. What are these armed men — these armed
groups — the non-regular army — doing in eastern
Congo? What is the international community doing?
Congolese women, victims of sexual violence,
are also hostages to the natural resources of Congo,
which are being exploited illegally.
I remind the Council that women in general, and
the women of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
particular, have the right to peace without fear of
violence or oppression. They have the right to peace,
without which all hope for dignity, well-being and
development will be in vain and compromised. I
conclude by hoping that Congolese women’s appeal for
peace — which I echo here — will be heard, because
trying to fight against sexual violence without seeking
peace is nothing more than a delusion.
I would like to thank all previous speakers who
mentioned the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
particular, I reiterate my thanks to the United States of
America for having made it possible to have this
S/PV.5916
08-3906930
debate, enabling me to speak — a person from a
country that is very affected by this issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Ms. Fritsche (Liechtenstein): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate and for
the personal efforts of Secretary Rice on the issue of
women and peace and security, in particular in the
framework of the Women Leaders’ Working Group.
We appreciate the careful preparation of today’s
meeting, including the early submission of a draft
resolution. However, even though we are happy to
sponsor the draft resolution, we would have preferred
for the debate to have an impact on its drafting. We
hope that future open debates will follow that example.
My delegation has supported resolution 1325
(2000) in its entirety ever since its adoption, and we
believe that it has had a positive impact on the ground.
Nevertheless, we agree with the assessment in the
concept paper that progress towards achieving its
major goals has been slow and uneven. In particular,
the United Nations must appoint more women to senior
positions with regard to preventive diplomacy,
mediation and peace operations. This would have a
clear impact on the topic under discussion today.
Appointing more women to leading positions would,
without any doubt, have a catalytic effect and empower
women affected by armed conflict. It would strengthen
the perception that women are stakeholders, as opposed
to mere victims or aid recipients.
A few years ago, during my time as Permanent
Representative in New York, I had the honour of
heading a group of like-minded ambassadors aiming to
increase the presence of women in such positions. The
success of our cooperation with the Secretary-General
in that regard then was very modest indeed and, several
years later, it is sad to note that very little progress has
been made, in spite of repeated expressions of good
intentions from all sides. Nevertheless, we believe that
resolution 1325 (2000) has, overall, had a positive
impact on the work of the United Nations in this field,
while its full potential has yet to be explored.
Sexual violence is one of the most important
aspects of resolution 1325 (2000) and merits a separate
discussion. While sexual violence has always been a
part of armed conflict, its systematic and targeted use
in numerous situations today is not just a by-product of
hostilities or merely a war crime. It has become a
method of warfare that aims to destroy the social fabric
of communities in order to achieve political and
military goals. The General Assembly addressed this
trend as early as in 1995 by adopting resolutions on
rape and sexual violence in the context of the conflict
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, but the trend has continued
unabated. The increasingly systematic use of sexual
violence is part of a larger pattern. One of the main
consequences of the changing nature of armed conflict
is the increasing victimization and targeting of civilian
populations, which puts women and girls at particular
risk.
The protection of civilians must be an inherent
task for all peacekeeping missions. This applies in
particular to acts of sexual violence. Peacekeepers are
currently providing protection, including against sexual
violence, only on an ad hoc basis and under a flexible
interpretation of their sometimes vague mandates.
Future mandates must provide clear guidance, in
particular to commanders, on how to protect civilians,
including girls and women, from sexual violence.
Resolution 1794 (2007) can serve as an example in this
regard. Furthermore, predeployment and on-mission
training programmes must instruct police, security and
humanitarian personnel on how to recognize and react
to incidents of sexual violence.
Sadly, girls and women in affected regions often
associate uniformed personnel with sexual violence. It
is therefore crucial to deploy more women in civilian
components of peacekeeping missions, empower local
women leaders and increase their role in all
peacekeeping efforts.
Most important, those who are supposed to
provide protection must never themselves become
perpetrators. All acts of sexual violence committed by
peacekeepers, including sexual exploitation of local
woman and child prostitution, are unacceptable. Such
acts heavily undermine the credibility and
effectiveness of any given peace operation, but also of
our Organization as a whole. Zero tolerance can be the
only answer to such incidents. Indeed, the ultimate
goal must be for the attitude and behaviour of
peacekeepers towards women to serve as a model for
local communities.
Very significant progress has been made over the
past few years with regard to the issue of impunity.
Both ad hoc tribunals established by the Council have
S/PV.5916
3108-39069
made highly significant contributions in this respect. In
the Akayesu case, the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda established that rape, under certain
circumstances, can constitute an act of genocide. The
codification of sexual violence as internationally
punishable crime occurred in the context of the
adoption of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court in July 1998. The explicit inclusion of
sexual violence in the provisions dealing with war
crimes and crimes against humanity was one of the
many significant steps forward reflected in the Rome
Statute.
Today, almost 10 years later, the Court is fully
operational and is currently dealing with situations
where sexual violence is rampant. One of them is the
situation in Darfur, which the Security Council has
referred to the Court. It is therefore clear that the parts
of the draft resolution dealing with the question of
impunity are indeed incomplete without a specific
reference to the International Criminal Court. We think
that the text would have sent an even stronger message
if it had included such a reference. We also think that
the Council should call for cooperation with all
international tribunals and courts that deal with sexual
violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ghana.
Mr. Christian (Ghana): I join previous speakers
in commending the delegation of the United States for
convening this timely open debate, which seeks to
address the grave sexual violence in situations of
armed conflict. We welcome the presence of United
States Secretary of State Rice and Deputy Secretary-
General Asha-Rose Migiro.
This gathering reinforces our shared belief in the
inherent dignity of every human being whether in time
of peace or in time of conflict. Indeed, the inclusion of
a range of sexual violence offences in the Statutes of
both the International Criminal Court and the ad hoc
international criminal tribunals was itself a strong
affirmation of our shared value that there should be no
tolerance for impunity.
As expressly set out in the concept paper
prepared by the United States (S/2008/364, annex),
there are practical challenges that we have to grapple
with in order to make meaningful progress in dealing
with gender-based and sexual violence, which remain
an important part of resolution 1325 (2000),
considering the almost daily and disturbing reports on
rape and other forms of sexual abuse emanating from
several of the conflict situations in the world,
particularly in Africa.
Improving the response to the scourge of sexual
and other forms of violence against women poses a
great challenge, particularly to developing countries,
which are the major troop contributors. This challenge
calls for fresh thinking aimed at finding more
appropriate measures to enable the United Nations to
discharge its mandate more effectively and with
maximum flexibility and efficiency. As the
representative of a major troop-contributing country,
allow me to briefly share my Government’s
experiences and its perspective on ways to improve the
response of peacekeeping personnel to the scourge of
sexual and other forms of violence against women in
situations of armed conflict.
We wish to emphasize that women peacekeepers
serve as role models and encourage girl soldiers and
victims to embrace programmes to disarm former
combatants and generally have a salutary and positive
impact on security sector reform, electoral support and
gender mainstreaming in broken societies where
women are even more marginalized.
Troop-contributing countries must take
responsibility for deploying well-trained peacekeepers.
The term “well-trained” must be redefined to include
having gender awareness. Gender training should also
take place in national staff colleges; it should be
realistic and based on exercises, case studies and split-
second decision-making.
Greater representation by women is therefore
required not only as a matter of principle, but also as a
practical matter, in order to strengthen the effectiveness
of peacekeeping. In this respect, Ghana has made
concerted efforts to increase the integration of women
in its armed and security forces and would endeavour
to deploy more women as peacekeepers. One
innovative strategy Ghana endorses is fostering closer
coordination between public institutions that deal with
peacekeeping and those that deal with women’s affairs.
We must put security institutions in closer working
relationships with women’s organizations.
We underscore the importance of security sector
reform as an essential element of peace and security.
But to be sustainable, such reform must be gender-
sensitive. Women are the glue that holds families and
S/PV.5916
08-3906932
communities together, even in the midst of war. There
is a need for greater recognition of the roles women
play in peace consolidation, and they should must be
consulted in all activities undertaken on their behalf
and be equitably represented in strategic responses to
violations.
Better liaison with women’s constituencies can
improve access to operational intelligence and can
serve as force multipliers in the achievement of
mission objectives. Increasing women’s voice in
security and governance structures can help weed out
the root causes of violence and discrimination. Gender-
sensitive protection efforts should be recognized and
rewarded to help ensure that peacekeeping forces
accord high-priority to the protection of women and
girls.
Failure to prosecute is a licence to rape.
Consistency in prosecutions and in referrals to justice
mechanisms shows that the Security Council takes this
matter seriously. All perpetrators and would-be
perpetrators must know that the international
community, particularly the Security Council, is
watching and is ready to act to end impunity for sexual
violence. States should review and, when necessary,
revise or create applicable laws to ensure that sexual
violence against women is always criminalized.
Bolstering the role and capacity of both the
United Nations and regional security institutions is also
essential. Our region, for example, has benefited from
action at the regional level. The African Union has
demonstrated its zeal in helping to end conflicts on the
continent, and cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union has been positive and should
continue to improve and give meaningful protection for
women.
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) is
premised on the twin pillars of protection and
empowerment. National-level responses must
ultimately aim at reducing women’s economic
vulnerability and dependence as well as their exposure
to exploitative relationships and sexual abuse. In that
connection, protection should not only be a reactive,
band-aid solution; efforts should be made to empower
women and girls in the long term.
As clearly stated by the Secretary-General in
February 2008, at the launch of a multi-year campaign
to end violence against women, Member Governments,
the private sector and civil society can effectively
support increased actions on the ground to end such
violence, prevent this affront to humanity and ensure
that women and girls have the right to a life free of
violence.
Ghana, for its part, will do all that is possible at
the diplomatic, policy and operational levels, as we
have done since the dawn of United Nations
peacekeeping, to bring about the desired change and
impact on peacekeeping operations, aimed at ending
sexual violence against women. We also take note of
the provision to strengthen access to justice and
services for survivors of sexual violence as well as the
emphasis on regional cooperation.
Ghana believes that the draft resolution to be
adopted at the end of this debate constitutes a good
basis for our work, and we support the
recommendations contained therein. We are
particularly pleased to recognize the emphasis on the
role and conduct of peacekeeping missions, including
related recommendations for troop-contributing and
police-contributing countries.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Stiglic (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.
In the interest of time, I will limit myself to an
abbreviated version of our statement. The complete and
official statement on behalf of the European Union is
being distributed in the room.
I would like to begin by commending the United
States presidency on the initiative to convene this
thematic debate. The presence of the United States
Secretary of State today, as well as that of other high-
level representatives, shows that the international
community understands the urgency of this important
issue and stands ready to take it forward. We hope this
timely and topical debate will help us do just that.
I would like to recall a remark made by Major
General Patrick Cammaert in his statement at today’s
debate, that it is more dangerous to be a woman that to
S/PV.5916
3308-39069
be a soldier right now in armed conflict. Women have
always been particularly vulnerable victims during
armed conflicts, but in modern history sexual violence
has developed into a method of warfare.
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), linking
gender equality to global security and acknowledging
the importance of women’s voices in building lasting
peace, represents a milestone on the road to more
gender-sensitive peace processes and security policies.
We must considerably strengthen our efforts to
guarantee the protection of women and girls in
conflict-affected societies and to ensure their full and
equal participation in peace processes at all levels,
including negotiations and decision-making, insisting
that women be fully engaged in all humanitarian,
reconstruction and development programmes.
The European Union believes that the best way to
promote women’s rights and women’s empowerment
and to respond to the needs of women is through a
gender-sensitive approach. Human rights and gender
issues are being mainstreamed in our development
cooperation policies. Through the European Initiative
for Democracy and Human Rights, we have supported
women’s participation in peace processes in Colombia,
Kenya, Ethiopia, Eritrea and Somalia. Furthermore, the
EU Initiative for Peacebuilding will be exploring ways
to ensure the effective implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) by the international community,
Governments and local civil society organizations. We
also have a strong commitment to mainstream gender
equality in the European Security and Defence Policy.
Sexual and gender-based violence is an area of
particular concern to women and girls in armed
conflict situations, although we know now that also
boys and men may be subjected to such violence and to
sexual torture. Violence against women and girls,
including rape and sexual slavery, is often used as a
weapon of war in order to demoralize women
themselves or the community to which they belong.
Importantly, high levels of sexual and gender-based
violence also rarely cease at the end of hostilities and
continue well into the post-conflict phase.
Examples from the recent past and, unfortunately,
at this present moment show the extensiveness and
severity of sexual violence against women in armed
conflict. Today, armed groups in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are using sexual violence as a
weapon of war to terrorize the population. In Darfur
too, women and girls continue to be affected by high
levels of gender-based violence and sexual crimes
including rape, while impunity remains a serious
problem.
The short- and long-term costs of sexual and
gender-based violence were largely underestimated or
ignored in the past and there still remains a lack of
coordinated and effective action. Such violence is
surrounded by a culture of silence and impunity, and
the range and complexity of the underlying causes
make it a difficult issue to address, particularly in
conflict-affected situations, where judicial and security
institutions are weak.
Impunity for perpetrators and an insufficient
response to the needs of survivors are unacceptable.
Grave violations of women’s human rights through
massive rape and other sexual violence require the
immediate attention of the International Criminal Court
and other relevant tribunals.
There is a strong need to develop and promote
innovative approaches that turn women from victims of
rape into rape survivors. Such approaches should
ensure their safety and support their access to justice,
and should actively support their economic
empowerment through income-generating activities.
Furthermore, they should also ensure adequate care,
recognizing women’s sexual and reproductive health
needs.
On this occasion, the European Union reiterates
its strong commitment to the zero-tolerance policy, in
the firm belief that under no circumstances can gender-
based violence be condoned in peacekeeping or other
United Nations-led operations. There should be no
impunity for gender-based violence in the United
Nations.
Every United Nations peacekeeping mission
should include, as a priority, the protection of women
and the safeguarding of women peacebuilders and
should include information about sexual and gender-
based violence in its regular reports to the Security
Council. Furthermore, it is essential that all military
and civilian personnel serving on United Nations
peacekeeping missions receive training on the
protection and rights of women.
In conclusion, the European Union looks forward
to the adoption of a strong and action-oriented draft
resolution, with a broad sponsor base as an outcome of
S/PV.5916
08-3906934
this thematic debate. We express our support for
developing an effective and comprehensive system-
wide approach for addressing the issue of sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict with clear
monitoring and accountability mechanisms.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Hill (Australia): Australia would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for including this issue on the
Council’s agenda.
Crimes of sexual violence are among the most
widespread and egregious of all violent acts committed
during armed conflict. We note with regret and disgust
that sexual violence is often perpetrated by parties to a
conflict. Put simply, the deliberate and widespread use
of sexual violence is a crime against humanity and, if
used as a method of warfare, a war crime. Australia
condemns this egregious behaviour and demands that
the impunity of perpetrators of these despicable acts
stop. The international community must hold rapists to
account. We have the tools, including the International
Criminal Court, at our disposal, and we must mobilize
them urgently.
As we are all too aware, crimes of sexual
violence are also, in some circumstances, perpetrated
by United Nations personnel. Any act of sexual
violence or exploitation by United Nations personnel
undermines the credibility of the United Nations in
times of crisis. More than that, it is a gross breach of
trust. The role of United Nations peacekeepers in the
protection of civilians from all violence, including
sexual violence, is an important one. There is a strong
need to develop clear guidelines to ensure effective
implementation of that task.
The role of police in peacekeeping operations is
also of fundamental importance. Australia provides its
police with training and guidance on sexual violence
and also provides predeployment training to police
forces from regional countries for missions such as the
Regional Assistance Mission in the Solomon Islands.
We also recognize the important role of women in
peacekeeping missions, whether they be military,
police or civilian personnel. Almost 20 per cent of
Australian police and military personnel currently
involved in peacekeeping missions are women. Not
only are women deployed by Australia; they often hold
senior roles within these missions.
Australia reiterates calls by the international
community for effective training and strong command
structures within military and police contingents, be
they Blue Berets or not, to prevent such crimes and, in
situations where they have occurred, to prosecute them.
The absence of an effective system to prosecute United
Nations personnel who, while a member of a
peacekeeping mission, perpetrate sexual crimes should
not lead to impunity. Where this is the case, the State
of nationality should take action to hold its own
nationals to account.
Community education, including by
non-governmental organizations, is also important,
especially for those who come into contact with
victims of sexual violence. Removing the stigma all
too often attached to survivors of sexual violence and
condemning this violence are also important elements
of such education. It is also essential that victims of
sexual violence have effective and equal access to
justice, and that national systems, including
appropriate national legislation, be in place to ensure
effective judicial outcomes.
This is an important issue which requires the full
attention of the international community. We urge the
United Nations system and Member States to lead by
example and to redouble their efforts to respond to the
crime of sexual violence in armed conflict. As a first
step, Australia calls on Member States to undertake
more extensive predeployment training for all
personnel, including those bound for United Nations
missions. We cannot stand by and allow these
violations to continue.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. In view
of the lateness of the hour, I intend, with the
concurrence of the members of the Council, to suspend
the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m.

United Nations S/PV.5916(Resumption 1)
Security Council
Sixty-third year
5916thmeeting
Thursday, 19 June 2008, 3 p.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.
08-39081 (E)
*0839081*
President: Mr. Khalilzad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (United States of America)
Members: Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lammens
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Tiendrébéogo
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Pan Jingyu
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Weisleder
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Vilović
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. De Rivière
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Natalegawa
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Spatafora
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ettalhi
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Suescum
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Rogachev
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Lazouras
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . Ms. Cross
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Bui The Giang
Agenda
Women and peace and security
Letter dated 4 June 2008 from the Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2008/364)
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
08-390812
The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have just received letters from the
representatives of Mauritania and San Marino, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers, as I
indicated this morning, to limit their statements to no
more than five minutes, in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate the
texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Spain, to whom I now give the floor.
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain welcomes the choice of the topic of women and
peace and security for this thematic debate during the
United States presidency of the Security Council in the
month of June.
I should like to begin by saying that this morning
we heard some extremely important statements,
including those made by the Secretary-General, the
Deputy Secretary-General, the presiding officers of
important bodies of the Organization, the United States
Secretary of State and, in particular, such individuals
as the Ministers from Liberia and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as well as Major General
Cammaert, who have very closely experienced this
problem in various places, especially Africa.
Spain of course associates itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Slovenia
on behalf of the European Union.
Almost eight years after the Security Council’s
unanimous adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), and in
spite of greater awareness of the problem we are
addressing today and improvements in prevention
mechanisms, fully and effectively protecting women in
conflict situations continues to be an unfinished task.
Violations of the rights of women and girls in those
situations continue to increase, despite the legal
framework that the international community has put in
place and the growing awareness of the severity of the
problem. That awareness was reflected in the General
Assembly’s recent adoption of its resolution 62/134, on
eliminating rape and other forms of sexual violence in
conflict situations, of which Spain was a sponsor.
Responding comprehensively to the use of sexual
abuse as a weapon of war continues to pose a challenge
for the international community. Along with the ad hoc
measures adopted in extreme cases in given
peacekeeping operations, it is imperative that the
United Nations decisively address the question of how
to structure and institutionalize an efficient response by
the international community to this very serious
problem. Among other things, we need to wage a
frontal war against the impunity that, in too many
conflict situations, is enjoyed by those responsible for
committing crimes against civilians, especially women
and girls.
International law has appropriate mechanisms at
its disposal. Among them, the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court categorizes systematic
rape as a war crime and a crime against humanity and,
in certain circumstances, even an act of genocide.
Universal accession to the Rome Statute would be a
crucial step towards combating impunity; as is the
implementation of the principle of universal justice by
States that have incorporated that principle in their
legislation, as Spain has.
With regard to my country, and in the broader
framework of the policy of equality that my
Government has promoted and strongly defends, in
November 2007 Spain adopted a national action plan to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) within the context of
the objectives of Spain’s organic law for effective
equality between men and women. In line with
resolution 1325 (2000), Spain’s action plan reflects the
beliefs that peace is inextricably linked to equality
between men and women and that women’s equal
access and full participation in power structures and
their complete involvement in efforts to prevent and
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
308-39081
resolve conflicts are essential for the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security.
In that regard, allow me to briefly refer to some
of the measures that the Government of Spain has
adopted to respond to the pending challenges. Those
measures focus on six basic objectives: promoting the
presence of women in peace missions in which Spain
participates; mainstreaming the gender perspective in
all phases of those missions; specific gender training of
personnel participating in missions; full respect for the
human rights of women and girls in conflict situations;
promoting the principle of equality in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes; and
promoting greater participation by civil society groups
in this area.
Spain supports the establishment of special units
within peacekeeping missions to specifically cater for
women and girls who have been victims of sexual
violence. Such units should be composed of specialized
personnel and, moreover, should serve as coordination
centres for the activities both of the United Nations
system and of the donor community as a whole.
With regard to cases where crimes against women
and girls have been committed by personnel of United
Nations peace missions, the Organization has now
begun to provide an integrated response to the
problem. In that connection, we welcome the General
Assembly’s recent adoption of its resolution 62/214,
the Comprehensive Strategy on Assistance and Support
to Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse by United
Nations Staff and Related Personnel. The Government
of Spain firmly supports the zero-tolerance policy on
this matter.
Spain is determined to promote new efforts to
implement the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000).
We are also finalizing an action plan on women and
peacebuilding aimed at all actors participating in
Spain’s system of cooperation for development. The
plan, which will not disregard the status of women as
specific potential victims of violence, will highlight the
particular importance of women as contributors to the
peaceful settlement of conflicts.
In a similar vein, the third meeting of African and
Spanish women working for a better world — which
took place in Niamey last May under the sponsorship
of the Governments of Spain and Niger and which
included the participation of women leaders and
representatives from most African countries, as well as
international bodies — adopted a final declaration that,
among other things, stated that the role of women in
peacebuilding and conflict prevention processes must
be recognized and supported, including through the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
The Niamey meeting also called for the
establishment of a multi-donor gender and
development fund that would be managed by the
United Nations Development Fund for Women. Spain
will contribute €50 million to that fund.
In conclusion, Spain fully supports the draft
resolution before the Council, of which we are a
sponsor. We hope that it will be adopted unanimously.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Ms. Graham (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes this opportunity to focus on women and
peace and security, and once again reaffirms its strong
support for resolution 1325 (2000). New Zealand is
committed to seeking ways to enhance and strengthen
the implementation of the resolution through our
development cooperation programmes, peacekeeping
efforts and domestic policies.
Resolution 1325 (2000) remains the
internationally accepted blueprint for a multifaceted
response to the issues facing women in conflict and
post-conflict reconstruction. It has played an
invaluable part in highlighting the important role of
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts.
New Zealand welcomes increased Security
Council attention to the reality of sexual violence
during conflict and to the need to end impunity for
crimes, including sexual violence. Sadly, sexual
violence continues unabated in conflict and post-
conflict situations around the world. It is a gross
violation of women’s human rights, which further
exacerbates the vulnerability of women and girls in
times of conflict. Sexual violence is an attack not only
on the dignity of women but also on the peace process:
it raises significant barriers to reconciliation and peace.
New Zealand attaches great importance to the need to
eliminate such violence.
We welcome the advances that have been made in
these areas by the United Nations and Member States.
We strongly endorse the Secretary-General’s
forthcoming report on all forms of violence against
women. New Zealand has actively supported General
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
08-390814
Assembly resolutions on the intensification of efforts
to eliminate all forms of violence against women and
on eliminating rape and other forms of sexual violence
in all their manifestations, including in conflict and
related situations.
New Zealand’s response to resolution 1325
(2000) is proactive and includes a number of specific
steps to encourage implementation both domestically
and internationally. Here are four examples of that.
First, New Zealand is committed to encouraging
women to undertake assignments on peacekeeping
missions. Women from the New Zealand Defence
Force, New Zealand Police and our wider society are
an integral part of New Zealand’s regional, United
Nations and other international peacekeeping efforts.
This includes women working in high-risk areas, such
as Afghanistan, and on operational missions, such as in
Timor-Leste. Furthermore, up to 30 per cent of all of
our police peacekeeping deployments are female —
among the highest rate in the world.
Secondly, the New Zealand Defence Force has
worked hard to integrate women at all levels and in all
trades of the Force, including combat. Its diversity
strategy recognizes the full value of integrating women
into the Defence Force and the benefits of having
women at more senior levels.
Thirdly, New Zealand attaches priority to
promoting women’s rights through the delivery of
official development assistance. Gender-based violence
is a core focus area for New Zealand’s International
Aid and Development Agency (NZAID). NZAID
supports a number of initiatives in the Pacific region
aimed at empowering women and mitigating their
exposure to violence. For example, New Zealand is
currently involved in the Pacific Prevention of
Domestic Violence Programme, a joint initiative of
NZAID, the New Zealand Police and the Pacific
Islands Chiefs of Police organization. It seeks to tackle
domestic violence and influence social change.
Fourthly, the NZAID conflict and peacebuilding
policy identifies women and girls in conflict and post-
conflict areas as a priority group for attention and
specifically includes the need to provide support for
the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). It
highlights the gender impact of conflict and the role of
women in peacebuilding.
In conclusion, New Zealand commends you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity for this debate on
resolution 1325 (2000), but we agree that progress
towards achieving its major goals has been slow and
uneven. There remains an urgent need to increase
political commitment and resources to ensure its
systematic implementation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Ms. Jahan (Bangladesh): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on
women and peace and security, an issue of particular
interest to the delegation of Bangladesh. Allow me to
recall, with a modicum of pride, that Bangladesh was
closely associated with the elaboration and adoption of
that landmark resolution, resolution 1325 (2000), as a
then-member of the Council.
Women and girls are the main victims of conflict
situations. The inherent discrimination and inequalities
that women suffer, by and large, can be and often are
further deepened in post-conflict situations. Also, in
peace and conflict resolution processes, women are the
ones who are the most deprived. Their voices are not
fully listened to, or even heard. The international
community has been increasingly forthcoming in its
resolve to undertake concerted measures to prevent
gender-based violence.
However, eight years since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), sexual violence persists in
conflict situations and in peace. We need to reflect
further on how best we can address the issues of sexual
violence, including its root causes. We need to analyse
the challenges and how those can be overcome. There
is no denying the fact that we need to ensure adequate
representation of women at all levels of decision-
making in conflict prevention and in post-conflict
reconstruction and rehabilitation. The true measure of
women’s participation in peace negotiations is not
through numbers, but through power in decision-
making. In the consolidation of peace, although the
role of women remains a vital factor, it is often
ignored.
The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
has recorded some progress. We hope that the
remaining shortcomings will be addressed in the
updated 2008-2009 action plan. A number of
constraints persist. There is an inadequate
understanding of the gender dimension in conflict
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
508-39081
situations. That leads to gaps in capacity at the
institutional and organizational levels to address
various provisions of the resolution. Without adequate
attention to and understanding of gender relations and
inequalities, women will continue to remain excluded
from peacebuilding initiatives. As a result of such
situations, their needs are not fully understood. We
need to further intensify our efforts in incorporating the
gender perspective at all levels of peacebuilding. We
also need to create expertise to address the issues
related to sexual violence. One way to augment
capacity is to facilitate women’s participation in both
formal and informal negotiations in the peace process.
The availability of gender-disaggregated data is
particularly important in understanding the situation of
women and girls who are victims of war and conflict. A
focused examination of issues specifically related to
violence against women is also important in the
formulation of policy guidelines. That is an exercise
that will assist in undertaking preventive measures.
The sharing of experiences, good practices and lessons
learned on a regular basis is useful not only in
sustaining peace but also in guiding policy measures.
Peacekeeping operations are no longer limited to
military activities. They now have broader mandates to
assist in elections, monitor human rights and carry out
police functions. Multifaceted peacekeeping operations
thus have great potential in addressing the security of
women. To that effect, we have successfully integrated
the gender perspective in some aspects of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. However, in post-
conflict peacebuilding efforts much remains to be
done. As a member of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Bangladesh remains vigilant in our focus on the
provisions of resolution 1325 (2000).
As one of the largest contributors of troops to
United Nations peacekeeping operations, Bangladesh is
ever conscious of our responsibility to incorporate
gender dimensions, particularly the essential elements
of resolution 1325 (2000). At present, Bangladesh has
more than 30 women police personnel deployed in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. The
percentage of women as peacekeepers and police from
Bangladesh are set to increase in coming days.
We recognize that a strong Security Council
mechanism is needed to monitor the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Establishing a working group
on women and peace and security might be useful and
a good option in that regard. It is our belief that
integrating the gender perspective across the United
Nations system will keep in view geographical,
cultural and ethnic factors. Adequate resources should
also be mobilized to that effect. The active
involvement of civil society and non-governmental
organizations is a sine qua non. We are of the view that
the role of the media in enhancing the integration of
women in peace processes is quite significant.
In conclusion, let me underline that ending
impunity is a must. However, it is more important —
indeed, crucial — to mobilize leadership, secure
accountability, pool adequate resources, identify
challenges and address root causes in protecting
women and girls in wartime, as well as in peacetime.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. De Klerk (Netherlands): Our thanks go to
you, Mr. President, and to Secretary Rice for having
organized this important debate and for providing an
opportunity for the Netherlands to make some remarks
in addition to Slovenia’s intervention on behalf of the
European Union.
In 2000, resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security was adopted unanimously by the
Council; in 2002, the Rome Statute entered into force;
in 2005, the Peacebuilding Commission was
established; and, most recently, the Secretary-General
launched the Campaign to End Violence against
Women by 2015. Despite all these developments, little
has changed on the ground. Sexual violence against
women in conflict continues unabated and is at
unacceptable levels. The incidence of rape is on the
increase.
For the Netherlands Government, women’s
empowerment is a top priority. Women’s rights are
everyone’s concern. The Netherlands is therefore
taking a firm stand against the horrific violations of
women’s rights and human dignity that are taking place
in countries such as the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Sudan. That is why the Netherlands
supports the United Nations Trust Fund to End
Violence against Women. Also, last December, the
Netherlands Ministries of Foreign Affairs, Defence and
the Interior and 15 civil society organizations agreed
on a national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000). An
increasing number of Member States are elaborating
similar action plans. We now need to focus on
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
08-390816
implementation. We need to join forces. What should
we do?
First, we need to target men. Gender equality and
women’s empowerment cannot be achieved without the
involvement of men. Men need to talk to men, and they
have to speak openly to militia leaders, gang leaders
and sometimes the generals to be better role models. If
we want sexual violence to end, we need to raise
awareness among men about the consequences of their
actions. In situations of conflict, boys and men are
constantly confronted with models of violent
masculinity. Discussions should also take place
between men and women, with boys and girls, within
communities, to start the healing process and break the
cycle of sexual violence.
Secondly, acts of sexual violence should not go
unpunished. We owe this first and foremost to the
numerous victims. But everyone also should know that
if they commit such a crime, they will not and cannot
escape justice. Justice is imperative to ending
impunity. Governments need to take vigorous action.
National judicial systems should be strengthened in
order to ensure that such criminals are caught, tried and
effectively punished. If national systems fail to bring
perpetrators to justice, the International Criminal Court
comes into play. The Rome Statute clearly defines rape
and other forms of sexual violence, when committed as
part of a widespread or systematic attack against
civilians, as crimes against humanity. Fighting
impunity is also one of the key elements of the
resolution on all forms of violence against women that
the Netherlands and France present in the General
Assembly.
Thirdly, acts of violence against women are often
committed by soldiers — the very people who are
supposed to provide protection. The Netherlands
Ministry of Defence invests in promoting gender
equality in the armed forces. Gender training is
mandatory and is included in the curriculum of the
School for Peace Operations. We believe that all
peacekeeping troops and police contingents should be
given comprehensive gender training before
deployment. Moreover, gender awareness training
should be mandatory for all persons in leadership
positions in conflict and peace building situations,
including civil, military and diplomatic representatives.
Additionally, the United Nations should make an extra
effort to appoint more women to senior leadership
positions in peacekeeping missions. The United
Nations should also vigorously implement its zero-
tolerance policy. Commanders should shoulder on their
responsibility and arrest perpetrators. In this respect, I
would like to highlight the recent report of Save the
Children United Kingdom about widespread sexual
abuse of children and women by aid workers, and
above all, by United Nations peacekeepers. It is
intolerable that persons who should be providing
assistance or protection on behalf of the international
community take advantage of the situation to sexually
abuse women and children.
Finally, women are not just victims. It cannot be
repeated often enough that women and women’s
organizations have to be included in peace and
reconciliation processes. They also need to be involved
in formulating justice and reparation programmes,
including post-rape care.
The Netherlands very much welcomes this open
debate and commends the presidency of the United
States for its effort to put this heinous crime so
prominently on the agenda of the Council. Sexual
violence is linked to peace and security. The adoption
of a draft resolution co-sponsored by the Netherlands
will be an important step in recognizing that link. We
look forward to a report of the Secretary-General
which initiates a process to ensure follow-up by the
Security Council and to improve coordination of
United Nations activities on the ground. Finally, we
hope that this process will also include the monitoring
of actions taken by parties to implement their
responsibilities.
We cannot tolerate what is happening to mothers,
daughters, wives and grandmothers. Sexual violence in
armed conflict has to stop. It is my responsibility, it is
your responsibility; it is the responsibility of us all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Carmon (Israel): At the outset, allow me to
thank the President for having convened this important
debate and also to thank Secretary of State Rice for
presiding over this morning’s debate on such a pressing
issue. I also thank you, Mr. President, for your
leadership during this month of June. My delegation
wishes to thank the Secretary-General, the Deputy
Secretary-General and the President of the General
Assembly for their statements, and especially the
former Force Commander of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
708-39081
the Congo for sharing insights from his personal
experience and helping us to better understand the
challenges before us.
Eight years ago, the Council adopted landmark
resolution 1325 (2000), which, for the first time,
addressed the impact of war on women. Israel
continues to support the full implementation of this
resolution. While progress has been made in some
aspects, much more work needs to be done. One aspect
in particular, which is the basis of today’s debate, calls
on parties to armed conflict to take special measures to
protect women and girls from gender-based violence,
particularly rape and other forms of sexual abuse, and
emphasizes the responsibility of States to put an end to
impunity.
While sexual violence in armed conflict has
occurred throughout history, brutal and systematic rape
has become increasingly commonplace in some
conflict and post-conflict areas. Moreover, sexual
violence as a weapon of war is now perpetuated with
almost universal impunity in some conflicts. Such
actions not only constitute gross violations of human
rights, but they also undermine confidence in peace
processes and raise huge barriers to reconciliation.
While the international community has
recognized that sexual violence can amount to a war
crime, crimes against humanity, or constitutive acts
with respect to genocide, numerous challenges remain
with respect to ending sexual violence in situations of
armed conflict.
One particular obstacle is victims’ reluctance to
come forward. Survivors and victims of sexual and
gender-based violence often feel ostracized, as they are
forced to assume guilt and shame. This silence not only
harms the victims and their families, but also leads to
faulty statistics. Sources in the field confirm that,
indeed, the number of incidents of sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict is greatly underreported.
Hence victims must be empowered to reclaim their
human dignity. States should enforce the rule of law,
bring the perpetrators to justice and end the cycle of
impunity.
Similarly, a change in societal attitudes and
norms regarding sexual violence must be effected,
beginning with, as I just mentioned, the bringing of
perpetrators to justice. Ending impunity will also
encourage victims to come forward to seek justice and
rehabilitation. At the same time, we must educate the
world’s children, at the earliest stages of life, on the
rights, dignity and worth of every human being,
without regard to their gender.
At the recent Wilton Park conference,
recommendations were made that sexual violence be
viewed as a security issue and that the international
community should identify the circumstances under
which sexual violence is a threat to national and
international peace and security. In this context, the
Council can play a greater role in ensuring that
peacekeeping mandates specifically refer to the
prevention of sexual violence, that peacekeepers are
appropriately trained and informed about sexual
violence and that sanctions and other tools are used
against perpetrators. In this regard, my delegation fully
supports the Secretary-General’s call for peacekeepers
to be part of the solution and not part of the problem.
Indeed, resolution 1804 (2008) of 13 March
2008, which imposed a travel ban and asset freeze on
individuals in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
who commit serious violations of international law,
including sexual violence against children, is a good
example of how the Council can act more effectively.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs reported more than 32,000 registered cases of
rape and other forms of sexual violence in the province
of South Kivu, Democratic People’s Republic of the
Congo, alone.
Lastly, we must consider the effects of sexual
violence not only on the victims, but also on the
children born of mass rape, sexual slavery and sexual
exploitation. The impact of armed conflict on children
born of rape and exploitation has economic, health and
social implications that must be addressed.
Sexual violence is not an inevitable outcome of
conflict. It can be stopped. States, regional bodies, non-
governmental organizations and even individuals all
have specific roles to play in seeing that an end is put
to this detestable practice.
The Council, in particular, can focus on reporting
on sexual violence and seek to fully implement
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. In that context, my delegation welcomes and
is pleased to co-sponsor the draft resolution currently
before the Council. For its part, Israel pledges to
continue to fully implement resolution 1325 (2000) and
to work to promote women’s rights in all of its political
and development work. Doing so, in concert with
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
08-390818
global efforts, will help to build and sustain an
international commitment to prevent and respond to
sexual violence in conflict situations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iceland.
Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): I have the honour of
delivering the following statement on behalf of all five
Nordic countries — Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
Norway and Sweden — each of which is sponsoring
the draft resolution today.
First of all, allow me to thank the United States
presidency of the Security Council for having
organized this open debate.
Women are often victims of armed conflict, but
they can also play a central role in preventing and
resolving violent conflict as actors in conflict
resolution and peacebuilding. The ongoing high
incidence of horrific sexual violence against women
and girls in conflicts demands the attention of the
international community as a human rights matter and
as a question of ensuring respect for international
humanitarian law. It is an issue that has a direct bearing
on peace and security, and it is therefore very timely
and appropriate that the Security Council is addressing
the issue once again. Landmark resolution 1325 (2000)
continues to require full implementation.
It is clear that the use of rape and sexual violence
exacerbates conflicts and also perpetuates them long
after active hostilities are over. Such crimes inflict
indelible scars on individuals, families and societies,
which makes reconciliation and peacebuilding much
more difficult. The scars of sexual violence on the
psyche of the victims, their families, the children it
often results in, and even the perpetrators, are the
explosive remnants of war of the mind, erupting
unpredictably, doing long-term damage and making
reconstruction of a sustainable peace very difficult
indeed.
A climate of impunity on sexual violence
continues to exist. We must all join forces to end
impunity for such crimes. The Security Council should
respond urgently to incidents of sexual violence in
conflicts and bring measures to bear to ensure that
parties to armed conflict understand clearly that they
will pay a heavy price for employing or permitting
sexual violence. All Member States must do their part
in ensuring that individuals suspected of such crimes
are brought to justice in accordance with the necessary
legislation at the national level. We also call on States
to cooperate fully with the International Criminal
Court, whose Statute explicitly states that rape and
other forms of sexual violence can be prosecuted as
war crimes or crimes against humanity. Amnesties
should not extend to crimes of sexual violence.
Clear guidance for peacekeeping missions is also
needed on how to make operational the mandate to
protect civilians, including women and girls, from
sexual violence. That approach calls for strong and
specific mandates from the Security Council, as well as
sufficient means and more comprehensive reporting by
the United Nations system. There is a need to make full
use of available expertise, including from human rights
mechanisms such as the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on Violence against Women.
All Member States should ensure that training of
peacekeepers includes training on resolution 1325
(2000). Furthermore, it is vital that peacebuilding and
reconstruction plans include comprehensive victim-
protection and support mechanisms, such as shelters
for the victims and their families and gender units
within the police.
A key element in ensuring the protection of
women and girls from sexual violence during conflicts
and in post-conflict situations is the participation of
women in decision-making processes in all areas and at
all levels. Whether it involves practical protection
measures, such as the gathering of fuel in safety, or
more complex issues, such as the reintegration of
combatants into society, the input and experiences of
women are essential to success and sustainability.
The participation of women is therefore directly
relevant to the maintenance of peace and security. In
addition to increasing the presence of women on
military and police forces, new avenues must be
explored on how to deploy more women in
peacekeeping missions, including by establishing
civilian observer components. Stronger efforts must be
made by the United Nations to include women in
discussions on the management and resolution of
conflicts and in peacebuilding, including in rebuilding
societies, security sector reform, transitional justice
and post-conflict political and economic processes.
The Secretary-General and relevant United
Nations bodies should also redouble their efforts to
recruit women to high-level positions. The United
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
908-39081
Nations system as a whole should intensify its efforts
to recruit more women at all levels. The same appeal
goes out to all States Members of the United Nations.
It is our responsibility to ensure that the United
Nations has a solid base from which to recruit.
The Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy on
sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations
peacekeeping missions should continue and be
strengthened. There must be no impunity for
peacekeepers either. Again, wider participation by
women in such missions would help. The highly
successful Indian women’s police corps in Liberia is
encouraging in this regard, as is the high percentage of
women in the group of Nigerian police that Nordic and
African police have jointly trained for the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. It is
also important to provide appropriate and recurrent
training to all personnel involved in peacekeeping
operations, including on ethical conduct and the zero-
tolerance policy.
Regional bodies are becoming increasingly
important actors under the mandate of the Security
Council in addressing regional issues of peace and
security. Such bodies should be closely linked to the
discussions and decisions in relation to women, peace
and security. The Secretary-General is encouraged to
take a leading role in this matter.
The Security Council should seriously consider
the establishment of a working group to monitor
conflict situations where sexual violence is widely or
systematically used as a weapon of war, as is the case
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Sudan. Such a working group could assist the Council
in reacting rapidly to urgent cases and making
proposals on appropriate actions, including emergency
obstetric and other sexual and reproductive health
services and measures to prevent and treat HIV and
other sexually transmitted infections, psychosocial
support, as well as early measures to enforce the rule
of law and crime victims’ access to justice.
We support the proposal made by the United
States in its concept paper that Security Council
mandates should be strengthened to prevent sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict and provide
greater protection for women and girls from
widespread and systematic attacks by parties to armed
conflicts. This should be dealt with systematically both
when mandates for ongoing operations come up for
renewal and when mandates for new operations are
adopted.
We further encourage the Council to follow up on
the recommendation by the Secretary-General of
developing a monitoring mechanism to improve its
contribution to preventing and redressing violence
against women in armed conflict.
Finally, all the Nordic countries have completed
or are in the final stages of completing national
implementation plans for resolution 1325 (2000) and
encourage other Member States to do the same, as a
matter of urgency. We also suggest that lessons learned
from countries that have such a plan be used in
supporting other countries in preparing their own
plans.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): On behalf of the
Nigerian delegation, I would like to commend the
United States presidency of the Security Council for
having initiated this open debate on women and peace
and security, with a focus on sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict.
Let me reiterate my delegation’s full appreciation
of the concern raised in the concept paper on the
endemic nature of sexual violence against women in
situations of armed conflict, in particular the use of
rape as a weapon of war.
My delegation views violent sexual acts such as
rape, sexual assault, sexual slavery, forced marriages
and forced prostitution are crimes against humanity.
For us, these crimes are as despicable as they are
condemnable, and it does not matter whether they are
committed in time of peace or in time of war. Such
crimes affect not only the victims, but also families and
entire communities. They traumatize people and
degrade lives, leaving behind stigma, humiliation and
social exclusion.
We are equally worried that eight years after the
adoption of landmark Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), which both serves as an action framework and
reinforces other existing mechanisms, such as the
Convention on the Elimination on All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and the Beijing
Declaration, progress towards its implementation has
been slow and uneven.
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
08-3908110
Indeed, the objectives of the resolution, including
the need to enhance women’s participation in decision-
making, integrating gender perspectives into
peacekeeping operations, protecting women from
gender-based violence and mainstreaming gender into
United Nations programme mechanisms, remain
largely unfulfilled. The Nigerian delegation therefore
welcomes this new milestone resolution, to be adopted
later, as a follow-up to resolution 1325 (2000).
However, similar to resolution 1325 (2000), the
critical challenge is how to ensure its steady and
widespread implementation, particularly in conflict and
post-conflict areas.
In Africa, the most significant achievements
under resolution 1325 (2000) have taken place in post-
conflict environments where women now enjoy
considerably enhanced role in decision-making.
Strengthened by the African Union’s 2005 Protocol on
the Rights of Women and the 2004 Heads of States
Solemn Declaration on Gender Equity in Africa, a
number of countries have scaled up women’s
participation in politics and decision-making.
Through specific measures such as a gender
quota and a minimum threshold, some countries have
accelerated the integration of women into national
decision-making processes. Increasingly, women are
also being included in national and continental peace
and security initiatives.
Nigeria has signed and ratified the Protocol on
the Rights of Women in Africa. It has also taken
special measures to guarantee the participation of
women in governance and decision-making. At both
the federal and State levels, efforts are being made to
outlaw discriminatory customary or traditional
practices that are harmful to the physical and mental
health of women and girls.
The federal Government is also working closely
with traditional rulers and non-governmental and faith-
based organizations to change long-held attitudes and
negative perceptions about women and to inculcate in
young men respect for the fundamental rights of
women and girls. School curricula and public
enlightenment campaigns are also focusing on positive
gender values, including the promotion of gender
equality in all spheres.
The cumulative effect of those initiatives has led
to a significant increase in the literacy levels of women
and girls and in the number of women pursuing careers
in male-dominated occupations. The country’s national
health policies and plans have also become more
gender-sensitive, and, in the case of HIV/AIDS and
other infectious diseases, due consideration of the
special needs of women have become standard policy
objectives. Nigeria has also made remarkable progress
in the implementation of the Millennium Development
Goals as they relate to women and children.
Notwithstanding these modest efforts, the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in Africa’s
conflict environments remains fitful. The most critical
challenge, as we see it, is the concrete implementation
of special measures to protect women and children
against sexual violence and the prosecution of those
responsible for large-scale violations of women’s
rights.
Another important challenge is how to
institutionalize gender-sensitive policies through the
domestic implementation of relevant international
conventions and mechanisms, such as the Convention
on the Elimination on All Forms of Discrimination
against Women and the Beijing Platform for Action to
prevent violence against women.
In addition, the political will necessary for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) at the
national and regional levels is not evident in many
cases. The fact that there is no requirement in place to
ensure the universal observance of relevant
conventions and principles has created further room for
inconsistency among States.
My delegation considers it imperative that these
challenges be seen as constituting lessons learned that
should guide the United Nations as it seeks to put an
end to this unconscionable aspect of armed conflict. To
meet these challenges, the international community
must have a clear understanding of the
multidimensional nature of the problem to enable it to
take remedial action, as appropriate.
Our responsibilities must include preventing
sexual violence against women, providing protection
for them, assisting and caring for the children born of
rape, including those who are victimized by the culture
of impunity. Indeed, it is our responsibility to comfort
and heal the communities savaged by these crimes.
More importantly, we must strengthen punitive
measures so that perpetrators and those responsible for
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
1108-39081
breaches are brought to justice. To enhance such
measures, there is a need for greater participation by
women in the civil and military components of
multilateral peace support operations.
We would also like to see gender sensitive
training imparted to male civil and military personnel
to foster the awareness of gender issues. The need to
integrate gender perspectives and training into
peacekeeping in Africa is critical, considering that well
over 80 per cent of United Nations peacekeepers are
currently deployed in Africa.
I have elaborated on some of the challenges we
face in protecting women from sexual violence in
situations of conflict. There are more. For instance, we
also need to strengthen dissemination, sensitization and
monitoring mechanisms in conflict zones. Conflict
monitoring and early warning systems are also needed
to help avert the prevalence of sexual violence during
and after conflicts. There is also a need to ensure
effective monitoring of the implementation of
humanitarian assistance in camps where women have
been known to be especially vulnerable.
Health and education programmes should be
developed to deal with the effects of sexual violence,
such as HIV/AIDS and psychological trauma.
Additionally, it is necessary to coordinate the efforts of
the relevant agencies and bodies involved in these
efforts by identifying the various actors, programmes
and activities relative to resolution 1325 (2000) in
Africa.
It is also important to make a clear commitment
to move the implementation of the resolution forward.
In this regard, we support the call for the Secretary-
General to periodically report to the Security Council
on the use of sexual violence against women in
situations of armed conflict. We also invite the
Secretary-General to utilize existing regional and
subregional resources such as the Economic
Community of West African States early warning
systems and security architecture to strengthen the
protection of women.
We also call on the United Nations to take a more
strategic view of this problem, with clear, action-
oriented commitments to ensure measurable
improvements in the lives of victims.
The challenges we have outlined thus far are
daunting, but they are well within our capacity to
address. We can prevent sexual violence and protect
victims because we all have a good idea what the
problems are, and their physical and social costs.
My delegation believes that, by working together,
we can also make perpetrators account for their
misdeeds. Today’s discussion is, therefore, a welcome
first step.
Once again, we thank the United States
delegation for initiating this dialogue and for laying
before us a very helpful draft resolution. My delegation
can associate itself with the draft resolution, and we
expect others to do the same.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I commend the United
States presidency on the initiative of convening this
open thematic debate on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), and express appreciation to
Ms. Rice for her participation and leadership.
This debate is rather timely, as we are witnessing
an increase in the reporting of cases of violence against
women around the globe. In the case of armed
conflicts, the shocking images broadcast by the media
are deeply disturbing and attest to the gravity of the
problem. It is simply despicable. Rape and all other
forms of sexual abuse must be vehemently condemned,
no matter their purpose, and perpetrators punished.
Our collective consternation and indignation must
lead to action. If we are to successfully face this most
daunting challenge, we need to design and implement
practical, concrete measures to adequately address the
issue, with the involvement of the international
community as a whole.
Current international instruments provide an
adequate framework and the necessary basis for such
work. The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women, the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action, the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocols
are all important references in the effort we need to
undertake. Also relevant are the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and pertinent instruments
of international humanitarian law, in particular the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War.
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
08-3908112
Implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) must
play a central role in such a strategy. It should be
carried out in conjunction with that of all General
Assembly resolutions on violence against women, the
Agreed Conclusions of the Commission on the Status
of Women, as well as the 1974 General Assembly
Declaration on the Protection of Women and Children
in Emergency and Armed Conflict, in accordance with
which all forms of repression and cruel and inhuman
treatment of women and children committed by
belligerents in the course of military operations or in
occupied territories shall be considered criminal.
Our common efforts on the ground can also
benefit from the accumulated knowledge, experience
and expertise of the United Nations system, in
particular the relevant agencies, programmes and funds
of the Organization. They are invaluable partners in a
strategy to combat violence against women in armed
conflicts.
Ending impunity must also be part of our
collective efforts. No woman or girl victim of sexual
violence can reconstruct her life unless the cycle of
recurrence is broken. Beyond a lack of respect for the
human being, impunity signals the continuation of a
horrendous crime, which has multiplying negative
effects on family members and the community as a
whole.
For that reason, we must strengthen the crucial
role played by the International Criminal Court in
ensuring accountability and punishing perpetrators of
rape and other forms of gender-related crimes and
crimes of sexual violence, all considered crimes
against humanity, as defined in the Rome Statute.
An effective response to violence against women
requires a comprehensive approach in which peace and
security concerns are integrated into a human-rights-
based perspective. In that regard, empowering women
and girls must be at the centre of any effort to address
gender-based violence. The overall situation of women
and girls will improve only if equal participation in
decision-making at all levels is ensured.
In the specific case of armed conflicts, the full-
fledged participation of women in peacebuilding
efforts is critical. In this respect, more interaction is
necessary between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council, under Article 65 of the
Charter. We should also make full use of the
possibilities of cooperation within the Peacebuilding
Commission, which can contribute to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). As we see
in the country-specific case of Guinea-Bissau,
peacebuilding can greatly benefit from women’s
perspectives and actions.
In the Americas, Brazil is involved in an initiative
of South-South cooperation carried out within the
scope of the Brazilian contribution to the consolidation
of peace in Haiti. This initiative, based on our domestic
experience, supports the implementation of the Haitian
national plan to prevent violence against women and to
address the needs of women victims of sexual violence.
It is developed through the exchange of experts and
good practices, with the support of the United Nations
Population Fund and OXFAM.
In concluding, I reiterate Brazil’s political and
practical commitment to international efforts designed
to end all forms of violence against women. My
delegation hopes that the Council’s adoption of the
draft resolution, “Women and peace and security:
sexual violence in situations of armed conflict”, will
help us to attain that goal.
The President: I call on the representative of
Switzerland.
Mr. Baum (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank the United States for organizing today’s open
debate and giving us the opportunity to speak on this
very important issue.
Sexual violence in armed conflict shows a very
serious gap in the protection of civilians that was
rightly recognized and addressed in resolution 1325
(2000). We look forward to the adoption today of the
draft resolution, of which we are co-authors, affirming
that the prevention of acts of sexual violence can
contribute to the maintenance of international peace
and security.
We are deeply troubled that sexual violence
against women and girls is still prevalent in situations
of armed conflict. Such conduct is unacceptable, and
even more so when committed by peacekeeping
personnel.
Switzerland has adopted an action plan for
national implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), and
it attaches the highest priority to combating gender-
based and sexual violence in the context of armed
conflict.
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
1308-39081
Practical measures are urgently needed in order to
strengthen prevention of and protection against sexual
violence. To this end, the following four priority lines
of action should be considered.
First, Switzerland stresses the importance of
fighting against impunity. Acts of sexual violence must
not go unpunished. The prosecution of persons
suspected of having committed such acts is, first and
foremost, the task of States. However, when States are
unwilling or unable to prosecute acts of sexual
violence amounting to war crimes, crimes against
humanity or genocide, such cases must be referred to
the International Criminal Court. The Court clearly has
a crucial role to play in fighting impunity.
It is therefore essential to build up national law
enforcement capacities to ensure that States are able to
prosecute the perpetrators of sexual violence. Without
improved understanding of the root causes, the
mechanisms and the consequences of acts of sexual
violence, the perpetrators of gender-based and sexual
violence will continue to enjoy impunity.
Furthermore, disciplinary measures at the unit
commander level cannot be a substitute for military
criminal prosecution.
Secondly, systematic gender training should be
given to personnel working in the security sector,
including those in the armed forces, police and justice
systems, as well as United Nations personnel. Security
personnel must be able to respond in an appropriate
and timely manner to the different security needs of
women and men. It is therefore crucially important that
senior management personnel be included in gender
training programmes to ensure that dealing with sexual
violence against women forms an integral part of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We welcome
the specific references to the matter in the draft
resolution.
Thirdly, the Security Council should consider
establishing a monitoring mechanism to increase
accountability and ensure the integration of resolution
1325 (2000) into country-specific and related thematic
work. To this end, the Council should also set up a
structure for obtaining timely, accurate and reliable
information on sexual violence committed in situations
of armed conflict. United Nations field missions could
be entrusted with this task and thus serve as an early
warning system.
In addition, the Security Council could ask the
Secretary-General to submit reports on best practices,
based on the expertise of specialized agencies or
programmes, such as the United Nations Development
Fund for Women and UNICEF, and take into account
the security assessments of local and international
women’s organizations.
Fourthly, the Security Council may wish to
consider the problem of sexual violence against women
and girls, as referred to in resolution 1325 (2000), in
conjunction with resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1674
(2006), on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
and resolution 1612 (2005), on children and armed
conflict.
Finally, Switzerland supports implementation of
the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy on this
issue and the establishment of conduct and disciplinary
units in all peacekeeping missions. Furthermore,
cooperation with the Office of Internal Oversight
Services should be strengthened. The goal is clear: all
United Nations personnel — military or civilian —
must be trained in the highest standards of conduct and
be held responsible for maintaining them.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Mr. Kavanagh (Ireland): I am grateful to the
Council for the opportunity to address it on the subject
of women and peace and security. My Government
commends the United States presidency of the Security
Council, under your able leadership, Mr. President, for
the work that it has invested in this important issue.
Ireland aligns itself with the statement made
earlier today by the Permanent Representative of
Slovenia on behalf of the European Union.
Eight years on from the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), it is indeed time to assess progress
towards achieving its major goals. The resolution has
helped to promote the equal participation and full
involvement of women in efforts to advance peace and
security. It has also sought to protect women and girls
from, and indeed to prevent, gender-based violence.
However, it remains a challenge to ensure that the
United Nations, both institutionally and through its
individual Member States, fully implements resolution
1325 (2000). Last October the Council regretted that
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
08-3908114
“gender-based violence, particularly rape, and
other forms of sexual abuse ... remain pervasive,
and in some situations have become systematic,
and have reached appalling levels of atrocity.”
(S/PRST/2007/40)
Such a grave situation requires an urgent and effective
response from the international community, in the first
place from the Security Council.
The Irish Government, for its part, is actively
engaged in promoting the role of women in conflict
resolution and post-conflict recovery. The recent
establishment of a major conflict-resolution dimension
within our Foreign Ministry has opened further
avenues for Ireland to support implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) in conflict and post-conflict
settings. Resolution 1325 (2000) is to be one of the
three cross-cutting themes which guide the work of a
new designated Conflict Resolution Unit in the
Ministry. Women’s participation in the Northern
Ireland peace process, together with the presence of a
strong research and activist base, will permit tangible
lessons to be drawn and shared internationally in
helping advance and implement the resolution 1325
(2000) agenda.
As Chair of the 12-member Human Security
Network for the period through May next year, Ireland
will focus its work on the theme of gender-based
violence. In line with the Beijing Platform for Action,
the promotion of gender equality and the elimination of
gender-based violence is a prominent feature of
Ireland’s aid policy and activities overseas, and of our
National Women’s Strategy at home.
In 2004, in response to reports particularly of
rape and sexual violence in the conflict in Darfur,
Ireland established a national Joint Consortium on
Gender-Based Violence. Mary Robinson, former
President of Ireland and former United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, has lent her valuable
support as a patron. This unique body marks the first
time in my country that human rights, development and
humanitarian agencies have cooperated with
Government agencies, including those in uniform, to
confront collectively the issue of gender-based
violence. Training on gender equality and protection
from such violence is provided to Irish peacekeepers at
the United Nations Training School Ireland, in our
Defence Forces Training Centre.
We support the leading role of the United Nations
in ending violence against women, including through
the new multi-year programme launched recently by
the Secretary-General. We strongly support, in
practical ways, the gender equality work of the United
Nations Development Programme, including the Eight-
Point Agenda for Women’s Empowerment and Gender
Equality in Crisis Prevention and Recovery.
I turn now to the very useful concept paper drawn
up by the United States presidency of the Council in
preparation for today’s debate. It correctly identifies
three priority areas for consideration: understanding
the problem; prevention and protection; and
consequences for accused perpetrators.
As far as understanding the problem is concerned,
Ireland encourages the Security Council to recognize
that sexual and other forms of gender-based violence in
conflict situations have direct and significant relevance
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
Accordingly, in our view the Council should ensure
systematic monitoring and analysis of such violence,
and, where appropriate, take steps, measures and action
to address it.
We also encourage the Council to request the
Secretary-General systematically to include in all
reports on conflict situations comprehensive
information about acts of gender-based violence,
including sexual violence, against women and girls.
Moreover, Ireland encourages the Council to request
the Secretary-General to reflect on ways to improve the
level and quality of such reporting, using benchmarks,
indicators and monitoring mechanisms.
On prevention and protection, Ireland would
encourage the Council to request the Secretary-General
to report to it on a heightened engagement of the
United Nations in stopping gender-based violence in
conflict situations. Such a report or study could draw
on United Nations action already under way and on
activities of non-governmental organizations and
women’s groups at the local, national and international
levels. Ireland supports the call for the appointment of
an independent expert to lead such a study.
We would also encourage the Council to ensure
that women at the local level can actively participate in
the design, implementation and evaluation of strategies
and programmes to meet their security needs, interests
and concerns.
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
1508-39081
Ireland believes that there ought to be
consequences for perpetrators. Accountability by State
and non-State actors should be ensured, including
through effective prosecution and punishment.
Security sector reform and capacity-building for
police and the judicial sector are also called for in this
connection.
The inclusion of sexual violence offences in the
Statutes of the ad hoc international criminal tribunals,
and the considered jurisprudence of those tribunals,
has, over a short space of time, progressively
developed the law in this area in many important
respects. Rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution,
forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization and other
forms of sexual violence are now included within the
definitions of war crimes and crimes against humanity
found within the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. The Council can, of course, refer a
situation for investigation by the Prosecutor of the
Court — an institution which Ireland fully supports.
There should be wider application of best
practices for effective prevention and prosecution of
sexual crimes committed in situations of armed
conflict. Council mandates for conflict situations
should provide that local commanders and their
superiors in the military chain of command of armed
parties to conflict can be held accountable. All too
often, military commanders and other superiors fail to
take necessary and reasonable steps within their control
either to prevent sexual violence against civilians or to
punish the perpetrators of such crimes. Military
commanders and other superiors should be held
accountable for such serious acts of omission on their
part. Impunity can be reduced by ensuring that women
are involved to the greatest extent possible in peace
negotiations and in any associated amnesty provisions.
In conclusion, Ireland welcomes the intended
adoption later today of a draft resolution, which we are
pleased to co-sponsor, on this important issue. We
believe that it should help to empower women to fully
participate in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflict. It must be effectively
implemented to ensure that countless women and girls
in conflict situations receive more adequate and
effective protection from sexual violence.
Adoption of today’s draft resolution will
recognize that the use of sexual violence as a weapon
of war is a threat to sustainable international peace and
security. And, under the law, principal responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
rests here, in this Chamber.
Ireland hopes, therefore, that the Security Council
will act on its own analysis and promote with all
necessary vigour wider respect for, and implementation
of, its resolutions so as to halt and eliminate sexual
violence against women and girls in situations of
conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Normandin (Canada): First, Mr. President,
on behalf of Canada I thank you for taking the
initiative of this open debate. It is important that it
mark the beginning of a more concentrated effort on
the part of the Council to combat and prevent sexual
violence.
Such violence, especially against women and
girls, continues at alarming levels in many conflict and
post-conflict situations, including as a deliberate
weapon of war. It is high time that all involved in the
maintenance of peace and security stepped up to
address this issue.
Sexual and other forms of violence against
civilians in conflict-affected situations can, in many
circumstances, constitute a threat to international peace
and security. It is more than clear in the Sudan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
region, for example, that sexual violence is a security
problem requiring a security response. It is imperative
that the issue be addressed by the Council.
Resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security, adopted in 2000, calls for special measures to
protect women and girls from rape and other forms of
sexual abuse, and emphasizes the need to end impunity
for war crimes, including those relating to sexual and
other violence against women and girls. Eight years
later, there remain significant challenges to the full
implementation of those commitments.
Let us reaffirm our commitment to the equal
participation and full involvement of women in the
maintenance and promotion of peace and security,
including in peace processes, and remind ourselves of
the need to take concrete measures to increase their
role in decision-making with respect to conflict
prevention and resolution.
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
08-3908116
Canada was pleased to co-sponsor three weeks
ago a conference on the role of military peacekeepers
in addressing sexual violence. Participants in the
conference came from military, police, civilian and
diplomatic backgrounds. Among the conclusions that
emerged very clearly were that peacekeeping missions
need clear and strong mandates from the Security
Council; that doctrine must be developed to provide
guidance to the missions; and that the Council’s
monitoring of sexual violence and efforts to address it
must become more systematic.
Canada has called on the Council repeatedly to
establish a mechanism to monitor the integration of
resolution 1325 (2000) into its daily work. We reiterate
that call today. In relation to this, information on
violence against women and girls, including sexual
violence, should be systematically included in all
relevant reports of the Secretary-General to the
Council. Rigorous data collection and monitoring
would increase the Council’s capacity to develop
effective peace support mandates that better address
this violence, including by way of prevention.
(spoke in French)
Canada welcomes the most recent renewal of the
peacekeeping mandate of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in resolution 1794 (2007), which gives the
Mission a more explicit mandate for action to eliminate
sexual violence. Unfortunately, the notable absence of
equally strong provisions regarding sexual violence in
resolutions 1795 (2008) on Côte d’Ivoire and 1812
(2008) on the Sudan, both adopted after resolution
1794 (2007), demonstrate that inconsistency in the
Council’s approach to sexual violence in mission
mandates continues.
Canada believes that a report by the Secretary-
General to the Council including recommendations to
improve the United Nations response would be useful.
The report should draw on the full breadth of expertise,
including from the United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict and from
non-governmental organizations. An independent
expert could be appointed to lead the study.
Impunity for sexual violence against women and
girls and men and boys is rampant in conflict
situations. Canada urges countries to cooperate with
regard to the four conflict and post-conflict situations
being addressed by the International Criminal Court —
namely, those in the Darfur region of the Sudan, the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Uganda — to ensure that perpetrators of
serious international crimes are held responsible.
In that regard, as co-Chair of the Group of
Friends of the Great Lakes Region, Canada strongly
urges the early implementation at the domestic level of
the binding Protocol on the Prevention and
Suppression of Sexual Violence against Women and
Children adopted in December 2006, which demands
the guarantee that sexual violence in the region shall be
punishable both in time of peace and in situations of
armed conflict.
In conclusion, Canada is resolved to actively
support the efforts of the Security Council to combat
sexual violence in conflict situations. We encourage the
development of a doctrine to address and prevent
sexual violence. It should now be abundantly clear to
all that the systematic use of sexual violence as a
weapon of war requires an effective, timely and
commensurate response by the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you very much, Mr. President, for
having organized this debate.
My delegation believes that the United Nations
plays an essential role in combating all forms of
discrimination and violence against women and girls.
There can be no question that it is essential to bolster
the work of the Organization in this area, as well as to
improve its internal coordination to ensure a more
effective long-term impact.
Ecuador is fully committed to this effort. We are
a State party to all the relevant international
instruments and have co-sponsored several General
Assembly resolutions on this subject. In its own area of
responsibility, the Security Council made a major
contribution to this effort by adopting several
resolutions on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, especially as regards women and children.
More specifically, the Council adopted resolution 1325
(2000), several of whose paragraphs specifically refer
to the subject of this debate, namely, sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict.
Several elements of the draft resolution to be
adopted by the Council today are incorporated in
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
1708-39081
resolution 1325 (2000), including the important role
played by women in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts and in peacekeeping, the issue of gender
mainstreaming in peacekeeping operations and the
elimination of all types of gender-based violence,
especially rape and sexual violence.
My delegation believes that, with respect to the
need to request a report from the Secretary-General on
this issue, such a report should deal with situations that
fall under the competency of the Security Council and
that are clearly inscribed on its agenda; otherwise,
there could be duplication of effort, as certain
resolutions of the General Assembly also call for
similar reports from the Secretariat on this matter.
Ecuador believes that, despite the major efforts
being made by the Council, it is urgent to achieve
closer cooperation between the main organs of the
United Nations — bearing in mind that the General
Assembly is the universal body responsible for
providing a normative framework underpinning the
decisions of all States on the issue we are debating
today. My delegation therefore shares the view of the
President of the General Assembly that the subject of
sexual violence, including that perpetrated in the
course of armed conflict, should continue to be
considered by the General Assembly in a systematic
and ongoing manner — as was the case during this
session with the consensus adoption of Assembly
resolution 62/134, on the elimination of rape and other
forms of sexual violence in all its aspects, including in
armed conflict and similar situations — as well as in
the thematic debates convened by the President of the
General Assembly on the issues of human security and
human trafficking. The General Assembly also
addressed this issue in its annual resolution on all
forms of violence against women, which was also
adopted by Member States by consensus.
Ensuring an end to impunity and acknowledging
that victims have rights are decisive elements in
combating all forms of sexual violence against women,
including sexual violence as a weapon of war. Ecuador
believes in the essential role of the International
Criminal Court in combating impunity, as well as in its
contribution to peacebuilding processes. The
international community should commit itself to
ensuring that no one enjoys immunity for such crimes
under any circumstances. That should be our
commitment to the victims and our contribution to
peace and justice.
Like other delegations, we believe that such a
sensitive subject as the one before us today, which
should be of concern to all countries, including
Ecuador, should be considered in a comprehensive and
systematic manner by all Member States. Such
consideration should not be confined solely to the issue
of sexual violence, but should also address all forms of
violence against women and girls.
One way to prevent armed conflict and all forms
of violence and discrimination they generate is to
address poverty and underdevelopment head-on in the
context of the Millennium Development Goals, to
whose achievement all Member States committed
themselves.
Ecuador will continue to cooperate with the
international community to ensure that all forms of
violence against women and girls, especially sexual
violence, are eliminated from every country and region
of the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Park In-kook (Republic of Korea): First of
all, Mr. President, I would like to say how very much I
appreciate your timely initiative to convene this
meeting.
As stated in the concept paper, recent reports
indicate that brutal and systematic rape is becoming
increasingly commonplace in some conflict and post-
conflict situations. In fact, sexual violence in situations
of armed conflict has occurred throughout history,
including sexual slavery during the Second World War.
It is our firm belief that the adoption of the noble
Charter of the United Nations is a clear manifestation
of our strong commitment to preventing the recurrence
of such a brutal and categorical denial of the human
rights of women. However, contrary to our call for
consciousness and commitment, we have witnessed the
horrifying intensity and severity of sexual violence in
armed conflict, which has been exercised as a weapon
of war, in particular in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in Darfur.
My delegation would like to make clear its
position on key issues for today’s deliberations. First,
with respect to the link between sexual violence and
peace and security, the Republic of Korea fully
recognizes that sexual violence is a security issue as
well as a fundamental human rights issue.
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
08-3908118
Secondly, based on the recognition of the direct
link between sexual violence and peace and security,
mandates for peacekeeping operations regarding sexual
violence should be further strengthened and clarified.
At the same time, my delegation believes that efforts
should be intensified to implement the zero-tolerance
policy for sexual exploitation and abuse in
peacekeeping operations.
Thirdly, on the reporting mechanism, our
delegation is of the view that the Security Council must
institutionalize and systematize its consideration of
sexual violence in armed conflict. For that purpose, an
action plan of the Secretary-General is recommended,
with priority accorded to establishing a mechanism to
collect information and to reporting periodically to the
Council on such situations.
Last but not least is the issue of impunity. My
delegation reaffirms its support for any efforts to end
impunity, recognizing that accountability is a crucial
component in the process of ending the cycle of
systematic sexual violence against women. We believe
that referring cases to the International Criminal Court
or to the tribunals will send a strong and effective
message to the perpetrators, as ending impunity is a
critical element of a comprehensive approach to the
quest for sustainable peace, justice, truth and national
reconciliation. Furthermore, amnesty should not be
granted to the perpetrators of sexual violence. We are
also of the view that, in addition to ensuring, by
putting an end to impunity, that individuals are held
responsible, the responsibility of the State for the
situation and for the protection of victims should also
be further enhanced.
Before concluding my statement, I would like to
draw the attention of the Council to the issue of
children in armed conflict, given the daunting reality
that a large percentage of victims of sexual violence in
armed conflicts are children. I would like to recall that
the Security Council adopted a presidential statement
on children in armed conflict, expressing its readiness
to review the relevant provisions of resolution 1612
(2005) with a view to further increasing the efficiency
of its action for the protection of children from sexual
violence in armed conflict. We look forward to
substantive progress in that regard.
My delegation fully supports and is pleased to
co-sponsor the draft resolution to be adopted today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Ms. Rovirosa (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico welcomes the convening of this important open
debate on women and peace and security because it
gives us the opportunity to present our views on the
matter.
Gender equality, progress towards the
empowerment of women and the promotion of
international peace and security are essential elements
of my country’s foreign policy. Mexico recognizes that
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) constitutes a
milestone in gender mainstreaming in connection with
peace and security.
Nonetheless, we are concerned by the limited
progress that has been made in this area. We continue
to witness recurring cases of widespread and
systematic sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict. The international community cannot remain
inactive given this alarming situation. Such abominable
acts of sexual violence constitute war crimes and
crimes against humanity when they are committed as
part of a generalized and systematic campaign against a
civilian population, as stated by the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court.
For that reason, Mexico joins with the Council in
demanding the immediate and complete cessation of all
acts of sexual violence. We cannot tolerate such
abuses, whereby women and children continue to be
the principal victims of deliberate attacks by armed
groups and armies.
However, if that appeal is to be morally effective,
it is necessary to put an end to incidents of sexual
exploitation and abuse committed by United Nations
personnel, in particular peacekeepers. Mexico believes
that, although the United Nations has made progress in
developing standards of conduct for peacekeeping
personnel and in the strategy to protect and support
victims of exploitation and sexual abuse committed by
United Nations personnel, greater efforts must be made
to ensure that we have an effective international
response mechanism that can undertake timely action
to deal with cases of gender violence in conflict and
post-conflict situations. Mexico reiterates that we must
continue to develop and implement mandatory training
programmes on gender issues for United Nations
personnel involved in peacekeeping operations and in
the provision of humanitarian assistance.
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
1908-39081
Mexico reiterates its unequivocal rejection of the
use of sexual violence as a strategy of war and joins
the Council’s call on all States to bring the perpetrators
of such acts to justice. Likewise, we agree that
effective measures must be taken to prevent and
respond to acts of widespread or systematic sexual
violence in order to contribute to international peace
and security.
We hope that the report that has been requested of
the Secretary-General through the draft resolution
before the Council will clearly identify practical
proposals regarding strategies to minimize the
vulnerability of women and girls to this type of
violence. It is essential that our political will to
eliminate sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict be reflected in concrete outcomes. We cannot
allow more time to pass. We have a moral obligation to
act now, in a decisive manner.
Mexico is a staunch promoter of international
humanitarian law. My country believes that the use of
sexual violence, because of its very serious
humanitarian consequences, together with the use of
weapons that are excessively injurious or have
indiscriminate effects, such as antipersonnel mines and
cluster munitions, should be excluded entirely from all
military doctrines.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): Austria warmly
welcomes and highly appreciates the initiative of the
United States presidency and fully supports the
measures contained in the draft resolution to be
adopted later today. We are, as the Council is aware,
very pleased to be a sponsor of this important draft
resolution.
The issue of women and peace and security is a
foreign policy priority for Austria. In the past eight
years, visible progress has been made in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We now
have a set of clear rules under international law to
prevent violence against women, including sexual
violence in armed conflict. Nevertheless, as has been
pointed out in today’s debate, the prevalence and
brutality of acts of sexual violence against women and
girls in conflict and post-conflict situations around the
world have reached a level requiring urgent attention
and action by the international community.
We all agree that sexual violence is often not only
a mere manifestation of war but, rather, a deliberate
tactic of warfare. That practice and the adverse effects
it has on peace processes, reconciliation and post-
conflict reconstruction make it clear that sexual
violence against women is indeed a security threat.
We highly appreciate the important efforts
already under way within the framework of the United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict. We
also strongly support the system-wide campaign to end
violence against women and hope to see significant
progress leading up to 2015. Recent measures
strengthening the enforcement of a zero-tolerance
policy against sexual exploitation and abuse by United
Nations peacekeepers and related personnel constitute
a major contribution. The United Nations must lead by
example. Sexual violence is unacceptable under all
circumstances.
Women must have a seat and a voice at
negotiation tables. Regrettably, women’s representation
in peace processes is still the exception. In its national
action plan on implementing Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), Austria has made a clear
commitment to lobby worldwide for women’s
participation in all peace efforts. Conferences in
Vienna last year, bringing together women leaders from
the Middle East, as well as from Serbia and Kosovo,
were important opportunities to establish networks
which allow for the multiplication of women’s voices
and for enhancing influence.
We are encouraged by the Secretary-General’s
recent appointments of women as special
representatives and envoys and to leading positions in
the Secretariat. We hope to see more such
appointments in the future and reiterate our call for
Member States to support, encourage and nominate
women for such positions.
Despite clear rules under international law
outlawing sexual violence, perpetrators still largely go
unpunished. This situation demands further action by
the Security Council to strengthen the rule of law in
order to end impunity. Unfortunately, some of the
existing mechanisms and tools of the Council have
been underutilized. We therefore call on the Council to
make full use of the range of measures and tools
available, including the imposition of targeted
measures and referrals to the International Criminal
Court. We also call on Member States to strengthen the
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
08-3908120
rule of law and fully utilize accountability mechanisms
to bring to justice perpetrators of violations against
women and girls.
In this context, I would like to draw the Council’s
attention to our initiative on the Security Council and
the rule of law, which contains 17 concrete
recommendations on how the Security Council could
strengthen the rule of law. Recommendations 8 and 9
specifically address the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse in
peacekeeping operations. The report was recently
issued as a United Nations document (S/2008/270,
annex) and is available in all official languages.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by thanking the United States
presidency for having organized this open debate,
which clearly reflects the Security Council’s
commitment to full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and, in particular, the growing concern
regarding the use of various forms of sexual violence
against the civilian population, particularly women and
girls, in conflict and post-conflict situations.
In the framework of a human rights perspective,
Argentina places high priority on the situation of
women and girls in conflict situations, and on the
participation of women as key protagonists in peace
processes and in peacebuilding.
Resolution 1325 (2000) provides a legal
framework which allows for the effective participation
of women at the national and international levels,
within the broader and indispensable legal framework
comprising the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action, the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, the outcome
documents of the twenty-third special session of the
General Assembly, on women 2000: gender equality,
development and peace for the twenty-first century
(General Assembly resolutions S-23/2 and S-23/3), as
well as other relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly, specifically
Assembly resolutions 58/185, on the in-depth study on
all forms of violence against women, and 62/134 on
eliminating rape and other forms of sexual violence in
all their manifestations, including in conflict and
related situations.
As a reflection of this deep commitment,
Argentina is one of four countries carrying out the pilot
programme for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and has started to take concrete actions,
including the first regional workshop for the
development of a gender policy for peace operations,
held in our country in May with a view to
strengthening alliances at all levels to move forward on
gender mainstreaming in peacekeeping operations.
In this regard, we would like to note that
Argentina has fully incorporated United Nations
recommendations on gender in all aspects of its
participation in peacekeeping operations. The
Argentine Joint Peacekeeping Operations Training
Centre has also incorporated a gender perspective in its
doctrine, both at the administrative level and in the
curricula of its training programmes.
As of January 2008, 26 Argentine women were
participating in peacekeeping missions, particularly the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti and
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus. In
2007, 36 per cent of our participants in White Helmet
humanitarian missions were women, a figure which is
expected to reach 43 per cent in 2008.
Increasing numbers of reports from the field alert
us on the use of sexual violence as a political or
military tool in some current conflicts. A regrettable
chapter of our past has shown us that rape and other
heinous forms of sexual violence can be used by agents
of the State as a tool to spread terror, and to torture and
degrade those whom it considers their “enemies”.
Sexual violence as a method of warfare is
categorically prohibited. The widespread and
systematic use of sexual violence is a grave violation
of international law, particularly in the light of the
Rome Statue of the International Criminal Court and
by the Geneva Conventions and their Additional
Protocols.
Considering these realities, Argentina is
persuaded of the need urgently to adopt effective
measures to prevent and respond to such acts of sexual
violence against civilian populations, which will
significantly contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and security. Such measures should
include, inter alia, the protection of civilians, in
particular women and girl children; the training of
military and security personnel; the adoption and
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
2108-39081
effective enforcement of appropriate legislation; and
community-based work and care for the victims.
In order to ensure that effective measures are
adopted, we consider that a report of the Secretary-
General would be particularly useful. It should
organize and analyse the information available to the
United Nations system, with a specific focus on the
shocking phenomenon of sexual violence as a political
and military tool.
Lastly, Argentina is of the view that any effective
response to this question must be two-pronged:
promotion of full respect for the human rights of
victims and an end to impunity for perpetrators. In this
regard, we believe that the draft resolution before the
Council today would have benefited from a
strengthened legal framework, particularly with a firm
reaffirmation of the Rome Statue of the International
Criminal Court, the main tool available to the
international community today to ensure that nobody
can with impunity commit heinous crimes, such as
those which we are considering today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Let me
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for your
initiative in organizing this debate on the subject of
women and peace and security. We particularly
appreciate the presence of the Secretary of State of the
United States of America, Ms. Condoleezza Rice, who
presided over our work this morning.
We would also like to thank the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon; the Deputy Secretary-
General, Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro; the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Liberia, Mrs. Olubanke King-
Akerele; and Major-General Patrick Cammaert, former
Commander of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) for their briefings.
Colombia rejects all forms of sexual violence,
including rape and other forms of sexual abuse. On that
basis, my country has been reporting on the progress it
has achieved in implementing resolution 61/143 on the
intensification of efforts to eliminate all forms of
violence against women.
Colombia has also been fulfilling the
commitments set out in resolution 1325 (2000) and has
submitted the corresponding reports pursuant to that
resolution, which has allowed us to raise awareness of
the important role of women in the prevention and
settlement of conflicts.
In Colombia, the Presidential Office for Women’s
Equality has strengthened the incorporation of the
gender dimension in all Government bodies,
particularly through the policy on “Women Building
Peace and Development”. That policy reflects the
Government’s determination to include gender
mainstreaming, in a cross-cutting manner, in the
design, implementation and evaluation of public
policies.
In addition, the military relies on a
comprehensive human rights and international
humanitarian law policy and have launched a
programme aimed at strengthening reproductive and
sexual rights and gender equity within that institution.
Also noteworthy is the role of the National
Commission for Redress and Reconciliation, which
was established for the purpose of facilitating peace
processes and the individual or group reintegration of
members of illegal armed groups. The Commission
seeks to guarantee the rights of victims to truth, justice
and redress. It has incorporated a gender perspective in
its work as well as the recommendations contained in
resolution 1325 (2000).
On the basis of the efforts of the Commission,
among other factors, and its work with the Office of
the Attorney General and with women victims, crimes
associated with sexual violence are being addressed in
a more effective manner. As an example, trials are
being held that, in addition to their purpose of
prosecuting the perpetrators of such crimes, also
contribute to preventing them and to protecting the
victims. Many of those victims, in particular women,
have come forward to denounce criminal actions such
as sexual violence.
In addition, the Office of the High Adviser for
Social and Economic Reintegration has provided
humanitarian assistance to more than 2,600 women
who had been partners of members of illegal armed
groups and who have received benefits such as
physical security, shelter, food and psychosocial
support. Special emphasis has been placed on the
provision of support for the settlement of disputes
arising from domestic violence and for the holding of
workshops on the issue of respect for and the integrity
of women.
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
08-3908122
Colombia will continue to follow this course of
action, with particular emphasis on the areas of
participation, prevention, protection and the combat
against impunity, in the quest to eliminate all forms of
sexual violence.
The Secretary-General’s most recent report on
women and peace and security highlights the role of
regional organizations in the implementation of the
plan of action 2008-2009 relating to resolution 1325
(2000).
My delegation would like to draw attention, in
this perspective, to the high-level dialogue that took
place in Chile in November 2007, at which the Latin
American and Caribbean authorities charged with
dealing with this subject carried out an assessment of
the developments relating to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) at the national level and shared
experiences on best practices. This type of activity is
particularly useful in developing management and
information systems that take into account each
region’s individual characteristics and priorities.
We would like also to underline the role of the
Inter-American Commission on Women, as the relevant
body of the Organization of American States in this
field, as well as its important efforts in the quest to
eliminate all forms of violence against women.
My delegation notes with interest the increasing
participation of women in tasks related to
peacekeeping. The example of the all-female police
contingent from India in the United Nations Mission in
Liberia constitutes a point of reference on progress in
this area and makes a positive contribution to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We echo the
support expressed for initiatives aimed at ensuring a
higher percentage of women in peacekeeping forces.
Lastly, my delegation would like to underscore
how important it is that the action of the Security
Council on issues related to sexual violence be focused
on situations where peacekeeping missions are
deployed and that are on the Council’s agenda. This
includes due regard for the continuation of zero-
tolerance policies for sexual exploitation and abuse in
such operations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Republic of Tanzania.
Mrs. Kafanabo (United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, allow me to congratulate you for
organizing this open debate on women and peace and
security. By focusing our discussion on sexual violence
in situations of armed conflict, the Security Council
will be sending an authoritative message of
condemnation to those parties that are perpetrating or
condoning such acts in conflict situations as well as a
message of hope to the victims. This debate is also
contributing to defining an international code against
sexual violence in conflict situations.
I thank the President of the General Assembly,
the Deputy Secretary-General and all the presenters for
their informative presentations on this subject earlier
today.
The concern for the protection of women and
girls against sexual and gender-based violence has
been reflected in various Security Council documents.
It is unfortunate that, despite the numerous calls made
to protect women and girls, there has been an
escalation of systematic and brutal acts of sexual
violence and abuses as calculated instruments of war
against civilians, especially women and girls. The
Security Council, with the support of Member States,
needs to take bold measures to stop this trend. It is our
expectation, therefore, that this open debate will lead
to recommendations that will enable the Security
Council to respond effectively to the use of sexual and
gender-based violence in conflict situations and to
galvanize concerted international action against such
crimes.
It is high time that we recognized sexual violence
in conflict situations as a pervasive criminal act with
global repercussions. Such acts of targeted violence
add new dimensions to regional and international peace
and security. We call upon all parties to conflict to end
these barbarous acts and to take measures to protect
civilians, including women and girls.
The Security Council needs to send a clear
message to parties in armed conflicts that sexual
violence in any manifestation is not condoned and that
stern measures will be taken against the perpetrators so
as to end impunity. We thus call upon Member States to
comply with their obligations to prosecute perpetrators
and to support the work of the International Criminal
Court in that regard.
It is unfortunate that civilians, and in particular
women and girls, are increasingly being targeted in
current warfare. Humanitarian law is being blatantly
violated and perpetrators escape with impunity. There
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
2308-39081
is thus an enormous challenge to the international
community as a whole and to peacekeeping missions in
particular to ensure that civilians are protected.
We are encouraged that sexual violence is
included in some peacekeeping protection of civilian
mandates. These mandates, however, need to be
matched with political resolve and resources, doctrine
and guidance. In the same vein, the national defence
policies of troop-contributing countries need to be
explicit and emphatic on protection of civilians,
including women and girls, in the training of troops for
peacekeeping missions. Equally, national laws must be
robust in dealing with those responsible for such acts
of violence.
Sexual violence in conflict situations needs to be
addressed holistically. In that regard, efforts to
encourage women to report it when they are attacked,
as well as mechanisms to assist the victims, need to be
in place. In addition, programmes to strengthen the rule
of law need to be implemented so as to end impunity
and provide justice for the victims. In the longer term,
community-based interventions to address the health,
psychosocial and educational needs of children and
adults, including men and boys, affected by and
implicated in the violence need also to be in place. This
means that interventions need to be carried out during
and after a conflict.
While we believe that national Governments have
the primary responsibility for the protection of their
nationals, the support of the international community,
as appropriate, is critical in addressing sexual violence
in conflict situations.
Let me conclude by reiterating that the
Government of the United Republic of Tanzania
strongly condemns all acts of sexual and gender-based
violence in all their manifestations. It is in this regard
that Tanzania joined in sponsoring last year’s General
Assembly resolution 62/134, entitled “Eliminating rape
and other forms of sexual violence in all their
manifestations, including in conflict and related
situations”, and is among the sponsors of the draft
resolution to be adopted today. We are willing to work
with the international community to end sexual and
gender-based violence as well as to end impunity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Ney (Germany): Germany welcomes this
open thematic debate on women and peace and
security: sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict. I would like to express Germany’s
appreciation to the United States, which currently
holds the presidency of the Security Council, for this
important initiative. Complementing the statement
made by the Republic of Slovenia on behalf of the
European Union, Germany would like to add the
following remarks.
We are deeply shocked by recent, and recurring,
reports indicating that brutal rapes are increasingly
becoming commonplace in conflict and post-conflict
situations. The pervasive and sometimes systematic use
of sexual violence against women and girls,
particularly rape or even gang rape and other forms of
sexual abuse, does not only belong to the most serious
violations of human rights. Sexual violence can also
constitute a threat to international peace and security,
when used or commissioned in situations of armed
conflict as a method of war in order to deliberately
target civilians or other protected persons or as part of
a widespread or systematic attack against civilian
populations.
We therefore have to recognize sexual violence as
a security problem requiring a systematic security
response, including through attention by the Security
Council and by the International Criminal Court. We
have to increase all our efforts, on all levels, to find
adequate responses and to end impunity for these
crimes.
In this context, Germany highly welcomes the
initiative entitled Stop Rape Now: United Nations
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict, launched
last year, as well as the Secretary-General’s campaign
entitled Unite to End Violence Against Women, which
he launched during the recent session of the
Commission on the Status of Women. We particularly
welcome the personal commitment that Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon attaches to this campaign.
The adoption of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) was a milestone in creating awareness of the
urgent need to protect women and girls from sexual
abuse in armed conflicts, but also in acknowledging the
crucial role that women can and should have in all
efforts to promote peace and security.
Germany reaffirms its commitment to the full and
effective implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
08-3908124
We just submitted a comprehensive and detailed report
to the Secretariat on Germany’s contributions to the
individual demands of resolution 1325 (2000). This
report documents a variety of measures both at national
and global level, ranging from efforts to increase
representation of women in all decision-making
mechanisms for the prevention, management and
resolution of conflict, to concrete projects aimed at
ending violence against women. Last year, the German
federal Government also presented its second action
plan to combat violence against women.
The promotion of gender equality and women’s
empowerment is an essential part of the United Nations
mandate. A coherent and effective implementation of
this mandate, including resolution 1325 (2000), needs a
coherent and effective United Nations gender
architecture. Germany supports the strengthening of
the normative and operative work of the United
Nations on gender equality and the empowerment of
women.
This week’s informal debate in the General
Assembly showed once again the broad commitment to
a reform of the United Nations gender architecture. We
now need concrete steps forward in order to enable the
United Nations to better deliver for women and girls all
around the world.
We look forward to further discussion on women
and peace and security within the Security Council.
The topics of gender equality and women’s
empowerment, and, more specifically, of sexual
violence, should not only be part of an annual open
debate, but should be continuously considered and
mainstreamed in the daily work of the Council and in
all discussions of conflict and post-conflict situations.
Germany therefore welcomes the fact that information
on sexual violence will now be systematically included
in the Council’s country situation reports. We had also
supported proposals towards a specific mechanism in
this regard, because we believe that effective
prevention starts with systematic reporting and reliable
data. We hope that the Council will return to this issue
in its future discussions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): At the outset,
Mr. President, I would like to thank you for having
organized this thematic debate on women and peace
and security: sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict. We believe that today’s discussions, like the
previous debate, in October 2007 (see S/PV.5766), will
be a useful contribution to the efforts to focus on the
main issues contained in resolution 1325 (2000).
Kazakhstan attaches great importance to
resolution 1325 (2000), which draws the attention of
the international community to the crucial issue of the
detrimental impact of armed conflict on women and
girls and the importance of incorporating a gender
perspective into peacekeeping operations.
My delegation once again reaffirms its
commitment to the zero-tolerance policy for sexual
violence against women and girls as a tool of warfare.
Since the adoption of the resolution, the Security
Council has organized regular reviews to assess its
implementation. Despite some progress, that
implementation is still slow and uneven. As has already
been pointed out by other delegations, we too agree
that women’s involvement in decision-making with
regard to security issues and the peacebuilding process
has a positive effect on the peaceful resolution of
conflicts and on post-conflict rehabilitation. Having
said that, my delegation fully commends the efforts
aimed at increasing women’s involvement in the
decision-making process in the areas of peacekeeping
and peacebuilding.
However, as the most vulnerable group of
civilians due to their gender and social status, women
and girls continue to be the main victims of sexual
assault during conflicts. The situation is further
exacerbated as a result of the fact that gross violations
against women and girls in zones of armed conflict are
often concealed. Because they are stigmatized by local
communities, victims usually tend to disguise
information about abuse out of fear for their lives and
families. There is therefore insufficient evidence to
make the case against perpetrators.
In that regard, we would like to underscore the
importance of developing victim protection systems
similar to existing programmes for witness protection;
strengthening legislation on the responsibility of
perpetrators for crimes against women and girls in
conflict zones; and working with local communities to
disseminate information on abhorrent crimes, including
sexual violence in zones of armed conflict, in order to
raise local awareness and knowledge about the legal
consequences of crimes.
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
2508-39081
Recognizing the fact that the consequences of
violence against women and girls in conflict zones has
a serious impact on physical and mental health and are
of a sensitive nature, my delegation would strongly like
to recommend a more vigorous expansion of the role
and contribution of women in field-based operations,
especially among humanitarian personnel, including
medical staff.
We must nevertheless recognize that
understanding about the magnitude of the problem of
security and the protection of women and girls in
conflict zones has been growing thanks to resolution
1325 (2000). In that regard, we would like to express
our appreciation for the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2007/567) on women and peace and security, as well
as the efforts of the United Nations system to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) at all levels.
Addressing sexual violations in armed conflict is not
the responsibility of a given country or region alone,
but a humanitarian imperative for every stakeholder.
The side to a conflict that encourages the violence must
be strongly condemned.
In conclusion, I would like to express the hope
that the full and successful implementation of the
resolution by all Member States will help to
significantly increase protection for women’s and girls’
rights and dignity in zones of armed conflict, as well as
to eliminate such crimes, including sexual abuses.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): At the outset, allow me to
thank you, Mr. President, and Secretary of State Rice
for convening this timely and important meeting,
which, in my delegation’s view, is crucial and
necessary at a time when women and other vulnerable
groups have become the main victims of armed
conflict.
Women’s advancement, security and living
conditions in Iraq had declined during the past three
decades. Wars and economic sanctions and negligence
and oppression by the former regime had eroded
conditions for women. There had been systematic
breaches of human rights, in particular against women,
who were subject to gender-specific abuse and
violence. In the past few years, thousands of Iraqi
women lost their lives and suffered from terrorist acts,
which have targeted the most vulnerable groups in
society, namely, children, women and the elderly. More
recently, terrorist groups have been recruiting and
using Iraqi women to commit suicidal attacks against
civilians. According to statistics, about 17 women have
committed such acts. Terrorists have even used women
with mental disabilities to commit suicidal attacks in a
market crowded with women and children.
With regard to the new Iraq, equality between
women and men and protection against discrimination
were enshrined in the Transitional Administrative Law
and in the new Iraqi constitution that has been adopted.
However, violence against women is rooted in some
traditional practices and tribal codes, and is
compounded by the socio-economic and security
situation in the country.
Throughout the difficulties the country has faced,
Iraqi women have shown resilience, courage and
determination. For the past few years, they have been
playing a larger and more effective role, as they are
part of the political process in the new Iraq. They hold
no less than 25 per cent of parliamentary and
provincial council seats.
They have recently become more empowered,
with the creation of the cross-party women’s caucus
composed of 73 women members of parliament. In a
joint effort with United Nations agencies, that party
will advance the development of policies to help
victims of conflict, including widows, orphans, the
families of war victims and Iraqi refugees. The
establishment of the cross-party women’s caucus will
enable Iraqi women members of parliament to emerge
as more effective and influential actors in the
legislature, by bridging different viewpoints held by
the various parties to which they belong.
For the first time, Iraqi women have also been
playing an effective role as ministers of important
ministries, including those responsible for human
rights, municipalities and public works, women,
housing and construction and the environment.
I should also mention that the country has for the
first time experienced the establishment of women’s
organizations, through which Iraqi women have proven
their capabilities in defeating challenges by taking on
difficult responsibilities on different levels. Those
organizations have been playing an important role in
advancing and empowering women in Iraq. My country
is going through the phase of institutional
reconstruction, and my Government realizes that
without the effective participation and full role of
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
08-3908126
women, many of the long-term goals will not be
achieved.
Iraq’s current political situation provides an
opportunity to redress persistent violations of women’s
rights, as the Iraqi constitution will be further amended
as part of the political process. It will open space to
continue to influence the process of addressing
women’s rights and promoting gender equality as part
of Iraq’s institutional rebuilding. It is anticipated that
60 laws will be either revised or formulated, as
stipulated in Iraq’s new constitution, providing an
unprecedented opportunity to influence further the
constitution and legislation and to align them with
international conventions — in particular the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and both Optional
Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
which my Government recently ratified.
The Government of Iraq, in partnership with the
United Nations Development Fund for Women, is
implementing programmes and projects to promote the
role of women by strengthening the role of civil society
organizations in mitigating violence and by
contributing to building peace in Iraq. Support for that
effort is provided in line with the framework of
resolution 1325 (2000), the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and the Beijing Platform for Action.
That partnership also includes capacity-building
for women’s non-governmental organizations to
promote women’s participation in peacebuilding and
conflict mitigation.
Another programme implemented in Iraq by
various United Nations agencies involves
disseminating knowledge on emerging issues and
innovative solutions towards conflict resolution and
increasing tolerance, in order to enhance the capacity
of community groups and women’s non-governmental
organizations that promote the culture of peace and
foster dialogue among various groups.
As we are discussing sexual violence and rape as
war crimes under international law, my delegation is of
the view that such crimes against women should be
considered as crimes against humanity, as those actions
cannot find a place in any culture and should not be
excused under any circumstances.
Eight years ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. Its purpose was to address the atrocities
committed against women and girls during conflicts
and even after peace agreements and in post-conflict
situations. We agree that since the adoption of that
resolution, progress towards reaching its main goals
has been slow.
We believe that one of the major problems facing
our endeavours to stop these crimes is the issue of
shame and the social exclusion of victims. Since we
are discussing the issue of data collection on rape and
sexual violence, we believe that due consideration
should be given to cultural differences and to
awareness-raising campaigns undertaken with the help
of community leaders in post-conflict situations, in
particular among the most vulnerable groups in society.
Preventing and eliminating these atrocities must
be the main goal of our endeavours, and to achieve that
goal we must act globally. We commend the efforts of
the United Nations in that regard, but we call upon all
relevant United Nations agencies, the Special
Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and
consequences, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
civil society and non-governmental organizations to
combine their efforts to combat these crimes and to
establish early warning mechanisms to enable the
international community to prevent these crimes from
taking place.
We also believe that an end must be put to
impunity for the perpetrators of these crimes and that
they should be held accountable for their actions.
To conclude, we would like to express our full
support for an action-oriented resolution that will put
an end to these crimes and atrocities against women
and girls, and my delegation hopes that this important
debate will bring this issue to the world’s attention and
make it globally recognized.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Nsengimana (Rwanda): My delegation
welcomes this opportunity to participate in this open
debate on women and peace and security and wishes to
express our appreciation to the delegation of the United
States for organizing the debate. We also commend the
President of the General Assembly, the Secretary-
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
2708-39081
General, the Deputy Secretary-General, His Excellency
the Liberian Minister for Foreign Affairs and Major-
General Cammaert for their briefings.
Throughout history, gender-based violence, in
particular violence against women, has a component of
armed conflict. In Rwanda, the 1994 genocide was
marked by horrific forms of violence, particularly
against girls and women. An estimated 500,000 girls
and women were victims of rape by the Interahamwe,
and up to two thirds of those victims were also infected
with HIV by perpetrators carrying the virus. It is now
evident that rape was part of the genocidal plan and
part of the systematic degradation of women and of
girls. This plan was then exported by members of the
former Rwandan Armed Forces (ex-FAR) and
Interahamwe across our borders into the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and continues to be
exacted by the ex-FAR/Interahamwe, under its new
denomination the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda, the Rally for Unity and Democracy
(RUD-Urunana) and other militias on the women and
girls of the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Fourteen years on, survivors of the 1994 genocide in
Rwanda continue to live with the effects of that legacy.
Therefore, addressing the specific protection
needs of women in armed conflict remains a critical
matter for the United Nations system. My delegation
therefore reiterates its support for the continued
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security and the Protocol to the African
Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of
Women in Africa.
It is within that context that my Government has
set out to elaborate a national policy on gender-based
violence and violence against women. The
development of that policy is situated within a
national, regional and international context and is
linked to peacebuilding and economic development and
growth. Article II of the Rwanda genocide law
stipulates that gender-based violence, violence against
women and sexual violence must be dealt with in the
first category under article I, as a crime of genocide or
crime against humanity, punishable under article 95 of
the penal code with a maximum term of life
imprisonment.
Rwanda, as one of the major troop-contributing
countries to United Nations peacekeeping operations,
has a vested interest in ensuring the protection of
women in situations of armed conflict. Gender-based
violence and violence against women are therefore
considered by the Rwanda Defence Forces as a key
component of the security threat. In that respect, the
gender desk at Rwanda Defence Forces headquarters
devises training programmes, with the support of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), to raise awareness of gender-based
violence and violence against women in the armed
forces. Awareness and training on responding to
gender-based violence and violence against women has
now been mainstreamed into the curricula of all
Rwanda’s military schools and training institutions and
is integral to the preparation of all Rwanda Defence
Forces battalions preparing for peace missions abroad.
The leadership of the Rwanda Defence Forces has also
undertaken the fight against gender-based violence and
violence against women as a command responsibility.
My delegation therefore calls upon the United
Nations system to take concerted action on addressing
the plight of women in armed conflict through
enforcing resolution 1325 (2000), rejecting impunity
through support to and strengthening of national
jurisdictions and the provision of support to victims of
sexual violence.
We also strongly believe that in order for the
United Nations system to respond in a more
coordinated, coherent and effective manner, urgent
attention needs to be placed on strengthening the
United Nations system’s work on gender.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Cato (Philippines): The Philippines would
like to begin by congratulating the United States and
commending it for having convened this debate on the
important issue of sexual violence in situations of
armed conflict. We thank you, Mr. President, for giving
the Philippines the opportunity to address the Council
on this issue.
The Philippines joins previous speakers in
condemning acts of sexual violence inflicted on women
and girls by parties involved in armed conflict. Sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict is something to
which the international community should not close its
eyes. As we speak, reports on how women and girls
have found themselves victims of sexual violence and
on how they remain vulnerable to increased risk of
violence from parties involved in armed conflicts
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
08-3908128
continue to stream in from various hotspots around the
world.
The sexual abuse committed against women and
girls is deeply rooted in a pervasive culture of
discrimination, highlighted by the unequal power
equation which denies females equal status. This
inequality is manifested in a number of ways during
conflict, particularly through the social, political and
cultural norms that identify women and girls not only
as the property of men, but also as sexual objects. This
inequality also finds form as a tool of war, with
violence directed at women being considered an attack
against the values and honour of a society.
While it is easy to see the vulnerabilities of
women, there is a tendency to regard them only as
victims of violence, most especially sexual violence.
Unfortunately, this obscures the many positive roles
that women play in conflict situations, especially as
agents of peace and reconciliation, as called for under
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security.
The Philippines continues to regard resolution
1325 (2000) as an important contribution by the
Security Council to addressing the complex issues
affecting women in countries torn by conflict.
Resolution 1325 (2000) is an instrument that brings a
United Nations gender perspective to conflict analysis,
monitoring and resolution. This has had a great impact
on the transformative responses that are needed to
address the gender dimension of conflict.
The fundamental strategy of the Philippines in
pursuing the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
lies in enabling more women to systematically
participate in conflict prevention, management and
resolution and in post-conflict peacebuilding, while at
the same time rehabilitating their communities and
ensuring basic services and livelihoods. Women are
empowered to take part in local peace processes by
building capacities and mobilizing peace
constituencies. Women in indigenous communities, for
instance, are even serving as intermediaries in local
peace dialogues and as mediators in the restoration of
broken peace pacts. The roles that women play in
addressing the issues surrounding them are critical;
therefore, the Philippines remains convinced that
women must be utilized as active agents in confronting
gender-based violence.
The response to sexual exploitation in conflict
situations necessitates a comprehensive approach. As
this entails a response which should address the
various dimensions of the problem, the United Nations
must mobilize the entities within its system and build
on their comparative advantages to address the root
causes, manifestations and consequences of conflict.
The Philippines recognizes the role of the
Security Council in addressing conflict in its various
dimensions, including the gender dimension, to the
extent that this is in accordance with the Council’s
mandate. It should be emphasized that, since the issue
of sexual violence requires a more holistic response,
including political, economic, social and cultural
aspects, the Security Council’s actions, which comprise
only part of the response, must be coherently
coordinated with the efforts of other bodies, such as the
development-oriented agencies.
The Philippines also wishes to underscore the
importance of the regional context in assessing and
addressing conflict, as well as in coming up with the
appropriate responses to the gender dimensions of
conflicts. In this connection, the Philippines urges the
Security Council to work closely with the relevant
regional intergovernmental and civil society
organizations in areas of conflict.
While the Philippines recognizes the need to
urgently confront sexual violence in conflict, it
believes that the Security Council must also exercise
caution to ensure that it does not confront the conflict
situation narrowly by focusing on palliatives to address
the issue of gender violence. As sexual violence is part
of the bigger context of conflict, the Security Council
must see to it that it also uses its mandate mainly to
assess and address this broader picture. Bearing in
mind the need to evaluate the effectiveness of targeted
measures and sanctions, the Security Council must be
cognizant that these, if contemplated, must not
exacerbate the conflict or give rise to negative
consequences for the civilian population.
The Security Council can concretely contribute to
gender-sensitive conflict prevention and resolution,
including post-conflict reconstruction and
peacebuilding, by taking the necessary steps to put an
end to impunity by going after all violators without
exception. This could also be accomplished by
integrating gender issues in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, incorporating
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
2908-39081
the necessary gender training in the security sector and
facilitating the establishment of necessary infrastructure
and capacity for women’s access to justice, as well as
cooperative work with non-governmental organizations
and other community groups.
To further address the issue of sexual violence,
the Security Council could support systems for gender-
sensitive monitoring of conflicts, including the
collection of sex-disaggregated data and information
with the engagement of national and local authorities.
This is important to facilitate national ownership and
accountability. The Security Council could also
advocate for the inclusion of gender violence issues in
peace accords and peace processes between parties to
conflict.
The Philippines believes that the Security
Council can help address the issue of gender violence
in conflict areas by seeing to it that the design and
training of peacekeeping missions include the
deployment of more female police and military
personnel, the necessary gender-sensitivity training by
troop-contributing countries and the enforcement of a
zero-tolerance policy towards sexual exploitation and
abuse involving peacekeepers.
In the case of the Philippines, gender sensitivity
is incorporated in the predeployment training for
personnel of our armed forces and our national police
whom we send out to support United Nations
peacekeeping operations. As early as four years ago,
the Philippines had put in place a zero-tolerance policy
on misconduct, especially on sexual exploitation and
abuse that could be committed by our peacekeepers.
This policy of zero tolerance, which is firmly
embedded in the revised policy framework and
guidelines governing Philippine participation in United
Nations peacekeeping operations, serves as a guarantee
that no Filipino peacekeeper will go unpunished for
misdeeds committed in mission areas.
Finally, the Philippines, as one of the largest
contributors, if not the largest contributor, of individual
police officers to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, could also support calls for the deployment
of more female police officers, especially those
experienced in handling gender violence cases. We
hope that such a contribution would help to bring about
better monitoring, reporting and response to cases of
gender violence in conflict areas.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the United States for having organized
this open debate on a very important protection gap,
that related to sexual and gender-based violence in
armed conflict and in post-conflict situations.
In situations of armed conflict and periods of
instability, armed groups often use violence against
civilians, especially women, as a deliberate tactic of
war. In Afghanistan, the devastating impacts of three
decades of armed conflict have particularly affected the
most vulnerable part of our population, namely women
and children. During this period, the basic rights of
Afghan women have been undermined, even denied,
due to the vicious cycles of violence which allowed
groups with power to act with impunity in the face of
women’s vulnerability. Under the Taliban regime,
Afghanistan was a graveyard for human and women’s
rights, where barbaric atrocities against women
constantly occurred. No one can forget the images of
innocent Afghan women being slaughtered in Kabul’s
stadium and the images of the inhuman Taliban
bludgeoning women in the street for so-called
unvirtuous behaviour. Today the results of widespread
violence during years of conflict are still affecting the
private and public spheres of women’s lives in
Afghanistan.
In several armed conflict situations, acts of sexual
and gender-based violence have been used to humiliate
and forcibly relocate civilian members of a community
or ethnic group. In Afghanistan, sexual violence was
not a predominant method employed by armed groups
in conflict, due to the strong cultural bounds within our
society. However, sexual violence was used by some
individuals and groups as an instrument of war.
Afghanistan recognizes that sexual and gender-
based violence is a threat to international peace and
security and condemns all sexual and gender-based
violence committed against civilians in conflict-
affected situations. We would also like to acknowledge
that, in countries in armed conflict as well as in post-
conflict countries, violence against women has
multiple dimensions that extend beyond a sexual
nature.
It has been eight years since the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1325 (2000) and about
seven years since the fall of the barbaric regime of the
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
08-3908130
Taliban and the beginning of the peace process,
democratization and reconstruction efforts in
Afghanistan. Our vision is a peaceful and progressive
nation where women and men enjoy security, equal
rights and opportunities in all spheres of life.
The Government of Afghanistan has made
considerable achievements in protecting women from
violence and in ensuring a secure environment where
their rights are protected and their participation in
decision-making bodies and in the peacebuilding
process is guaranteed. The fact that 28 per cent of the
seats in the Afghan Assembly are held by women is
testament to this claim. This places Afghanistan as the
twentieth-ranked country in the world in terms of
female representation in parliament.
Afghanistan has undertaken several initiatives in
addressing violence against women, as embodied in its
constitution, the Millennium Development Goals, the
Afghanistan Compact, the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy that was recently launched in
Paris, and international treaties. The Afghan Ministry
of Women’s Affairs is leading our efforts in achieving
this goal and chairs the ministerial task force created in
2005 to eliminate all forms of violence against women.
We would like to take this opportunity to express
our gratitude to all relevant organizations, including
United Nations agencies, in particular the United
Nations Development Fund for Women, as well as to
the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission,
for assisting us in advancing the status of Afghan
women.
Progress in the process that involves the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants and the disbanding of illegal armed
groups has contributed to minimizing violence against
civilians, particularly women and children. However,
the successful completion of this process will help to
create an environment where women will be
empowered to exercise their rights.
The Afghan Government recognizes that security
sector reform is crucial to strengthening the rule of law,
to ensuring the protection of women’s rights, to
improving law enforcement bodies and to ending the
culture of impunity.
But at the same time, we would like to underscore
the need for women to participate in the security sector
reform process. In this regard, initial steps have been
taken by the Ministry of the Interior to increase the
recruitment of female law enforcement officers and to
provide gender sensitivity training in the police
academy. Police family response units are staffed by
women who are trained to deal with domestic violence
and to respond to female victims of crime.
The escalation of violence and insecurity in some
parts of the country as a result of the terrorist activities
carried out by the Taliban and Al-Qaida hinders the
implementation of the rule of law and consequently
makes women vulnerable to all forms of violence.
Various methods of violence against women are used
by the Taliban and Al-Qaida to intimidate, terrorize and
force Afghan women to retreat from public activities
and limit their access to health care, education, justice
and economic and social endeavours, particularly in
the southern and eastern parts of Afghanistan. The
terrorist campaign of the Taliban and Al-Qaida has
particularly affected girls’ school enrolment and
attendance. Schools are burned, and female teachers
and students are attacked and threatened.
The legacy of the long conflict, including access
to weapons, difficulty in stabilization efforts and
rampant poverty, is reflected in some parts of the
country in self-immolation, forced marriage, domestic
and other forms of violence. In order to be successful
in our efforts to eliminate these practices, we request
the international community to continue its assistance
so that we may strengthen our national capacity in
ensuring a secure environment, improving economic
and social conditions and implementing human rights
and the rule of law in Afghanistan.
The protection of civilians, including women, is
highlighted as an inherent part of the NATO-led
International Security Assistance Force mission
operating in Afghanistan. We would like to emphasize
on the need to integrate specific strategies for the better
protection of women from all forms of violence,
including sexual violence. We also encourage
peacekeeping forces to receive predeployment gender
sensitivity training.
Sustainable peace in Afghanistan cannot be
achieved without the participation of half of its
population, namely Afghan women. Afghanistan
recognizes the importance of the positive contribution
of women to conflict prevention, conflict resolution
and the promotion of peace and security. As Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon justly stated this morning, the
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
3108-39081
most effective way to combat violence against women
is to make women messengers of peace instead of
victims of violence. That reflects our vision for Afghan
women.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of El Salvador.
Mrs. Gallardo Hernández (El Salvador) (spoke
in Spanish): El Salvador welcomes the initiative to
hold an open Security Council debate on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security. That resolution is a cornerstone
of the call for full and equal participation of women in
all peace and security initiatives, together with
mainstreaming the gender perspective in the context of
armed conflict, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and
also in post-conflict reconstruction and reconciliation.
The resolution emphasizes the need to increase
the role of women in the political participation process
and in decision-making with regard to conflict
prevention and resolution.
El Salvador’s post-conflict situation enables us to
confirm that women and men experience peace and
conflict in different ways and that, therefore, they have
different vulnerabilities and needs and require different
mechanisms to address their security.
Thus, in the context of armed conflict and in
peacebuilding processes, we may wonder whether
gender roles and relations differ, since men and women
adapt to changes in situations according to
circumstances. Resolution 1325 (2000) is thus a
landmark which enables us to consider the increasing
complexity of conflict situations and the transition
from conflict to development in a broad and integral
manner and from a gender perspective.
El Salvador recognizes that since resolution 1325
(2000) was adopted, limited progress has been made in
implementing it. The results have been mixed, as
confirmed by studies carried out by the United Nations
International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women, particularly the study entitled
“Securing Equality, Engendering Peace: A guide to
policy and planning on women, peace and security”. It
should be noted that this study helps facilitate the
development of national action plans that are realistic
and effective in implementing resolution 1325 (2000)
through good practices, specific recommendations and
a six-step process.
Additionally, as the debate on the gender
perspective in the context of armed conflict continues,
related problems come to light, such as a lack of
prevention and protection, in particular for women and
girls, from violence of all kinds, including sexual
violence, which unfortunately is, in some cases, used
as a weapon of war.
In this connection, my delegation joins other
delegations and civil society organizations in
requesting the Secretary-General to systematically
include full information on acts of sexual violence and
gender-based acts against women and girls in all
reports on conflict situations.
El Salvador recognizes the need to broaden the
framework of action derived from the promotion of a
holistic approach to the issue of the gender perspective
in the context of armed conflict and transitional and
peacebuilding situations. However, we are aware that
in progressing along this path, we are liable sometimes
to duplicate the functions of other principal organs of
the United Nations, including the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council, both of which
have specific mandates to deal with these matters
under the Charter.
In that light, further efforts should be made to
ensure coordination and cooperation among the
principal organs of the United Nations in order to
tackle these issues in an holistic manner while avoiding
overlaps in the mandates and functions of each organ.
Thus, in El Salvador’s view, the special position
of the Peacebuilding Commission, deriving from its
organic link with the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council, make it,
in a way, the proper forum for promoting and assessing
on the ground the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in a broad-based and holistic manner.
In concluding, allow me to restate the political
will of the Government of El Salvador to continue
making progress in the promotion and implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and in strengthening the
political participation of women in decision-making
processes which will ensure that women become active
players in their own development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tonga.
Mr. Tupouniua (Tonga): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Pacific small island developing
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
08-3908132
States, comprising Fiji, the Federated States of
Micronesia, Nauru, Palau, Papua New Guinea, the
Republic of the Marshall Islands, Samoa, the Solomon
Islands, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and my own country, the
Kingdom of Tonga.
I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your strong leadership in
convening this open debate. We share the concerns
raised in the presidential statement of October 2007
(S/PRST/2007/40), wherein the Security Council
condemned all acts of gender-based violence in
situations of armed conflict committed against women
and girls, including killing, maiming, and sexual
violence and abuse. We commend the work that
Security Council has done in addressing gender-based
violence with the adoption of resolutions 1325 (2000)
and with the more recent adoption of resolutions 1468
(2003), 1493 (2003) and 1590 (2005).
Gender-based violence in situations of armed
conflict is a violation of women’s basic human rights.
It is also a concern raised by the Secretary-General in
his report containing an in-depth study on all forms of
violence against women published in 2006
(A/61/122/Add.1). The report recognized that there are
many forms and manifestations of violence against
women in a wide range of settings, including the
family, the community, State custody and institutions,
armed conflict and refugee and internally displaced
persons situations. The Secretary-General emphasized
that
“violence constitutes a continuum across the
lifespan of women, it cuts across both the public
and the private sphere and one form of violence
often reinforces another.” (A/61/122/Add.1,
para. 365)
What we are seeing in some parts of the world is
the use of rape and sexual assault as systematic war
tactics in destroying the cohesion of communities. In
some cases, women who were raped or sexually
assaulted during situations of armed conflict face
rejection by their families and communities. They are
often ostracized and left to fend for themselves. These
women face debilitating poverty and discrimination,
and many subsequently fall into the vicious cycle of
further exploitation and abuse by working in the sex
trade; many are exposed to the danger of human
trafficking.
In the light of women caught in situations of
armed conflict, we urge the Security Council to
recognize gender-based violence as a threat to the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
recommend that, where appropriate, the Security
Council systematically monitor incidents of gender-
based violence in situations of armed conflict.
Furthermore, we recommend that, where appropriate,
the Secretary-General systematically include
comprehensive information on gender-based violence
in his reports on conflict-affected situations and that he
prepare a special report to the Security Council with
timely information on sexual and gender-based
violence, thereby initiating the process of follow-up for
the Security Council and United Nations agencies.
We congratulate the sponsoring countries for
taking the initiative to put forth today’s draft
resolution, which reaffirms the important role of
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts
and peacebuilding and highlights the fact that violence,
intimidation and discrimination may erode women’s
legitimacy and their capacity to participate in post-
conflict public life, reconciliation and post-conflict
peacebuilding processes.
In our efforts to support the victims of sexual and
gender-based violence, we must provide women with
psychological care to help them achieve long-term
stability.
I would like to take this opportunity to highlight
the importance of taking a preventive attitude towards
sexual and gender-based violence and other factors that
may endanger the security of women. Sexual and
gender-based violence does not occur in a vacuum.
Unfavourable political, social, cultural, economic and
environmental exerts pressure and therefore reinforce
existing vulnerabilities and gender inequalities.
It is important for the Security Council to address
cross-cutting issues such as climate change in relation
to women’s security. Climate change is an emerging
cross-cutting issue with serious security implications.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, in its
fourth assessment report, highlights the vulnerabilities
of developing countries and states that poor
communities are especially vulnerable due to limited
adaptive capacities and are more dependent on climate-
sensitive resources.
Women and children account for an estimated
70 per cent of the world’s poorest population. Women
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
3308-39081
in developing countries are responsible for an
estimated 45 to 80 per cent of household food
production. Women are arguably much more dependent
upon agriculture for their livelihoods and survival.
Thus far, the effects of climate change are mostly
likely to erode women’s capacity to provide for
themselves and their families, due to the loss of their
livelihoods.
It is important to recognize gender differences not
just in terms of differential vulnerability but also as
differential capacity to adapt and to mitigate the effects
of climate change. Climate change is not gender-
neutral; rather, gender is an important determinant in
climate change mitigation and adaptation. The lack of
provisions for integrating a gender perspective into
adaptation and mitigation strategies will seriously
threaten the security of women. Women need to be
empowered economically and must receive training
and capacity-building to better adapt to the effects of
climate change. It is also imperative to increase
grassroots assistance to women in their efforts to
preserve their livelihoods.
The link between climate change, the security of
women and gender-based violence in situations of
armed conflict is closer than one would expect. The
developing world is facing more exogenous threats and
risk factors than ever before. During the Food Security
Forum in April this year, the Food and Agriculture
Organization warned that long-term food insecurity
would lead to the chronic undernourishment of the
world’s poor. An estimated 850 million people
worldwide suffer from hunger, and the number is likely
to increase by 4 million each year. Experts at the
Forum cautioned that without proper mitigation and
adaptation strategies and resources to implement such
strategies, many developing countries will see their
coping capacity diminish over time. The loss of arable
land, the increased frequency of natural disasters,
weakened infrastructure, increases in epidemic
diseases, population displacements, the increase in
poverty and competition for natural resources are
drivers of conflict.
Since nearly one third of the world’s poorest
population live in countries that are fragile or conflict-
affected, they will also be the ones most likely to be
affected by or to engage in resource wars — armed
conflicts over the use of natural resources, including
oil, water and arable land. In a recent interview,
António Guterres, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, reinforced the likelihood
of the situation as he explained that climate change
could also uproot people by provoking armed conflicts
over increasingly scarce resources.
Such conflicts will have a devastating impact on
developing countries, and it is very likely that women
will be exposed to physical and psychological harm
and sexual and gender-based violence. We therefore
urge the Security Council to take a preventive approach
in dealing with sexual and gender-based violence by
considering climate change as a threat to women’s
security and to the maintenance of international peace
and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Prica (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, let me commend you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open debate on such an important issue
as women and peace and security.
My delegation fully aligns itself with the
statement already delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Slovenia on behalf of European
Union. At the same time, I would like to add some
points reflecting our own national activities.
Bosnia and Herzegovina recognizes the
importance of resolution 1325 (2000) and will continue
to work towards its full implementation. We welcome
the advances that have been made in this area by the
United Nations system and Member States since the
historic adoption of the resolution, eight years ago.
Generally speaking, we can clearly see from the
Secretary-General’s reports that the United Nations has
supported the systematization and institutionalization
of efforts to strengthen action in solving the gender
problem; but the work is still far from done. We have
to ensure that the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000)
are implemented completely and that women can fully
participate at all levels of decision-making. We must
also strengthen the status of women in all fields.
We are very concerned at the fact that systematic
sexual violence against women and girls in armed
conflicts has been, and still is, used as a war strategy
and that it remains a direct threat to international peace
and security. Speaking from our own experience from
the 1990s, Bosnia and Herzegovina strongly condemns
all acts of violence against women and girls in armed
conflicts and post-conflict situations. From the very
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
08-3908134
beginning, therefore, Bosnia and Herzegovina
sponsored and supported General Assembly resolution
62/134, entitled “Eliminating rape and other forms of
sexual violence in all their manifestations, including in
conflict and related situations”, which was adopted on
18 December 2007.
Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the Secretary-
General’s initiative to launch a multi-year global
campaign with the goal of bringing together the United
Nations, Governments and civil society to end violence
against women.
Two years ago, the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina adopted a five-year gender action plan
incorporating the main provisions of resolution 1325
(2000). Much has been achieved in the area of adopting
appropriate legislation on the protection of civilian
victims of war. The law now gives women victims the
status of civilian victims of war and helps them on
their path towards full reintegration into the
community, giving them a chance for professional
improvement and providing them with monthly
allowances and medical and psycho-social assistance.
Under the plan, expert teams have been established to
engage in analysis, provide legal assistance to victims
and conduct workshops on the basis of, among other
things, sharing lessons learned.
In addition to the Government’s activities, the
non-governmental sector is successfully involved in
improving the situation regarding the issue. A very
good example is that of a project carried out by the
non-governmental sector that has established a
database of women victims in my country. In spite of
society’s traditional attitude towards women victims,
3,000 women have already been inscribed on this
database, which remains open. Privacy is guaranteed,
and all women were granted long-term financial aid.
Bosnia and Herzegovina strongly believes that
women should be more involved in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts, peace negotiations,
peacebuilding in post-conflict situations and the
promotion of sustainable peace. However, women still
need considerable support and capacity-building to be
effective in today’s society, which traditionally has
been dominated by men.
In conclusion, I would like to assure the Council
of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s full commitment to close
cooperation with the States Members of the United
Nations in the comprehensive implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union.
Mr. Lamamra: On behalf of the Commission of
the African Union (AU), I wish to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. I would also like to join previous
speakers in commending the United States presidency
of the Council and Secretary Rice for organizing this
open debate on the crucial question of women and
peace and security.
I wish to say how honoured I am to address a
formal meeting of the Council for the first time in my
new capacity as the African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security. Indeed, I feel fortunate that I am
assuming office in a climate of increasing cooperation
between the African Union and the United Nations, and
with the Security Council in particular. I am confident
that we will continue to strengthen our relations as we
move forward.
The protection and empowerment of women is
indeed one of the founding principles of the African
Union, as enshrined in our Constitutive Act, the
Protocol on the Establishment of the Peace and
Security Council and other instruments of the African
Union. As Council members are aware, the Adoption of
the protocol on the rights of women to the African
Charter on Human and People’s Rights and of the
declaration on gender equality, adopted following the
historic presidential debate of the Assembly of the
African Union in 2005, were important milestones in
that respect.
A clear vision and mandate on the issue of
women and peace and security in the continent have
thus been established in the African Union, which
stresses gender parity at all levels of our organization.
We continue to develop the necessary instruments and
the operational environment for their implementation,
as an integral part of our overall agenda for a peaceful,
united and prosperous Africa.
Furthermore, our regional economic
communities, African women and civil society
organizations have been the driving forces behind our
efforts and achievements, and we are committed to
continue to strengthen efforts towards addressing the
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
3508-39081
well-known range of challenges of peace and security
for women and for our peoples as a whole.
We therefore welcome the seriousness with which
the Security Council continues to address this question,
which also ranks high on the list of priorities of the
African Union. In that connection, we have launched
the preparatory process for the convening of an
important conference on women in post-conflict
reconstruction and development, to be held in 2009.
I would now like to focus on the theme of today’s
debate: on some of the opportunities and challenges
which lie on the path ahead, from the peace and
security perspective in particular.
First, we have been greatly honoured by the
leadership and important contributions of women in
recent peace processes in Africa, such as in
Mozambique, Angola and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and in ongoing efforts for lasting peace and
security in the Sudan and Somalia. I should, however,
like to underscore the need to strengthen the
involvement of women in such processes in the future.
Indeed, the efforts of the international community on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
related instruments have made possible a deeper
understanding of the centrality of the gender
perspective in the maintenance of international peace
and security. The wide range of issues involved, such
as the specific challenges facing women in armed
conflict situations and sexual slavery and abuse, are
now well known. We must take concrete actions in
ensuring that the knowledge gained thus far is fully
integrated in the new and emerging era of closer
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations for the maintenance of international
peace and security. That includes the participation of
women in peacekeeping operations at all levels. The
coordination of efforts between the United Nations and
the African Union would be crucial in that aspect.
Secondly, we in the African Union face the
challenge of ensuring that our emerging peace and
security architecture, which includes the African
standby force, the Continental Early Warning System,
the Panel of the Wise and our subregional
arrangements for peace and security, adequately reflect
our vision on women and peace and security. We are
determined to address this challenge and continue to
count on the support of the Security Council and our
international partners in that respect.
Furthermore, the ongoing efforts for the reform of
United Nations, and of Security Council in particular,
also offer an excellent opportunity to address this
crucial question, through adequate representation and
participation of regions, such as Africa, that are facing
serious peace and security challenges for women and
for their nations as a whole, due to persistent conflict
situations. We also believe that the elevation of the
United Nations mandate on gender equality to the
highest possible level within the Secretariat could be a
major step towards addressing the issue of gender
equality as a whole, and we call on the Security
Council to encourage the efforts of the Secretary-
General on this question.
Finally, as part of ongoing efforts towards
strengthening the mobilization of resources and
support for international peace and security, I would
like to underscore the importance of ensuring that
efforts centred on women and peace and security are
adequately supported by the entire international
community.
With those few remarks, I wish to reiterate the
commitment of the African Union to our cooperation
with the United Nations and with our international
partners on this matter and other questions, and I wish
every success for this timely and important open
debate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Than Swe (Myanmar): I thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to take part in
today’s open debate. The issues of women and of peace
and security are issues of particular importance for my
country.
The need to prevent armed conflict and to bring
to a speedy conclusion situations of armed conflict
cannot be overemphasized. Resolution 1325 (2000)
calls for all parties to armed conflict to take special
measures to protect women and girls from rape and
other forms of sexual abuses and to end impunity
whenever such dastardly crimes are perpetrated. In
situations of armed conflict, the most vulnerable
among the population include women and girls.
Therefore, we firmly believe that tackling the root
causes of conflict, which include disunity, poverty,
socio-economic and gender inequality and
underdevelopment, is extremely important.
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
08-3908136
Myanmar fully supports a zero-tolerance policy
with regard to violence against women and girls.
Myanmar’s traditions, culture and values strongly
favour our efforts to promote gender equality. They
also contribute strongly to the Government’s
endeavours to protect women and girls from gender-
based violence, including sexual exploitation and
abuse. In order to promote and protect the rights of
women and girls, the Government established the
Myanmar National Committee for Women’s Affairs in
1996 as a national mechanism to carry out the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action. In 2003, in order
to comprehensively carry out the measures laid out by
the National Committee, the Myanmar Women’s
Affairs Federation was formed. One of the key areas
actively dealt with by those organizations is violence
against women.
My delegation has repeatedly stressed here that
the best way to protect civilians, particularly women
and children, in armed conflict is to put a speedy end to
such conflict. We also believe that national
reconciliation is the only way to end conflict in a
speedy manner. My country experienced the
devastating effects of an insurgency that raged in our
country for over 40 years. It is only recently that,
owing to the national reconciliation policy of my
Government, we have emerged from a conflict
situation and are able to put a virtual end to the
insurgencies that had ravaged the country for so long.
Currently, 17 out of 18 major insurgent groups
have come back to the legal fold. With regard to the
remaining Karen National Union (KNU) insurgent
group, its two main factions have opted for peace,
leaving only a small remnant of the KNU and former
narco-trafficking armed groups outside the legal fold.
Peace and stability now prevail in almost all corners of
Myanmar. That has resulted in significant
improvements in the daily life of civilians, in particular
women and children.
My delegation joins the rest of the international
community in its condemnation, in the strongest terms,
of all sexual and other forms of violence committed
against civilians in armed conflict, particularly women
and children. We must work together to prevent such
violence. Here, I wish to stress the importance of
avoiding the politicization of this important issue.
Sexual violence as a weapon of war must be strongly
condemned. In the same vein, fabricating allegations
and using disinformation as a weapon of political
pressure warrant strong condemnation.
My delegation therefore takes exception to the
unfounded allegations regarding sexual violence
levelled against the Myanmar armed forces. We
categorically reject them. The allegations levelled at
the Myanmar military come from groups associated
with the insurgents. Failing in their attempt to topple
the Government by force of arms, they have embarked
upon a disinformation campaign by fabricating
allegations. The Security Council has had first-hand
experience showing that reports emanating from exiles
are at variance with reality.
Rape is regarded by Myanmar people and
Government as a most dastardly and abhorrent crime.
Whenever such a crime is committed, we make sure
that the full force of law is applied against the
perpetrators. Whenever there are allegations,
investigations are carried out by the authorities and
organizations concerned, including the Myanmar
Women’s Affairs Federation; where there were genuine
cases, perpetrators were prosecuted and given
sentences ranging from 10 years to life imprisonment.
Rape and any other form of sexual violence are
unlawful in any circumstance and in all places. They
are also an offense against the dignity and integrity of
the victims. The international community, national
Governments and the United Nations system must all
work together to protect women and girls from gender-
based violence, particularly rape and other forms of
sexual abuse.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Mansour (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I
would first like to take this opportunity to convey to
Ms. Condoleezza Rice, Secretary of State of the United
States, my sincere congratulations on her country’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. I
would also like to thank her for having taken the
initiative to organize this debate on a topic that is as
important as it is topical and which calls for a response
from the entire international community.
I also welcome the participation of Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, Mr. Srgjan Kerim, President of
the General Assembly, and many ministers this
morning. The active and involved participation in this
debate of so many delegations of Member States
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
3708-39081
reflects the primary interest that we all attach to issues
of peace and security and to the central role of women
in achieving this and in achieving the ideals of our
universal organization. But it also highlights the role
that we must play in order to promote women’s rights
in general and to protect and provide care for the
victims of the horrors and brutalities of conflict in
particular.
While it is understood today that the international
community must make greater efforts to promote the
status and rights of women and to take appropriate
action in that context, even more so must we protect
them during times of conflict. Violence against women
is, by definition, a dehumanizing and unacceptable
practice and an abject violation of basic human rights.
Such practices must be fought and forcefully punished.
The efforts made to that end by the United
Nations and its Member States can only be praised and
encouraged. However, reports issued by the United
Nations and its specialized agencies give us alarming
statistics on the treatment of women and on their
sufferings and call upon us to redouble our efforts to
put an end, once and for all, to the violence and abuses
committed against women. We should recall, in this
context, that at the 2005 World Summit our heads of
State or Government reaffirmed the importance of
protecting civilians, particularly women, in conflict
and post-conflict situations. They also emphasized the
need to promote women’s rights as an essential
precondition for peace, security and development
worldwide.
The international community possesses an
impressive legal arsenal for eliminating all forms of
discrimination against women and for protecting them
as a vital force in every society. It is thus up to us to
ensure rigorous implementation of the provisions of the
relevant international legal documents and instruments,
and to ensure that women in our societies, particularly
those affected by war and conflict, finally benefit from
the protection and attention that they deserve in order
to bring about lasting peace and stability in our world.
Today’s debate makes it incumbent upon us to
make a collective commitment to ensure that women,
wherever they are, are no longer vulnerable, are no
longer placed in an inferior position and are no longer
exposed to discrimination, threats or terror. In this
framework, our civilizations must choose to genuinely
participate in the global move towards ensuring that
women get the place and role that they deserve in
today’s societies as full-fledged citizens, partners
benefiting from equal opportunities and holders of
responsibilities in all sectors and at all levels. This is,
of course, a blueprint for a civilized society where
women are a guarantee of modernity, a vehicle for
development, a guarantor of political stability, and
especially a preventive security shield against any
obscurantist and retrograde tendencies — in other
words, the spearhead of a society mobilized for
progress and prosperity.
That, in any case, was the path taken in
promoting the status of women in Tunisia, launched
immediately after Tunisia achieved its independence in
1956, with the adoption of a personal status code. This
is one of the basic pillars of the new plan for our
society that is being undertaken by independent Tunisia
thanks in large part to the reformist revival brought to
our country by President Ben Ali. The principle of
gender equality under the law was thereby enshrined
and women were given a position at the forefront of
the social and political modernization of the country.
This has secured the position of Tunisian women in
political life, making them an essential component of
society and an effective, genuine agent of progress and
stability.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Benin.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): My
delegation congratulates the United States of America
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We are particularly pleased, Sir, to see you
presiding over this public debate.
If there is one area where the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) leaves most to be desired, it is
that of the many forms of unconscionable violence and
abuse which parties to armed conflict continue to
inflict against women and young girls. This situation is
in complete contravention of international standards.
The most heinous and most traumatizing form of abuse
against women is sexual violence. The seriousness of
this abominable phenomenon is multiplied when it is
perpetrated on a large scale. But all of that still does
not compare to the use of mass rape as a weapon of
war or as an instrument for ethnic cleansing or outright
genocide.
The international community must acquire the
means to gain access to the lawless regions where such
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
08-3908138
crimes are committed and must carry out investigations
of reported cases. In this context, the Council should
be able to order special operations, by virtue of the
principle of the responsibility to protect, in order to
establish and document the involvement of armed
groups committing sexual violence against women.
Such investigations would aim also to determine the
nature and the scope of the action to be taken to put an
end to these criminal practices.
Synergy should also be established between the
activities of human rights advisers, where they are
deployed, and the monitoring and information
mechanism established within the framework of
resolution 1612 (2005), which was initiated by my
country, Benin. This mechanism has been proven itself:
it has enabled us to identify the perpetrators of abuse
against children in situations of armed conflict.
Strengthening the legal provisions to fight
impunity would be of great use, because the credibility
of these provisions could serve as a deterrent to the
parties to conflict. The International Criminal Court
has a crucial role to play in this context.
At the same time, we must put an end to the
stigmatization of women who are victims of rape and
give them back their dignity by organizing awareness-
raising campaigns and by establishing structures for
psychological rehabilitation. This type of assistance to
victims and to communities affected by armed conflict
should be taken into account in the mandates of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations.
In general terms, protection against sexual
violence is an essential aspect of protecting civilians.
United Nations missions should analyse such violence
in order to define the concrete measures that can be
taken to prevent sexual attacks. It nearly goes without
saying that the deployment of women in the
contingents would make the fight against sexual
violence more effective because it could facilitate
contact and the gathering of sensitive information. But
the absence of women in these contingents should not
impede the development of effective strategies to
counter this phenomenon.
While amnesty for warlords is often the price to
pay in concluding peace accords, it is important to
ensure that serious crimes not be covered up, as long as
they are properly documented. These crimes should be
made imprescriptible worldwide so that those who are
suspected of having committed such crimes may be
brought to account as soon as possible in an
international or national jurisdiction as appropriate.
That said, we must enhance the awareness of law
enforcement agencies on the issue of sexual violence to
ensure that they effectively protect the population,
because it is not rare for all parties to an armed conflict
to be guilty of serious crimes against civilian
populations — who are just as fearful of Government
forces as of rebel forces.
The fight against sexual exploitation attributed to
members of peacekeeping operations must be
intensified. We must act more preventively than we
have by improving the awareness of contingent
members before they are deployed.
Care for victims of sexual violence is best
provided by women and by women’s civil society
organizations. They should regard this as a field of
action in which they have a clear comparative
advantage. Their participation in negotiations to
conclude and implement peace accords and to establish
truth and reconciliation bodies would be an additional
guarantee of the mainstreaming of gender-specific
issues. They could also help to ensure that effective
prevention policies are adopted.
In this context, my delegation believes that it is
entirely appropriate for the Security Council to adopt a
resolution on this issue on the basis of the draft text
(S/2008/403) circulated by the United States as part of
the preparations for this public debate. This initiative,
as a whole, has the support of my delegation.
Last year, it was an honour for Benin to have
contributed to bringing about consensus in the General
Assembly on the resolution on rape (General Assembly
resolution 62/134) that was initiated by the United
States. The Security Council’s adoption of this new
draft resolution will give the United Nations the tools
to ensure better monitoring of zones of conflict with a
view to better protecting civilians.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mauritania.
Mr. Ould Hadrami (Mauritania) (spoke in
French): Owing to the lateness of the hour, I will be
brief.
At the outset, I congratulate you, Mr. President,
on having organized this important meeting on women
and peace and security: sexual violence in situations of
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
3908-39081
armed conflict. I would also like to congratulate the
United States Secretary of State, Ms. Condoleezza
Rice, and the other ministers for their outstanding
statements and for having given them some of their
time to this important debate. I would also like to thank
Mr. Srgjan Kerim, President of the General Assembly,
and Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for the particular
attention they are devoting to combating sexual
violence against women in armed conflict.
The presence this morning of a great number of
ministers from States members of the Security Council
was a sign of the importance that the Council attaches to
this issue, because sexual violence can, to varying
degrees, pose a threat to international peace and security.
In this respect, I would add the voice of
Mauritania to the chorus of those who have preceded
us to condemn the degrading and inhuman treatment
inflicted upon women through sexual violence
committed in armed conflict. Despite all of the legal
instruments — which Mauritania has ratified — and
despite the actions and initiatives taken by the
international community on the protection and
advancement of women, we must note that much
remains to be done. Women remain victims of the
abominable practice that is sexual violence.
We are against all forms of violence against
innocent civilian populations, all the more so when it is
women who are the victims. Islam, our holy religion,
orders us to cherish and protect women, who are after
all the mother, the sister, the wife, the daughter — in
short, those who are the dearest to us in human society.
Sexual violence against women exposes society as a
whole to serious dangers: early and unwanted
pregnancies for many women, HIV/AIDS infection for
mother and child, the spread of sexually transmitted
diseases, the total demoralization of women victims,
negative social repercussions for victims, and so on.
Statistics show that in recent armed conflicts it is
civilian populations, that is to say non-combatants,
who represent the majority of the victims. Women, who
are the main targets of sexual violence in these
conflicts, along with children, account for the greatest
number of victims.
In this face of this shameful phenomenon, the
international community should take all necessary
measures to put an end to it and adopt mechanisms
where zero-tolerance is required for perpetrators of
these abominable crimes against women, crimes which,
moreover, are not limited to a single region of the
world.
The Special Rapporteur on violence against
women has done remarkable work, but the persistence
of rape of women in armed conflict has reached a level
that requires a strengthening of the capacities of the
Office of the Special Rapporteur, particularly in human
resources; here, women should be the focus of the
choices that are made. That is why my delegation
believes that the proposal made by the Minister for
Development Cooperation of the Kingdom of Belgium
to appoint a woman special investigator on sexual
violence is appropriate as an effective means for
eradicating this practice.
Women must also play an active role in
peacekeeping operations. Such participation is
currently limited; this is especially linked to language
issues. To work for the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur as a military adviser, it is
not enough to speak two official languages of the
United Nations. This linguistic obstacle must be
overcome to allow women who have the qualifications
and who speak at least two United Nations languages
to apply for a post in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations if they wish.
The President: The last speaker on my list is the
representative of San Marino, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Bodini (San Marino): I would like to thank
the Secretary of State of the United States of America,
Ms. Condoleezza Rice, and you, Mr. President, for
convening this important meeting today.
Over the years, the Republic of San Marino has
been a strong supporter of all campaigns against any
type of violence against women. As President of the
Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe, our
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Fiorenzo Stolfi,
spearheaded the Council of Europe campaign against
violence against women.
San Marino welcomes the now United Nations
initiative on this subject initiated by the Secretary-
General. In that context, we recently organized an
event here at the United Nations, linking the work of
the Council of Europe with the activities of this
Organization.
I am happy to report that yesterday our
parliament adopted a very comprehensive law against
violence against women.
S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)
08-3908140
San Marino, a small country without an army, has
been able to maintain its independence for more than
17 centuries. We condemn war and violence in general,
but, more than anything else, we condemn violence
against women and girls. Our women are the pillars of
our society and of our families, and our families are the
cornerstone of our society. Allowing violence against
women destroys the very fabric of our society and all
the dreams for our children’s peaceful and prosperous
future.
We are very proud to be among the sponsors of
today’s Security Council draft resolution on this very
important matter.
The President: It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft
resolution before it (S/2008/403). Unless I hear any
objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote
now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Indonesia, Italy, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Panama, Russian Federation, South
Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Viet
Nam
The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1820 (2008).
There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.55 p.m.

