United Nations S/PV.6117
Security Council
Sixty-fourth year
6117thmeeting
Thursday, 30 April 2009, 4.45 p.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.
09-31958 (E)
*0931958*
President: Mr. Heller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Mexico)
Members: Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mayr-Harting
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Tiendrébéogo
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. La Yifan
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Urbina
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Skračić
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ripert
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Takasu
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dabbashi
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Churkin
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. İlkin
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mugoya
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . Sir John Sawers
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Rice
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Bui The Giang
Agenda
The situation concerning Western Sahara
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation concerning Western Sahara
(S/2009/200 and Corr.1)
S/PV.6117
09-319582
The meeting was called to order at 4.45 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Western Sahara
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation concerning Western Sahara
(S/2009/200 and Corr.1)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Spain, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Yáñez-
Barnuevo (Spain) took the seat reserved for him
at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/200 and corrigendum 1, which
contains the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation concerning Western Sahara.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2009/224, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by France, the Russian
Federation, Spain, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America.
I would like to draw the attention of the Council
to the following oral amendments to the draft
resolution.
The current eighth preambular paragraph will
become the seventh preambular paragraph, and should
read as follows:
“Stressing the importance of making
progress on the human dimension of the conflict
as a means to promote transparency and mutual
confidence through constructive dialogue and
humanitarian confidence-building measures,”
The former seventh preambular paragraph will
become the new eighth preambular paragraph and
should read as follows:
“Welcoming in this context the agreement
of the parties expressed in the Communiqué of
the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Western Sahara of 18 March 2008 to explore the
establishment of family visits by land, which
would be in addition to the existing programme
by air, and encouraging them to do so in
cooperation with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees”.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it,
as orally amended. Unless I hear any objection, I shall
put the draft resolution, as orally amended, to the vote
now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Viet Nam
The President (spoke in Spanish): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution, as orally
amended, has been adopted unanimously as resolution
1871 (2009).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): The United
States fully supports the Secretary-General and
Ambassador Christopher Ross in their efforts to find a
peaceful, sustainable and mutually agreed solution to
the Western Sahara conflict. This conflict has gone on
for too long. These ongoing strains, as well as poor
relations between Morocco and Algeria, have
prevented regional cooperation on urgent and emerging
issues facing North Africa.
S/PV.6117
309-31958
We very much welcome the appointment of
Ambassador Ross to serve as the Secretary-General’s
Personal Envoy for Western Sahara. He is a seasoned
diplomat with extensive experience in the region, and
he has our full support. During Ambassador Ross’s
recent trip to the region, all of his interlocutors
confirmed their commitment to cooperate with the
United Nations to reach a solution to the Western
Sahara conflict as soon as possible. We welcome that
news.
We also concur with the assessment of
Ambassador Ross that informal preparatory talks may
help pave the way for more substantive formal talks.
We are glad that the parties have agreed to meet
informally, and we encourage all involved to come to
the table without preconditions. Given the current
situation on the ground, and Ambassador Ross’s
continuing efforts, we agree that the presence of the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara (MINURSO) remains indispensable. The United
States supports renewing MINURSO’s mandate for
another 12 months.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): As the
Council has had occasion to state on numerous
occasions, there is no solution other than a negotiated,
mutually acceptable political solution to the issue of
the Western Sahara, whose resolution remains
necessary — as all are convinced — not only for the
Sahara but for the entire Maghreb region. For that
reason, France welcomes the fact that the Security
Council today reiterated its unanimous support for the
negotiating process launched in Manhasset in 2007 and
for resolution 1813 (2008), a resolution that was also
adopted unanimously and which serves as the road map
for the process.
My delegation hopes that on that basis the parties
concerned will return to the negotiating table as soon
as possible and resolutely enter into a substantive
discussion — as the Council calls upon them to do —
under United Nations auspices, showing realism, a
spirit of compromise and political will to finally
achieve a just, lasting and mutually acceptable
solution.
While the negotiations must resume, France
wishes also to recall the importance of the autonomy
proposal put forward by Morocco in 2007, which, in
our view, provides a basis for negotiation that is
credible, transparent and constructive and that respects
the principle of self-determination and is thus worthy
of close attention by all parties.
I wish to reiterate our support for the efforts of
the Secretary-General and of Mr. Christopher Ross, his
new Personal Envoy, to whom we wish every success.
We support Mr. Ross’s proposal to hold informal
meetings to better prepare the next session of
discussions. My delegation also wishes to express its
support for measures to be taken in the humanitarian
and political arenas, with the agreement of the parties,
to promote mutual trust and confidence.
In conclusion, my delegation welcomes the fact
that the mandate of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) has been
renewed by consensus. We take this opportunity to
recall how important it is for the Secretariat and the
Council to be in a position, in line with the initiative
launched jointly with the United Kingdom, to ensure
better political and military follow-up for all
peacekeeping operations, including MINURSO. To that
end, as we always strive to do for various peacekeeping
operations, out of a concern for effectiveness, we
underscore the importance of the Secretariat keeping
the operation’s planning documents up to date.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation welcomes the
unanimous adoption of the resolution on the Western
Sahara, which extends the mandate of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO). That mission continues to carry out an
important stabilizing function. In adopting the
resolution, the Council has sent the parties to the
conflict an important signal in favour of achieving
progress in resolving the issue of Western Sahara. My
delegation expects that this consensus resolution will
provide a serious basis to assist Christopher Ross, the
Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General, in his efforts
to re-launch and breathe new life into the Manhasset
negotiating process.
There is a need to ensure that the protracted
pause in the settlement process be overcome as rapidly
possible. In that respect, we attach great importance to
the process of negotiations and view it as the most
important mechanism which will enable the parties to
resolve issues through direct dialogue.
On the whole, the Russian position on Western
Sahara remains unchanged. We advocate the search for
fair, lasting and mutually acceptable solutions to the
S/PV.6117
09-319584
issue on the basis of existing Security Council
resolutions and in compliance with the principle that
the parties must agree to any mechanism proposed to
resolve this issue.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): The
unanimous adoption of resolution 1871 (2009) sends an
important message of the Security Council’s support
for the Secretary-General’s Personal Envoy,
Christopher Ross, as he embarks on his new role. The
appointment of Ambassador Ross and the fresh
approach he brings represent a real opportunity for the
parties and the neighbouring States to re-engage, to
renew the talks process and to make meaningful
progress towards the settlement of a conflict that has
run for far too long. We strongly urge all those
involved to seize this opportunity, and we underline the
Council’s call for the parties to approach the talks in
good faith and without preconditions.
In all cases of this sort, the principle of self-
determination of the people of the territory is
fundamental. The United Kingdom remains committed
to seeing a process of negotiation, under the auspices
of Ambassador Ross, which leads to a just, lasting and
mutually acceptable political solution which provides
for the self-determination of the people of Western
Sahara.
I would also like to emphasize the importance of
what the Secretary-General has described as the human
dimension of the conflict, to which we refer to in the
seventh preambular paragraph of the resolution. My
Government firmly believes that addressing the
Secretary-General’s recommendations in this respect,
including the expansion of humanitarian confidence-
building measures and transparency on human rights
by all parties, will do much to establish trust and
confidence between the parties and thereby enable
progress in the negotiations.
We have today renewed the mandate of
MINURSO for another year. In line with our ongoing
discussions on peacekeeping, I would stress the need
for the Council to take a strategic view of all its
peacekeeping operations. In this respect, I would echo
the comments of the Permanent Representative of
France and ask the Secretariat to develop suitable
benchmarks against which MINURSO’s progress in
achieving its mandate can be measured and to include
an assessment of such progress in the next report.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): My
country voted in favour of resolution 1871 (2009) to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara because we believe
that it is important to lend unanimous Security Council
support to the plan presented to us by Mr. Ross,
Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General, in whose
management we have confidence.
However, we are not satisfied with the text of the
adopted resolution. As you know, Sir, from your own
experience, Costa Rica has been an active advocate of
peaceful dispute settlement processes. Our President
was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize precisely because
of an effort on his part that brought peace to Central
America and rendered the United Nations efforts
successful. We know from our own experience that the
foundation of mediation is political will to arrive at an
agreement and that this political will has to be based on
absolute respect for the Charter of the United Nations,
together with a legitimate sense of commitment to the
promotion and protection of human rights.
Costa Rica considers that the full respect for and
guarantee of human rights is an essential prerequisite
to the resolution of this and other conflicts, and not an
obstacle, as some seem to think. This position of my
country is a clear one, and we have manifested it with
great transparency, respect and with complete respect
for the rules of negotiation in this Council. That is
what we did throughout all the consultations and
meetings of experts that took place. We brought the
arguments and elements we wanted to see reflected in
the text. We are very sorry that our concerns have not
been reflected in the resolution.
We are aware of the efforts of the parties and
their commitment to move ahead, some to a greater
extent than others. That is why we put forth, as a last
resort, a proposal whose sole purpose was to ask for a
report on the efforts of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights to work with
the parties to ensure respect for human rights in
Western Sahara. As we said during the consultations,
Costa Rica has not invented human rights in the
Sahara. This is a topic that appears in the Secretary-
General’s 2008 report (S/2008/251), in paragraph 71,
where he stated,
“I would like to repeat my call to the parties … to
remain engaged in continuous and constructive
dialogue with the Office of the United Nations
S/PV.6117
509-31958
High Commissioner for Human Rights with a
view to ensuring respect for the human rights of
the people of Western Sahara.”
This appeal, along with an important statement to
the effect that the United Nations remains resolutely in
favour of respect for those same human rights
standards appears in paragraph 66 of this year’s report
(S/2009/200 and Corr.1), where the Secretary-General
says,
“I would like to reiterate that the United Nations
remains committed to upholding international
human rights standards, and I repeat my call to
the parties to remain engaged in continuous and
constructive dialogue with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, with a view to ensuring respect for the
human rights of the people of Western Sahara in
the Territory and in the refugee camps …”.
But the Security Council has unfortunately not
endorsed these conclusions of the Secretary-General,
which appear in his last two reports (S/2008/251,
S/2009/200 and Corr.1).
We voted in favour of the resolution in order to
lend support to the work of the Personal Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ross, and we hope that he will
be guided in his performance by the words of the
Secretary-General, which, leaving aside the economic
and political interests of the moment, represents the
generous moral voice of humanity.
Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): My delegation voted in
favour of renewing the mandate of the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO) for another year. But my delegation
remains concerned about a number of issues in the
human rights dimension raised in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/200 and Corr.1).
We welcome the observation in that report that
the United Nations remains committed to upholding
international human rights standards. However, we see
MINURSO as the only contemporary peacekeeping
operation without a human rights component, contrary
to the general principles of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and its own mandate. We
therefore welcome the attention given in the resolution
to the importance of making progress on the human
dimension of the conflict. We call upon the parties to
work with Mr. Ross to ensure that observance of
human rights in Western Sahara and refugee camps is
upheld.
Mr. Tiendrébéogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in
French): Burkina Faso welcomes the adoption by this
Council of resolution 1871 (2009), a resolution that
extends the mandate of the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO),
whose actions we unreservedly support. When on
22 April the Council considered the issue of Western
Sahara, my delegation expressed concern at the slow
pace of the negotiations between the parties. At the
same time, we noted our appreciation of the planned
approach proposed by Christopher Ross, the new
Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General — and we of
course wish him every success in his mission — to
breathe new life into the process. We felt reassured by
his remarks insofar as, after a visit to the region, he
spoke of the adherence of the parties to this approach.
The importance of MINURSO and the necessity
for the United Nations, and the Secretary-General in
particular, to ensure assistance for the parties during
the negotiations process are clear to all. We believe at
this stage that, in addition to the extension of the
mission’s mandate, the Security Council should pursue
clear objectives, namely, to spare no effort to promote
the rapid resumption of the Manhasset negotiations
process and to fully support the new Personal Envoy of
the Secretary-General.
We believe that all of these objectives have found
expression in the new resolution that we have just
adopted, and that is why we supported it. Indeed, we
believe that this draft is the best possible compromise
at present. We thank the delegation of the United States
and all co-sponsors for their efforts, which have
enabled the Council to speak with a single voice this
afternoon.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Austria
wholeheartedly supports the renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara (MINURSO) for another 12 months. It
is very important, from our point of view, that the
Council has been able to achieve unity in this matter,
because resolution 1871 (2009) provides the Secretary-
General and his Personal Envoy with the unanimous
message of support by the Council that they need for
their efforts to bring both parties back to the
negotiating table as soon as possible.
S/PV.6117
09-319586
In the field of human rights, Austria supports a
results-oriented approach. Both parties have the
obligation to ensure respect for the human rights of the
people of Western Sahara. Against this background, we
believe that the populations in the territory and in the
refugee camps would greatly benefit in their enjoyment
of human rights from a new resolve by both parties in
the negotiation process. A continuous and constructive
dialogue with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights as suggested by the
Secretary-General could help the parties to approach
the issue of human rights protection and promotion
from a confidence-building perspective.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Mexico.
The Mexican delegation is gratified that the
Security Council has adopted resolution 1871 (2009) to
renew the mandate of the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO). We
are particularly gratified that the resolution was
adopted with 15 votes in favour, as this demonstrates
the unanimous support of the Council for the work of
MINURSO in the field and the initiatives taken by the
new Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Christopher Ross.
We therefore support the Personal Envoy’s
suggestion to organize small, preparatory informal
meetings before convening a fifth round of
negotiations in Manhasset. We believe this will be
indispensable to achieving substantial progress in the
negotiations. We trust that the parties will attend these
negotiations in good faith without prior conditions and
will demonstrate the political will to set in motion
substantive deliberations that will bring about tangible
progress in the negotiations, leading towards a just,
lasting and mutually acceptable solution that will
guarantee the self-determination of the people of
Western Sahara.
Mexico attaches great importance to the
promotion and protection of human rights, which is a
priority in our foreign policy. My delegation feels that
the Security Council must not fail to consider this topic
as it addresses the situation in Western Sahara. That is
why we welcome the fact that this year’s resolution
contains an improvement in this respect, in the eighth
preambular paragraph, when it refers to the
humanitarian dimension of the conflict as a means to
promote transparency and mutual confidence through
constructive dialogue, as suggested by the Secretary-
General in his report (S/2009/200).
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
As this may be the last meeting held under the
Mexican presidency of the Council, I would like to
take this opportunity to express my sincere thanks to
all my colleagues on the Council, who have provided
such valuable support to my delegation. I would also
like to thank the Secretariat team for their continuing
support throughout the month and to thank all the other
staff of the Secretariat, including the interpreters, who
have worked behind the scenes in support of the work
of the presidency. I would like to thank you all.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.
