United Nations S/PV.6335
Security Council
Sixty-fifth year
6335thmeeting
Wednesday, 9 June 2010, 10 a.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.
10-39596 (E)
*1039596*
President: Mr. Heller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Mexico)
Members: Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mayr-Harting
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Barbalić
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Viotti
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Li Baodong
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Araud
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Takasu
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Salam
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Onemola
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Churkin
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Apakan
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Rugunda
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . Sir Mark Lyall Grant
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Rice
Agenda
Non-proliferation
S/PV.6335
10-395962
The meeting was called to order at 11.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Germany and the Islamic
Republic of Iran, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Khazaee
(Islamic Republic of Iran) and Mr. Wittig
(Germany) took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/283, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by France, Germany, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Council wishing to make statements before the voting.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Brazil will vote against the
draft resolution. In doing so, we are honouring the
purposes that inspired us in the efforts that resulted in
the Tehran declaration of 17 May. We will do so
because we do not see sanctions as an effective
instrument in this case. Sanctions will most probably
lead to the suffering of the people of Iran and will play
into the hands of those on all sides who do not want
dialogue to prevail. Past experiences in the United
Nations, notably the case of Iraq, show that the spiral
of sanctions, threats and isolation can result in tragic
consequences.
We will vote against the draft resolution also
because the adoption of sanctions at this juncture runs
counter to the successful efforts of Brazil and Turkey
to engage Iran in a negotiated solution with regard to
its nuclear programme.
As Brazil has stated repeatedly, the Tehran
declaration adopted on 17 May is a unique opportunity
that should not be missed. It was approved by the
highest levels of the Iranian leadership and endorsed
by Iran’s parliament. The Tehran declaration promoted
a solution that would ensure the full exercise of Iran’s
right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy while
providing full, verifiable assurances that Iran’s nuclear
programme has exclusively peaceful purposes. We are
firmly convinced that the only possible way to achieve
this collective goal is to secure Iran’s cooperation
through effective and action-oriented dialogue and
negotiations.
The Tehran declaration showed that dialogue and
persuasion can do more than punitive action. Its
purpose and result were to build the confidence needed
to address the whole set of aspects of Iran’s nuclear
programme. As we explained yesterday, the joint
declaration removed political obstacles to the
materialization of a proposal by the International
Atomic Energy Agency in October 2009. Many
Governments and highly respected institutions and
individuals have come to acknowledge its value as an
important step to a broader discussion on the Iranian
nuclear programme.
The Brazilian Government deeply regrets,
therefore, that the joint declaration has neither received
the political recognition it deserves nor been given the
time it needs to bear fruit. Brazil considers it unnatural
to rush to sanctions before the parties concerned can sit
and talk about the implementation of the declaration.
The Vienna Group’s replies to the Iranian letter of 24
May, which confirmed Iran’s commitment to the
content of the declaration, were received just hours
ago. No time has been given for Iran to react to the
S/PV.6335
310-39596
opinions of the Vienna Group, including to the
proposal of a technical meeting to address details.
The adoption of sanctions in such circumstances
sends the wrong signal to what could be the beginning
of a constructive engagement in Vienna. Also of great
concern was the way in which the permanent members,
together with a country that is not a member of the
Security Council, negotiated among themselves for
months behind closed doors.
Brazil attaches the utmost importance to
disarmament and non-proliferation, and our record in
this domain is impeccable. We have also affirmed, and
reaffirm now, the imperative for all nuclear activity to
be conducted under the applicable safeguards of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, and Iran’s
activities are no exception. We continue to believe that
the Tehran declaration is sound policy and should be
pursued. We hope that all parties involved will see the
long-term wisdom of doing so.
In our view, the adoption of new sanctions by the
Security Council will delay rather than accelerate or
ensure progress in addressing the question. We should
not miss the opportunity to start a process that can lead
to a peaceful, negotiated solution to this question. The
concerns regarding Iran’s nuclear programme raised
today will not be resolved until dialogue begins. By
adopting sanctions, this Council is actually opting for
one of the two tracks that were supposed to run in
parallel — in our opinion, the wrong one.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Turkey is fully committed
to its responsibilities in the field of non-proliferation,
and as such is a party to all major international
non-proliferation instruments and regimes. We do not
want any country in our region to possess nuclear
weapons. Such a development would make even more
difficult the attainment of the goal of establishing a
zone free of weapons of mass destruction in the Middle
East, to which Turkey attaches great importance.
Turkey would like to see the restoration of
confidence within the international community
concerning the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s
nuclear programme. To that end, we see no viable
alternative to a diplomatic and peaceful solution. It is
in that understanding that, together with Brazil, we
signed the Tehran declaration, which aims to
implement the swap formula elaborated by the
International Atomic Energy Agency in October last
year with a view to providing nuclear fuel to the
Tehran Research Reactor.
The Tehran declaration has created a new reality
with respect to Iran’s nuclear programme. The
declaration, which was designed as a confidence-
building measure, would, if implemented, contribute to
the resolution of the substantive issues relating to
Iran’s nuclear programme in a positive and
constructive atmosphere. The declaration in essence
provides a first step in a broader road map that could
lead to a comprehensive settlement of the problem. In
other words, the Tehran declaration provides a new and
important window of opportunity for diplomacy.
Sufficient time and space should be allowed for its
implementation. We are deeply concerned that the
adoption of sanctions would negatively affect the
momentum created by the declaration and the overall
diplomatic process.
On the other hand, it was rather unhelpful that the
response of the Vienna Group was received only a few
hours ago. The fact that the response was of a negative
nature and that it was sent on the day of the adoption of
the draft resolution on sanctions had a determining
effect on our position. Our position demonstrates our
commitment to the Tehran declaration and to
diplomatic efforts.
That said, our vote against the draft resolution
today should not be construed as reflecting indifference
to the problems emanating from Iran’s nuclear
programme. There are serious questions within the
international community regarding the purpose and
nature of Iran’s nuclear programme, and those need to
be clarified. We take this opportunity to call upon Iran
to show absolute transparency about its nuclear
programme and to demonstrate full cooperation with
the International Atomic Energy Agency in order to
restore confidence.
Turkey attaches great importance to the
resolution of this problem through peaceful means and
negotiations. The draft resolution on sanctions will be
adopted today despite our active and unrelenting
efforts in that direction. However, the adoption of the
draft resolution should not be seen as representing an
end to diplomatic efforts. We are of the firm opinion
that, after the adoption of the draft resolution, efforts to
find a peaceful solution to this problem will have to be
continued even more resolutely.
S/PV.6335
10-395964
On the other hand, we take note of the concerns
of the international community regarding the uranium
enriched by Iran at 20 per cent. We expect the Iranian
authorities to take steps to dispel the concerns of the
international community, which reflect certain question
marks regarding the peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear
programme. We now expect Iran to work towards the
implementation of the Tehran declaration. The
declaration must stay on the table. Iran should come to
the negotiating table with the permanent five members
of the Security Council plus Germany to take up its
nuclear programme, including the suspension of
enrichment. We will contribute to that process.
With those considerations, the Republic of
Turkey shall thus vote against the draft resolution
today.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Council
will now proceed to take a decision on the draft
resolution (S/2010/283) before it.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, China, France,
Gabon, Japan, Mexico, Nigeria, Russian
Federation, Uganda, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
Against:
Brazil, Turkey
Abstaining:
Lebanon
The President (spoke in Spanish): The result of
the voting is as follows: 12 votes in favour, 2 against
and 1 abstention. The draft resolution has been adopted
as resolution 1929 (2010).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): Today, the
Security Council has responded decisively to the grave
threat to international peace and security posed by
Iran’s failure to live up to its obligations under the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT). The Treaty is the principal international legal
instrument for holding Member States accountable,
discouraging the spread of nuclear weapons, and
bringing the benefits of nuclear energy to all corners of
the world. As President Obama has said, rules must be
binding; violations must be punished; words must
mean something.
The issue is straightforward. We are at this point
because the Government of Iran has chosen clearly and
wilfully to violate its commitments to the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the resolutions of
this Council. Despite consistent and long-standing
demands by the international community, Iran has not
suspended its uranium enrichment and other
proliferation-related activities. The Security Council
has passed a resolution today aimed at reinforcing the
need for Iran to take these steps and comply with its
obligations. These sanctions are not directed at the
Iranian people, nor do they seek to stop Iran from the
legitimate exercise of its rights under the NPT, in
conformity with its obligations. Rather, the sanctions
aim squarely at the nuclear ambitions of a Government
that has chosen a path that will lead to increased
isolation.
These sanctions are as tough as they are smart
and precise. The resolution prohibits Iran from
investing in sensitive nuclear activities abroad. It
imposes binding new restrictions on Iran’s import of
conventional arms. It bans all Iranian activities related
to ballistic missiles that could deliver a nuclear
weapon. It imposes a comprehensive framework of
cargo inspections to detect and stop Iran’s smuggling
and acquisition of illicit materials or nuclear items.
It creates important new tools to block Iran’s use
of the international financial system, particularly
Iranian banks, to fund and facilitate nuclear
proliferation. It highlights the potential links between
Iran’s energy sector and its nuclear ambitions. It targets
the role of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps in
Iran’s proliferation efforts. It establishes a United
Nations panel of experts to help monitor and enforce
the implementation of sanctions. And it imposes
targeted new sanctions, including asset freezes and
travel bans, on 40 entities and an individual linked to
Iranian nuclear proliferation.
Since 2002, the International Atomic Energy
Agency has sought to investigate serious concerns that
Iran’s nuclear programme might have military
dimensions. In 2003, the IAEA Board of Governors
expressed “grave concern” that Iran had still not
enabled the IAEA to assure Member States that Iran
had declared all of its nuclear material and activities.
For our part, the United States launched a sustained
S/PV.6335
510-39596
and serious effort, starting early last year, to engage
with Iran on a range of issues of mutual concern,
including these nuclear issues. The United States has
made detailed and specific openings to the Iranians,
including personal and direct outreach by President
Obama.
The United States strongly supports the peaceful
use of the atom for energy and innovation. Like every
nation, Iran has rights; but it also has responsibilities,
and the two are inextricably linked. Iran has shunned
opportunity after opportunity to allow verification of
the peaceful nature of its nuclear programme. In recent
months, Iran has given us all more reason, not less, to
suspect that its goal is to develop the ability to
assemble a nuclear weapon. Last September, the world
learned that Iran had secretly built another uranium
enrichment facility at Qom, in clear violation of
Security Council resolutions and Iran’s IAEA
obligations. Last November, Iran announced that it
would build 10 more such facilities. In February, Iran
said that it would begin to enrich uranium to nearly
20 per cent, moving closer to weapons-grade material.
In May, the IAEA affirmed yet again that Iran is
continuing its banned uranium enrichment, and warned
that Iran has amassed more than 2,400 kilograms of
low-enriched uranium.
The resolution we adopted today offers Iran a
clear path towards the immediate suspension of these
sanctions. The best way is also the easiest one. Iran
must fulfil its international obligations, suspend its
enrichment-related reprocessing and heavy-water-
related activities, and cooperate fully with the IAEA.
The United States reaffirms our commitment to engage
in robust, principled and creative diplomacy. We will
remain ready to continue diplomacy with Iran and its
leaders in order to make clear how much they have to
gain from acting responsibly and how much more they
stand to lose from continued recklessness. Today’s
resolution does not replace those efforts, but it does
support them.
Turkey and Brazil have worked hard to make
progress on the Tehran Research Reactor proposal,
efforts that reflect their leaders’ good intentions to
address the Iranian people’s humanitarian needs while
building more international confidence about the
nature of Iran’s nuclear programme. My Government
will continue to discuss the Iranian revised proposal
and our concerns about it, as appropriate.
But the Tehran Research Reactor proposal, then
and now, does not respond to the fundamental, well-
founded and unanswered concerns about Iran’s nuclear
programme. Today’s resolution does. Until the world’s
concerns with Iran’s nuclear defiance are fully
resolved, we must work together to ensure that the
sanctions in the resolution are fully and firmly
implemented. We must ensure that the development of
the most devastating weapons ever devised by human
science is prescribed by the most responsible controls
ever produced by human Government. Last month, 189
countries came together to strengthen the nuclear
non-proliferation Treaty as a cornerstone of global
security. Today’s resolution is an important part of that
work. The NPT must remain at the centre of our global
effort to stop nuclear proliferation, even as we pursue
the ultimate goal of a world without nuclear weapons.
Today, I am proud to say that this Council has
risen to its responsibilities. Now Iran should choose a
wiser course.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to begin by reading out the text of a
statement that has been agreed on by the Foreign
Ministers of China, France, Germany, Russia, the
United Kingdom and the United States, with the
support of the High Representative of the European
Union. The statement reads as follows:
“We, the Foreign Ministers of China,
France, Germany, Russia, the United Kingdom
and the United States, would like to take this
opportunity to reaffirm our determination and
commitment to seek an early negotiated solution
to the Iranian nuclear issue.
“The adoption of United Nations Security
Council resolution 1929 (2010), while reflecting
the international community’s concern about the
Iranian nuclear programme and reconfirming the
need for Iran to comply with the United Nations
Security Council and IAEA Board of Governors
requirements, keeps the door open for continued
engagement between the E3+3 and Iran. The aim
of our efforts is to achieve a comprehensive and
long-term settlement which would restore
international confidence in the peaceful nature of
Iran’s nuclear programme, while respecting Iran’s
legitimate rights to the peaceful use of atomic
energy. We are resolute in continuing our work
for this purpose. We also welcome and commend
S/PV.6335
10-395966
all diplomatic efforts in this regard, especially
those recently made by Brazil and Turkey on the
specific issue of the Tehran Research Reactor.
“We reaffirm our June 2008 proposals,
which remain valid, as confirmed by resolution
1929 (2010). We believe these proposals provide
a sound basis for future negotiations. We are
prepared to continue dialogue and interaction
with Iran in the context of implementing the
understandings reached during the Geneva
meeting of 1 October 2009. We have asked
Baroness Ashton, the European Union High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, to pursue this with Mr. Saheed Jalili,
Secretary of Iran’s Supreme National Security
Council, at the earliest opportunity.
“We expect Iran to demonstrate a pragmatic
attitude and to respond positively to our openness
towards dialogue and negotiations.”
That concludes the statement on behalf of the six
Foreign Ministers.
I should now like to make some remarks in my
national capacity.
Today, the Security Council adopted resolution
1929 (2010) as a result of the international
community’s ongoing serious concerns about the
proliferation risks of the Iranian nuclear programme.
Once again, the Security Council has sent a strong
message of international resolve. It is a clear signal
that Iran’s continued failure to comply with its Security
Council and IAEA Board requirements to cease its
enrichment-related activities cannot be tolerated.
The Security Council last addressed this issue in
September 2008 in a clear statement that we wish to
resolve our serious concerns through dialogue and
negotiation (see S/PV.5984). Since that time, we have
made several efforts to achieve that. When E3+3
Foreign Ministers met in New York on 23 September
2009 they reiterated their wish to negotiate a
comprehensive long-term agreement to resolve the
Iranian nuclear issue. But they also made clear that this
could only be achieved if both sides were willing to
approach these matters in a spirit of mutual respect and
were committed to looking for solutions going forward.
At last October’s meeting in Geneva we reached
agreement on three important issues. First, Iran agreed
to hold a further meeting on its nuclear programme
within one month. Iran also said that it would
cooperate fully and immediately with the IAEA on the
enrichment facility near Qom. It also agreed in
principle to a deal to resupply its Tehran Research
Reactor (TRR).
We welcomed those commitments and made clear
that we hoped that it would be the start of a period of
intense negotiation. We regret that that did not prove to
be the case. Iran has stated repeatedly that it will not
discuss its nuclear programme, claiming that our
concerns are baseless. They are not. They are fully
documented in reports from the IAEA Director General
going back several years and the subject of Security
Council resolutions since 2006. The purpose of the
facility at Qom remains unestablished. The February
2010 IAEA report made clear once again that Iran had
not answered a number of key questions.
On the TRR, three days of talks in Vienna
produced a detailed proposal from the IAEA that all
parties present agreed. Iran then withdrew its initial
acceptance of the TRR proposal and in February
started to enrich low-enriched uranium to 20 per cent,
despite having neither the need to do so nor the means
to fabricate the fuel for use in the reactor. Iran also
announced the construction of further enrichment
facilities.
We acknowledge the good-faith efforts of Turkey
and Brazil to persuade Iran to engage with the IAEA on
the Tehran Research Reactor. However, we cannot
accept Iran’s attempts to use these efforts to justify its
continued defiance of successive Security Council
resolutions that mandate a suspension of Iran’s
enrichment operations. We have said many times that
we do not question Iran’s right to peaceful nuclear
energy. But with those rights come responsibilities.
Today’s resolution has been made necessary by
Iran’s actions. Once again, the resolution restates our
willingness to engage in dialogue to address the
substance of our concerns. The measures adopted in
this and previous resolutions can be suspended when
Iran suspends its proscribed activities.
We remain ready to resume the talks on Iran’s
nuclear programme that we started in Geneva on
1 October 2009. We believe that such talks can lead to
a solution as long as they are purposeful, discuss both
sides’ concerns and make swift progress. In extending
our hand, we show our determination to resolve these
matters through dialogue and diplomacy, and in
S/PV.6335
710-39596
adopting this resolution we show equal determination
to continue to respond robustly to Iran’s refusal to
comply with its international obligations.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 1929 (2010). The
Council adopted it by a large majority, with the votes
of countries of Africa, Asia, Europe and America,
countries with or without a nuclear industry and
countries with or without trade relations with Iran.
This unity has a clear reason, and all members
know it. For 18 years, Iran has been developing a
clandestine nuclear programme. Once that programme
was discovered, Iran has unceasingly impeded the
efforts of the International Atomic Energy Agency to
uncover its objective. Iran continues to enrich uranium
despite five Security Council resolutions and the lack
of a credible nuclear power programme on its soil.
The facts are overwhelming; there is no room for
doubt. It is sufficient to recall them. Iran has developed
a programme for missiles capable of carrying nuclear
warheads. Iran has worked on advanced military
studies that are the missing link between enrichment
and the ballistic missile programme, in particular on
building a delivery vehicle in which a nuclear warhead
can be placed, while rejecting all cooperation on that
issue with the Agency.
More recently, Iran has built a clandestine
enrichment facility at Qom, adapted to military use but
far too small for civilian use. That facility would have
to function 24 hours a day for 45 years to provide fuel
for a civilian reactor. Finally, in February Iran started
to enrich its uranium to 20 per cent, which brings it
even closer to a military threshold.
It is no surprise, therefore, that the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has concluded in its
Director General’s report of 31 May that it was
impossible for it to confirm that all nuclear material in
Iran is in peaceful activities.
This, however, was not for lack of increased
efforts to lead Iran, through dialogue, to prove its
openness. Since 2003, the three European States — the
Federal Republic of Germany, the United Kingdom and
France — have been seeking to start a dialogue with
Iran. That approach resulted in the first European
cooperation proposal of August 2005, then the E3+3
proposal of 2006 and a new proposal of June 2008.
Significant incentives have been offered to Iran in
the nuclear, security, commercial, agricultural and
medical fields. A high-level delegation went to Tehran
in June 2008 with a letter signed by the six Ministers,
including the United States Secretary of State of that
time. Countless meetings, ministerial exchanges and
direct, indirect, multilateral and bilateral contacts took
place with the Iranians. No effort was spared.
However, those offers did not succeed, owing to the
refusal of the Iranians to start negotiations, and for
seven months Iran has refused to meet the European
Union representative, Baroness Ashton, despite the
commitment that it undertook last October.
In that context, my country gratefully welcomes
the initiative of Turkey and Brazil on the Tehran
Research Reactor as a confidence-building measure,
and French authorities have indicated this at the
highest level. We welcome the commitment of the two
eminent leaders and wish them success. However, we
note that Iran has already spared no effort to strip the
agreement of its substance by continuing to enrich its
uranium to 20 per cent and reaffirming its intention to
continue to do so, which negates the main purpose of
the agreement, and by playing for time to ensure that it
would have to export only a fraction of its stockpile of
uranium to enable it to rapidly rebuild the necessary
quantity for a military device.
We have also noted Iran’s biased reading of the
agreement, choosing to view it as a justification for
unlimited enrichment, a definitive rejection of
sanctions and IAEA inspections, and an alibi to avoid
discussing its nuclear programme with the E3+3.
Finally and most importantly, a satisfactory
agreement on the Tehran Research Reactor, which we
sincerely hope to achieve, could be a useful
confidence-building measure although it would not
address the heart of the problem. The heart of the
problem is the nature of the Iranian nuclear
programme, the discovery of the clandestine facility in
Qom, enrichment to 20 per cent and Iran’s obstruction
of the IAEA’s efforts. This problem remains
unchanged, and Iran’s refusal to resolve it forces us to
be firm today.
For these reasons, the sanctions resolution that
we have just adopted is an appropriate response. The
resolution is robust, yet specific and targeted. It is not
aimed at the Iranian people. Its measures will increase
the cost to Iran of its proliferation policy. They will
S/PV.6335
10-395968
slow down the progress of the nuclear programme and
thereby give us more time for diplomacy. In fact, it was
the very least we could do following the discovery of
the clandestine facility in Qom and the beginning of
enrichment to 20 per cent. It is our duty to protect the
non-proliferation Treaty — a vessel that Iran believes it
can board without a ticket.
If we did not react to such developments, the
message we would send to potential followers of Iran
would be: Go ahead. It is also our duty to prevent a
regional arms race, which could be provoked by mere
doubt concerning the aims of the Iranian programme. It
is our duty, finally, to prevent a conflict leading to
disastrous consequences in an unstable region.
That being said, the door of dialogue remains
open. This includes discussions on the Tehran Research
Reactor. Fully mindful of Brazil and Turkey’s efforts,
France, the United States and Russia have written to
the IAEA Director General to share with him the
problematic issues raised by the Tehran agreement. We
will propose an experts meeting with Iran as soon as
possible to reach agreement on these issues. We are
also ready to consider other confidence-building
measures, as spelled out in the resolution that we have
just adopted.
However, this is a decision that we cannot take
alone. It is now up to Iranian leaders to take the hand
offered to them, as we have urged them to do for nearly
seven years. It is up to them to consider the interests of
their people, rather than to pursue a dangerous dream
of power at the cost of regional stability. It is up to
them to choose integration into international society,
reaping its dividends rather than the growing isolation
to which they are condemning themselves. If they are
ready for this, we will be there to help them.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): Uganda voted in favour
of resolution 1929 (2010) because we fully support the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT). The resolution has a mechanism for review,
including the suspension and removal of the measures
imposed, provided that Iran complies with its
obligations and the NPT. It is important that all nuclear
activities of State parties to the NPT be verified for
their compliance with the safeguards of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
The Agency has raised a number of issues in its
reports regarding the Iranian nuclear programme that
require clarification by Iran so as to assure the
international community that its nuclear programme is
for peaceful purposes. Uganda commends and supports
the diplomatic efforts of Brazil and Turkey that
resulted in the Tehran declaration. We are convinced
that such confidence-building initiatives are useful in
the search for a peaceful solution to the Iranian nuclear
issue.
Uganda reiterates that it is important to continue
all efforts towards a negotiated solution that guarantees
Iran’s inalienable right to develop its nuclear energy,
while at the same time assuring the international
community that its programme is exclusively for
peaceful purposes.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Russia voted in favour of resolution 1929
(2010) on the basis of its consistent principled position
regarding the Iranian nuclear issue. We have
consistently advocated a resolution of all the
international community’s questions concerning Iran’s
nuclear programme through dialogue and constructive
cooperation with Tehran.
We hope that Iran will view the resolution as a
further signal of the need to respond positively to the
numerous appeals of the E3+3 and the entire
international community to fulfil its non-proliferation
obligations and to launch substantial negotiations with
the E3+3 to ensure full and transparent cooperation
with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
in order to clarify all issues related to the Iranian
nuclear programme.
Russia has made and will continue to make
significant multilateral and independent efforts to
convince Iran to cooperate constructively with the
E3+3 and to fulfil in good faith all provisions of the
relevant Security Council resolutions and IAEA
decisions. In building the Bushehr nuclear power plant,
Russia is reaffirming not just in words but in actions
the fundamental right of Iran, as a party to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), to
develop a peaceful nuclear energy programme.
Unfortunately, the intensive efforts of Russia and our
partners in the E3+3 have yet to receive an appropriate
response from Iran. Tehran has yet to take the decisions
necessary to pave the way to its full enjoyment of
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and the
strengthening of the nuclear non-proliferation regime.
Under these conditions and in the context of the
dual-path approach developed by the E3+3 and
S/PV.6335
910-39596
approved by the Security Council, it has become
inevitable that additional restrictive measures should
be adopted to constrain development in those Iranian
activities that run counter to the task of strengthening
the non-proliferation regime.
The Security Council’s adoption of sanctions is a
forced step, and we approach their use in a balanced
and proportional way. During the negotiation of the
resolution, Russian delegation’s efforts were targeted at
ensuring that the Council’s decision aimed exclusively
at bolstering the non-proliferation regime and
contained no provision that would harm the well-being
of the Iranian people.
We are firmly convinced that there is no
alternative to a peaceful, diplomatic settlement of the
Iranian nuclear issue. This postulate was reflected in
the text of the resolution. We expect that Tehran will
ultimately signal its full readiness to engage in
negotiations with the E3+3. In the framework of such
dialogue, the critical discussion of the Iranian nuclear
programme would also address the E3+3’s proposed
package of constructive incentives for our Iranian
partners, in cooperation with the IAEA, to remove any
lingering doubts about the programme. This package
remains on the table, as reaffirmed by the resolution
just adopted and the statement of the E3+3 Foreign
Ministers at today’s meeting.
We are convinced that the contents of the package
fully demonstrate the benefits to Iran of cooperation
with the international community in various fields,
which is impossible in the context of its disregard for
Security Council resolutions and IAEA decisions on its
nuclear programme. We hope that Iran will see these
clear benefits and initiate cooperation with the E3+3,
including in implementing all the understandings
reached in Geneva on 1 October 2009. Clarifying the
nature of Iran’s nuclear programme through Tehran’s
full and transparent cooperation with the IAEA could
reverse the Security Council’s sanctions against the
country and afford it the opportunity to fully exercise
all the rights enjoyed by non-nuclear parties to the
NPT, including to uranium enrichment for nuclear
power plant fuel production.
We hope that the fuel-swap mechanism for the
Tehran Research Reactor, which Russia originated, will
be implemented. We welcome Brazil and Turkey’s
efforts in that regard. Relevant work related to this
initiative is continuing within the framework of the
Vienna Group, with our active participation.
In conclusion, I should like again to underscore
that we expect that Iran will act in a pragmatic and
reasonable manner and respond positively to the six
facilitators’ openness to dialogue to effectively resolve
the Iranian nuclear issue in the interest of the entire
international community.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): Japan voted in favour of
resolution 1929 (2010). I would like to explain the
reasons for Japan’s support for this important
resolution.
The Iranian nuclear issue has been a source of
serious concern to the international community since
Iran’s extensive nuclear activities were revealed in
2002. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
and the Security Council have been closely engaged
and taken a series of decisions to resolve this issue of
international concern. As a country strongly committed
to the regime of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, Japan upholds the importance of
nuclear non-proliferation and the peaceful use of
nuclear energy. It should be stressed, however, that the
right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy entails the
responsibility to comply with requirements and
obligations under the relevant IAEA and Security
Council resolutions. The Council needs to squarely
address the fact that Iran continues to violate its
resolutions and fails to meet IAEA requirements.
The Tehran declaration on the exchange of
Iranian low-enriched uranium and nuclear fuel for the
Tehran Research Reactor would be a positive step if it
were properly implemented. We pay tribute to the
efforts of Brazil and Turkey to contribute to a
diplomatic solution. However, this accord does not
address the core issue of Iran’s obligations under
Security Council resolutions. That is to say that Iran is
obliged to suspend all enrichment-related activities
until it fully satisfies and clarifies the international
community’s concerns about the nuclear programme
and thereby restores confidence. Even after the Tehran
declaration, Iran continues to enrich and accumulate
more low-enriched uranium, including activities to
enrich up to 20 per cent, in violation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. The recent report of the
IAEA Director General of 31 May once again states
that Iran has not provided the necessary cooperation to
S/PV.6335
10-3959610
permit the IAEA to confirm that all nuclear material in
Iran is for peaceful activities.
Japan supports the dual-track approach taken by
the E3+3 group — and endorsed by the Security
Council — to solve the Iranian nuclear issue through
dialogue and the necessary pressure, since resolution
1929 (2010) contains a firm but targeted and balanced
message urging Iran to change its policy. Iran should
intensify its cooperation with the IAEA to fully clarify
outstanding and new issues in order to prove that its
extensive nuclear activities are exclusively for peaceful
purposes. Iran should also faithfully implement the
decisions of the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 1929 (2010), so as to restore
international trust and confidence.
Resolution 1929 (2010) is in line with the dual-
track approach. In no way does it mean closing doors
to continuing efforts to achieve diplomatic solutions
through dialogue with Iran. I would like to underscore
that the window for diplomatic efforts is open. Such
thinking is well reflected in resolution 1929 (2010). On
its part, Japan continues to seize every opportunity to
urge Iran to take the strategic decision to seek a
constructive solution to the nuclear issue.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Austria voted in
favour of resolution 1929 (2010). A decision of this
kind is never one to be taken lightly. From the time that
Iran’s undeclared nuclear materials and activities were
first confirmed by the International Atomic Energy
Agency in June 2003, Austria had hoped that the matter
could be resolved through negotiation. Insufficient
cooperation on the part of Iran led to the transmission
of the issue to the Security Council in March 2006.
Since that time, the Council has adopted a presidential
statement and five resolutions. Regrettably, Iran has
failed to address the core concerns of the international
community and to build confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of its nuclear programme.
Indeed, since the adoption of the last Council
resolution in September 2008, the existence of a new
undeclared enrichment facility has come to light and
Iran has begun to enrich uranium to 20 per cent, to
mention but two of the more recent developments. This
is all the more unfortunate as last month the Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) here in
New York demonstrated a new constructive approach
to non-proliferation issues. In the action plans adopted
on that occasion, all NPT member States underscored,
inter alia, the importance of cooperating with the
International Atomic Energy Agency on questions of
compliance.
As I indicated yesterday, Austria, in line with
long-standing European Union policy, remains
committed to the dual-track approach. In that context,
we reiterate our call on Iran to take up the offer of talks
with the High Representative of the European Union
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, in line with
paragraph 33 of the resolution just adopted.
While we believe that the additional measures
adopted today are necessary, we continue to stand
behind the two major incentive packages put forward
in June 2006 and June 2008. We hope that Iran will
take up the offer of China, France, Germany, the
Russian Federation, the United Kingdom and the
United States, as well as the High Representative of the
European Union, to resume dialogue on the nuclear
issue without preconditions, with a view to seeking a
comprehensive solution to this issue. In that context, I
wish to highlight in particular the commitment
contained in paragraph 37 of today’s resolution to
suspend the implementation of measures if and for so
long as Iran suspends all enrichment-related and
reprocessing activities, as verified by the International
Atomic Energy Agency, to allow for negotiations in
good faith in order to reach an early and mutually
acceptable outcome.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Security Council has just adopted a new resolution on
the Iranian nuclear issue. This is the sixth resolution
adopted by the Council on the matter since July 2006.
Like the previous five, the new resolution not only
reflects the concerns of the international community
about the Iranian nuclear issue, but also expresses the
aspiration of all parties to achieve an early and
peaceful settlement of the issue through diplomatic
negotiations. China calls on all members of the
international community to implement the resolution
comprehensively and in good faith. China has
consistently maintained that the actions taken by the
Security Council on the Iranian nuclear issue must
adhere to the following three principles.
First, it should contribute to the maintenance of
the international nuclear non-proliferation regime. As a
State party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, Iran should strictly fulfil its
S/PV.6335
1110-39596
obligations under the Treaty. In the meantime, its right
to the peaceful use of nuclear energy should be fully
respected and safeguarded. Secondly, the Security
Council’s actions should be conducive to peace and
stability in the Middle East, especially the Gulf region.
Thirdly, it should help to promote the current
momentum towards global economic recovery and not
affect the day-to-day lives of the Iranian people or
normal international trade and transactions.
The action taken by the Security Council should
be appropriate, incremental, clearly targeted and
commensurate with the actual practices of Iran in the
nuclear field. It should reinforce diplomatic efforts to
resolve the Iranian nuclear issue.
China was earnestly and constructive engaged in
the consultations on the draft resolution and worked
vigorously to ensure that the text fully reflected the
foregoing principles.
We are the view that sanctions can never
fundamentally resolve the Iranian nuclear issue. To
bring about a comprehensive and appropriate
settlement of the issue, it is imperative to return to the
track of dialogue and negotiation. The Security
Council’s adoption of this new resolution does not
mean that the door to diplomatic efforts is closed. The
new resolution is aimed at bringing Iran back to the
negotiating table and at activating a new round of
diplomatic efforts.
To that end, the sanctions mentioned in the new
resolution are reversible. In other words, if Iran
suspends uranium enrichment and reprocessing
activities and complies with the relevant resolutions of
the International Atomic Energy Agency and the
Security Council, the Council will suspend or even lift
its sanctions against Iran.
It has always been China’s view that Security
Council unity is essential to resolving the Iranian
nuclear issue. We have always maintained that the
importance of the unity of the Security Council, and
we are not in favour of hasty action. We believe that
we must make a greater effort to maintain the unity of
the Security Council.
Over the years, China has been committed to
peacefully resolving the Iranian nuclear issue through
diplomatic negotiations and has made unremitting
efforts in that regard. China welcomes and highly
values the tripartite agreement between Brazil, Turkey
and Iran on nuclear fuel exchange for the Tehran
Research Reactor. We hope the parties concerned will
make full use of the positive momentum created by the
agreement and will spare no effort to resolve the
Iranian nuclear issue peacefully through dialogue and
negotiations.
As the Security Council adopted its new
resolution on the Iranian nuclear issue, the E3+3
Foreign Ministers issued a joint statement reiterating
their commitment to resolving the issue through
diplomatic negotiations and expressing their readiness
to redouble diplomatic efforts towards the resumption
of negotiations. China hopes that the countries
concerned will, on the basis of equality and mutual
respect, strengthen contacts and dialogue, foster mutual
trust, dispel misgivings, address one another’s
concerns and seek a solution acceptable to all parties to
restart negotiations.
China will work along with all countries
concerned and continue to make its own contribution to
the peaceful settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue
through diplomatic means.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Lebanon
was among the first countries to accede to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). It
is therefore important for Lebanon to reaffirm that the
Treaty is extremely important in terms of the balance
among and interdependence of its three pillars:
disarmament, non-proliferation and the right to the
peaceful use of nuclear energy. For both Lebanon and
the Arab States in general, the Treaty is the cornerstone
of our response to the expectation of our peoples for a
world free of nuclear weapons.
On behalf of the Arab Group, Lebanon reaffirmed
this principle during last month’s NPT Review
Conference in New York. There, the need to attain the
universality of the Treaty was included among the core
priorities of the international community. In line with
our endeavour to attain the noble objective of freeing
the entire world of nuclear weapons, our Arab peoples
dream of the day when the people of the Middle East
can enjoy living in a region free of nuclear weapons, as
is the case with other regions and other peoples of the
world.
In this regard, we stress the importance of the
final document of the 2010 NPT Review Conference,
which reaffirms the call to transform the Middle East
into a zone free of nuclear weapons on the basis of the
S/PV.6335
10-3959612
decision of the 1995 Review and Extension Conference
and to develop a mechanism for its implementation.
Israel is the only country in our region that
possesses nuclear weapons. Israel should adhere to the
Non-Proliferation Treaty as a non-nuclear State and
subject all of its nuclear facilities to the comprehensive
safeguards regime of the International Atomic Energy
Agency.
It is very important for Lebanon to say that the
approach to non-proliferation issues should be
comprehensive and non-selective. However, a focus on
nuclear non-proliferation should not overshadow the
need to reaffirm the inherent and inalienable right of
all States parties to the NPT, including the Islamic
Republic of Iran, to the peaceful use of nuclear energy
in accordance with the rules and criteria established by
the International Atomic Energy Agency as well as its
comprehensive safeguards regime.
Thus, Lebanon believes that the understanding
reflected in the Tehran declaration on enriched uranium —
reached in May at the excellent initiative of Brazil and
Turkey — is a significant step towards a diplomatic
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue. My delegation has
reaffirmed several times before the Council that the
Tehran understanding provides an important
opportunity that we should all seize and deal with in a
positive manner.
Although that understanding did not have the
necessary support and was not given enough time to
yield the expected results, its elements still provide a
gateway for the required process of confidence
building. Even if the understanding does not dispel the
doubts and respond to the questions of many Council
members, the most effective response to any concerns
or questions about the Iranian nuclear issue will come
through further dialogue, not through sanctions. That is
Lebanon’s firm and well-known position of principle.
My Government has studied the issue of today’s
vote, and we have not at this time reached a final
position. For that reason, Lebanon abstained. However,
Lebanon believes, on the basis of its unwavering
positions, which I have just recalled, that today’s new
sanctions resolution is a sad setback for diplomatic
efforts.
We refuse to give up in the face of this situation,
and we call on all States, despite all the difficulties of
this situation, to immediately resume and intensify
international efforts, especially those of the E3+3. We
appreciate all the efforts made by the E3+3 in recent
years to reach, through responsible dialogue and due
flexibility, a solution to all pending issues with regard
to the Iranian nuclear programme on the basis of
mutual respect, constructive cooperation and the right
of all States parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to the peaceful
use of nuclear energy, to have access to nuclear energy
and to develop the relevant technologies in accordance
with the IAEA comprehensive safeguards agreement.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Our vote this morning
was informed by respect for our unwavering
commitment to the ideals of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
Adherence to the NPT does not preclude any country
from optimizing its full use of nuclear technology for
peaceful purposes; rather, it guarantees the inalienable
right of parties to the peaceful use of nuclear
technology. The NPT also remains the best framework
for achieving disarmament and the non-proliferation of
nuclear weapons. Indeed, Nigeria is pursuing a
peaceful nuclear programme within the parameters of
the NPT, including its safeguards agreement and
additional protocol, in full cooperation and
collaboration with the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). Thus, we recognize Iran’s right to
pursue a peaceful nuclear programme.
Where, however, questions arise and evidence
suggests that a country’s nuclear programme and
activities are inconsistent with the provisions of the
NPT, it becomes a matter of great concern to us.
Having followed very carefully the discussions on
Iran’s nuclear activities, Nigeria, like other countries,
has been unable to fully understand whether Iran’s
nuclear programme is entirely and strictly for peaceful
purposes. Therefore, it is incumbent on Iran dispel the
doubts that surround its nuclear activities. Specifically,
we are convinced that Iran, as a State party to the NPT,
has clearly violated its obligations under the Treaty.
Furthermore, Nigeria does not understand Iran’s failure
to cooperate with the IAEA. We are also troubled by
Iran’s failure to fully implement its safeguards
agreement, including the additional protocol.
These worrisome failures have been compounded
by the lack of clarity on the sudden spike in the
building of nuclear sites, some of which were shrouded
in secrecy. Moreover, the decision by Iran to enrich
uranium to a higher level of 20 per cent and its
S/PV.6335
1310-39596
insistence on continuing its enrichment programme
raise genuine doubt about the real direction of its
nuclear activities.
Notwithstanding our misgivings, we believe that
a dual-track approach that combines pressure with
intense political and diplomatic activities is the best
way to resolve the Iranian nuclear conundrum. We are
satisfied that the resolution that we have just adopted
recognizes this and commits all countries to pursue a
dual-track approach regarding Iran. We welcome the
explicit reaffirmation that outstanding issues can best
be resolved and confidence built in the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme by Iran
responding positively to all the calls that the Council
and the IAEA Board of Governors have made on Iran.
The emphasis on the importance of political and
diplomatic efforts to find a negotiated solution
guaranteeing that Iran’s nuclear programme is
exclusively for peaceful purposes gives hope that all
the doors are not closed on Iran. In that regard, we
applaud Brazil and Turkey for their exemplary
initiative in signing with Iran at the highest political
levels the joint Tehran declaration of 17 May 2010. We
hope that it will still be possible to follow through on
the joint declaration as a concrete confidence-building
measure. Cooperation with the IAEA and the
resumption of early dialogue with Baroness Ashton
will give further impetus to a political settlement of the
dispute.
Finally, I would like to echo the accent placed in
the resolution on the fact that nothing compels States to
take measures or actions exceeding the scope of the
resolution, including the use of force or the threat of
use of force in responding to Iran. Satisfied with the
intent of the resolution and the recognition of the need
for continued political and diplomatic efforts, Nigeria
voted in favour of resolution 1929 (2010).
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to stress once again that Bosnia and Herzegovina
was among those who nourished the hope that the issue
at stake could be resolved through negotiations and in a
manner that would satisfy the concerns of all.
However, we find ourselves confronted with further
aggravation regarding a comprehensive solution to the
issue of nuclear capacity development in the Islamic
Republic of Iran.
As a State party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), Bosnia
and Herzegovina is fully committed to implementing
the Treaty, which represents a unique and irreplaceable
framework for the promotion of security and the
prevention of proliferation of nuclear weapons in the
world. It is our strong belief that only full
implementation of NPT safeguards agreements can
ensure that nuclear energy is used in a safe and
responsible manner. The role of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) as the implementing
agency remains the most reliable instrument to verify
compliance with the provisions of the Treaty.
Furthermore, we consider that the right to the
peaceful use of nuclear energy by all States is also
important and must be fully respected and protected.
Iran is no exception to that rule. It should be made
clear, nevertheless, that the scope and objectives of any
nuclear programme, including the Iranian programme,
have to remain in accordance with the international
rules and must be subjected to the verifiable and
transparent inspection regime of the IAEA.
The Security Council has adopted resolutions
calling on Iran to comply with the provisions of the
NPT and to extend its full cooperation to IAEA
inspections. However, according to the most recent
reports, the international community did not get a clear
and unequivocal answer from Iran, which has put the
Security Council in the position of looking for
additional measures to address this issue of utmost
importance.
Bearing in mind the importance of restoring
confidence in the strictly peaceful nature of the Iranian
nuclear programme, Bosnia and Herzegovina urges
Iran to comply with all resolutions of the Security
Council and the IAEA Board of Governors, and to
implement the additional protocol. We firmly believe
that a negotiated settlement, based on mutual trust and
respect, is the best option. In that regard, we welcome
the recent efforts by Turkey and Brazil as a significant
confidence-building measure.
The resolution adopted today by the Security
Council is tough. However, Bosnia and Herzegovina is
of the view that the resolution does not close the way
to further diplomatic efforts and an ultimate negotiated
solution. We believe that additional efforts and support
from various parties could contribute to the creation of
an environment conducive to readdressing the current
situation and finding a satisfactory negotiated solution,
which is our ultimate goal.
S/PV.6335
10-3959614
Therefore, once again, we call upon the parties
directly involved to explore all possible means that
could pave the way to a peaceful solution of this issue
of particular importance. Such an undertaking would
be beneficial first and foremost for the people of Iran
and would open new avenues for cooperation between
Iran and the international community.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity.
Mexico is deeply commited to nuclear
disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful use of
nuclear energy — the three pillars of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We are
concerned by any actions that could undermine the
non-proliferation regime that the international
community itself has adopted, particularly when they
represent new threats to international peace and
security in regions where tension, conflict and distrust
among States prevail.
The case of Iran is not a new one for the Security
Council, and unfortunately it is difficult to dissociate
the debate on its controversial nuclear programme from
its foreign policy pronouncements which run counter to
the Charter of the United Nations and which give rise to
concern and mistrust among a large portion of the
international community.
The peaceful use of nuclear energy must be
accompanied by a commitment — freely undertaken by
each State — to respect the legal obligation not to
carry out any activity related to a nuclear programme
that has purposes other than peaceful ones. Iran must
comply more transparently with the decisions of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
responding to all requests for information on its
nuclear programme. And Iran must also comply with
the resolutions of the Security Council, with an express
and above all verifiable renunciation of the possession
of nuclear weapons. The Iranian Government must
make every effort to redress the shortfall of confidence
that a large portion of the international community
feels with respect to the lack of transparency in the
development of Iran’s nuclear programme. This would
unquestionably contribute to dialogue and cooperation
as a way of resolving disputes in the region. It is Iran,
not the Security Council, that must earn the trust of the
international community.
We reaffirm the importance of continuing to deal
with the Iranian nuclear case through dialogue and the
importance of Iran continuing to cooperate with the
IAEA to clarify pending questions about its nuclear
programme in conformity with Security Council
resolutions.
Today, we voted in favour of a resolution
imposing sanctions on specific individuals and entities,
sanctions that do not seek to harm the general
population. These sanctions target nuclear proliferation
activities and are completely reversible if the
Government of Iran meets the requests of the Security
Council. We urge the Government of Iran to meet those
requests.
In our view, recent diplomatic initiatives on this
matter are insufficient because they do not include a
clear commitment to putting an end to nuclear-material
enrichment activities and do not address the concerns
of the international community. It is spurious to say
that we are faced with an ultimatum or a dilemma
between a peaceful solution and the use of force. In
fact, after three rounds of sanctions, the path of
dialogue with Iran remains open. A diplomatic solution
is not incompatible with the adoption of sanctions,
when the situation calls for it, and sanctions in no way
close off dialogue and negotiation.
Mexico considers that the agreement we have
reached is balanced. It puts greater pressure on Iran to
fulfil its obligations under previous Security Council
resolutions and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT), while leaving open the path
by which Iran can return to the negotiating table and
reach a diplomatic outcome if it meets its obligations
under Council resolutions and the NPT.
In that context, Mexico is convinced that the
creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle
East, as emphasized at this year’s NPT Review
Conference, should be part of a broader political
understanding guaranteeing peaceful coexistence
among the sovereign States of the region, including a
future Palestinian State, and addressing the legitimate
security concerns of those States.
In line with our pacifist outlook and our tradition
of devotion to international law, we believe in the
negotiated resolution of disputes. Mexico will continue
to be committed to dialogue, peaceful means and the
rejection of the use of force to resolve this issue.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
S/PV.6335
1510-39596
I now invite the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran to take a seat at the Council table and
to make his statement.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
never seen this Chamber as crowded as I see it today,
so I must welcome all my colleagues who are here to
watch this debate. It reminds me of the football game
between the United States and Iran at the World Cup in
1998: the whole world was watching it.
Before entering this Chamber, I was refreshing
my memory of history. History is indeed a wonderful
instructor, especially when it follows us to this very
moment. A wise man used to say that it is not history
that repeats itself; it is we who repeat the same
mistakes. A review of our bitter past memories,
together with a close look at how this Council still acts
today, proves that we are still dealing with a biased and
unjust international system that is based on the
hegemony of the most powerful.
In order to place them on record for the
conscience of all peace-loving people around the
world, I would like to say a few words about the unfair
pressures that our nation has endured due to the
aggression and intervention of some of the same
countries whose representatives are sitting around this
table today and are pushing for the imposition of more
pressure against the Iranian nation. Let me talk about
our own historical experiences.
This is not, of course, accidental or spontaneous.
Comparisons in this case are amazingly instructive.
The case that members of the Security Council have
considered today has characteristics that are identical
to those of the case against my country in 1951. The
key words are quite similar: energy, independence and
big-Power intervention. In the early 1950s, the United
Kingdom was arguing exactly the same way as today,
saying that “nationalization of Iran’s oil industry is
putting in danger the peace and security of the region
and the world”. Just replace the phrase “oil
nationalization” from accusations against Iran at that
time with today’s phrase “nuclear activities” and the
result will be quite workable statements for diplomats
who are repeating history.
It is worth remembering, however, that when Iran
won the case regarding its oil nationalization in The
Hague, the United Kingdom sold a trumped-up anti-
communist story to President Eisenhower and a United
States-led coup reinstated and supported the Shah’s
dictatorship in Iran. Needless to say, the coup d’état
was organized and implemented under the false pretext
of maintaining international peace and security and
respect for democracy and freedom — qualifications
which were later used to justify many other, similar
subversive actions against other developing nations in
order to preserve or expand the interests of
international cartels and consortia. The message was
clear: No one should be allowed to endanger the vital
interests of the capitalist world.
Yet again, history will not forget the stark
similarity and sharp contrast that exist between the
efforts to impose anti-Iranian sanctions at the present
time and those of the 1950s against the nationalization
of the Iranian oil industry. The stark similarity is that
the axis of the United Kingdom and United States has
been, at both times, at work to deprive the Iranian
nation of its absolute right to achieve self sufficiency
in energy production, whether through hydrocarbons or
peaceful nuclear energy.
The difference, however, is that the Islamic
Republic of Iran today is more powerful than ever,
supported by its people — who now have three decades
of political experience, a scientific and industrial
renaissance and a rich cultural heritage — and enjoys
the support of the overwhelming majority of nations.
The hostile actions of these few Powers against
our nation are not new. The United States and its allies
even intervened on behalf of Saddam in his aggression
against Iran, providing him with chemical weapons and
other military support. That deadly support included
increasing supplies of chemical and biological agents
even after the first United Nations report was issued on
the use of these lethal weapons by Saddam against
civilian Kurds in northern Iraq and against Iranian
troops. The first reaction of these Powers was to deny
the accounts. The second reaction was to declare any
response to the attacks to be premature. The third
response was to sharply escalate the delivery of arms
and chemical and biological agents. Again, no action
was taken by the Security Council against this brutal
use of chemical weapons because of the threat of veto
by the very providers of these inhumane weapons.
They are the same Powers that imposed this resolution
on the Security Council today.
As soon as the United States saw that the victory
of Iran was imminent in the war, it entered into direct
confrontation with Iran by, among other things,
S/PV.6335
10-3959616
shooting down an Iranian passenger aircraft. The
inaction of the Security Council was again outrageous.
I will not dwell on the abuse of this body and the
greatest lies of modern history articulated here by yet
again the same Powers when they attempted to justify
their invasion of Iraq. The United States and the United
Kingdom again forged their own coalition and invaded
Iraq under the false pretext of searching for weapons of
mass destruction.
The Islamic Republic of Iran is determined to
exercise its inalienable right to nuclear technology for
peaceful purposes and to build on its own scientific
advances in developing various peaceful aspects of this
technology. At the same time, as a victim of the use of
weapons of mass destruction in the recent past, Iran
has rejected and opposed the development and use of
all such inhumane weapons on religious as well as
security grounds. The Leader of the Islamic Republic
of Iran has on several occasions, including in his
message to the Tehran international conference on
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, held in
April 2010 in Tehran, declared that nuclear weapons
are forbidden. I brought that message to the attention
of this body in my letter circulated as document
S/2010/203, in which he stated:
“We consider the use of such weapons as haram
(religiously forbidden) and believe that it is
everyone’s duty to make efforts to secure
humanity against this great disaster.”
(S/2010/203, annex, p. 4)
Furthermore, the presence and statement of the
President of the Islamic Republic of Iran at the Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) also
underlined Iran’s fundamental rejection of nuclear
weapons, as well as the need to strengthen and
revitalize the non-proliferation Treaty. This is yet
another indication of our great commitment to NPT
issues and our concern about the dangers of nuclear
weapons and the urgent need for their total eradication
from the face of the Earth.
Iran indeed has maintained close collaboration
with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
and indeed went even beyond its legal obligations in
this cooperation. On many other occasions, I have
already elaborated upon numerous examples of Iran’s
robust cooperation with the Agency; here, I shall limit
myself to saying that, since February 2003, the Agency
has conducted over 4,500 person-days of inspections in
Iran, which represent unprecedented verification
activities in a State party since the creation of the
Agency.
However, despite this unprecedented, robust and
proactive cooperation with the IAEA, a few western
countries continue their unfair and provocative
behaviour and hostile attitudes against my country by
getting the Security Council unnecessarily involved in
this issue and pursuing such politically motivated
resolutions. The Council has heard many false
allegations against Iran, including that Lady Ashton
was approached to meet with Mr. Jalili. I am not going
to elaborate any further on that one.
A striking example of the lack of sincerity of
those countries that make false accusations against Iran
on the nuclear issue was manifest in connection with
the deal on the supply of fuel for the Tehran Research
Reactor, which was in fact put on the table after our
request for the Agency’s assistance in purchasing
20 per cent-enriched fuel specifically for the Tehran
Research Reactor, which produces radioisotopes for
medical purposes for more than 800,000 cancer-
affected patients. While we have proved our ability to
enrich uranium to higher levels for the production of
the fuel needed for the Tehran Reactor, we preferred, in
a gesture of good will, to exchange our low-enriched
fuel of 3.5 per cent for fuel enriched to the 20 per cent
level needed for the Reactor. However, a few countries,
in a miscalculated and politically motivated action,
tabled a resolution at the IAEA Board of Governors in
November 2009, immediately following the discussion
that we had in October. The same thing is happening
here following Brazil and Turkey’s deal with Iran.
Again, something has happened to thwart the goodwill
of those countries, which I hope will not occur.
In addition to that, provocative remarks made by
some American and European officials have raised
serious suspicions among the Iranian people and
officials regarding the American and European
officials’ real intentions with respect to the uranium
exchange proposal, damaged the atmosphere and
deepened the sense of mistrust.
Despite this, we responded positively to the
efforts of two members of the Council, Turkey and
Brazil, which sincerely and at the highest level tried to
pursue a deal that was actually what the Vienna Group
had wished them to achieve. We displayed our good
S/PV.6335
1710-39596
will and seriousness by agreeing to that initiative,
which led to the Tehran declaration on the exchange of
fuel. Here, I should like to express the gratitude of the
Iranian Government and nation for the sincere efforts
made by the Governments of Brazil and Turkey, which
opened a new window of opportunity for further
cooperation. But instead of welcoming the Tehran
declaration, unfortunately — and to the great surprise
of the international community, which had
overwhelmingly supported the declaration — the same
few Powers immediately introduced this politically
motivated resolution.
Those who unfairly accused the Islamic Republic
of Iran of a lack of cooperation are today showing no
respect for what they initially encouraged these two
members of the Council to do. This yet again
highlights the bitter fact that what matters to these few
Powers is their narrow political interests. It shows that
they will break their promises whenever they so wish
and that they have respect neither for other members of
the Council nor for the pledges they have themselves
made. What is at stake today is the credibility of the
Security Council, which has been turned into a tool in
the toolbox of a few countries that do not hesitate to
abuse it when and where their interests require.
One day, there should be an end to the
unrestrained and rampant application of double
standards that is unfortunately being practiced by this
Council. Some powerful members of the Council
should provide answers to the many legitimate
questions of international public opinion with regard to
their behaviour in this Council. They should explain
why they have incapacitated this body to react to the
threats of resort to the use of force, and even of nuclear
weapons, against Iran, uttered so vividly at the highest
levels by the United States and as reflected in the
United States Nuclear Posture Review, which exempts
Iran from negative security assurances. They should
respond to the question of why they have never
allowed the Council to take any action with regard to
the threats made on a daily basis by the criminal Israeli
regime against Iran in violation of the United Nations
Charter.
Indeed, they should also explain to the
international community why they are pushing the
Council to take action against a nation that is only
trying to exercise its legal and inalienable rights, while
at the same time the same few countries resort to every
possible effort to prevent the Security Council from
taking action against the Israeli regime’s violations of
the most basic principles of international law and
international humanitarian law, as documented by the
Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48), and have repeatedly
prevented this body from moving to stop the massive
aggression of the Zionist regime against the Palestinian
and Lebanese peoples. There should be an answer on
the part of those who prevented this body from
adopting a strong resolution in condemnation of the
massacre on board the freedom flotilla ship and forced
the Council to limit its action to adopting a mere
presidential statement on that grave, brutal and
criminal act, which was a clear example of State
terrorism. There should also be an answer as to why
this Council has not been given the slightest chance to
address the issue of the Israeli regime’s nuclear
arsenal, despite its compulsive propensity to engage in
aggression and carnage.
I wish to conclude by stressing that no amount of
pressure or mischief will be able to break our nation’s
determination to pursue and defend its legal and
inalienable rights. Iran, as one of the most powerful
and stable countries in the region, has never bowed and
will never bow to the hostile actions and pressures of
these few Powers, and will continue to defend its
rights.
I have again to express my sincere thanks to the
delegations of Turkey and Brazil for voting against
today’s resolution, and to the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon for not supporting it.
History will commemorate those actions taken today in
this Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of the United Kingdom has asked to take
the floor a second time.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
regret the need to rebut some of the comments made by
the Permanent Representative of Iran, but his distorted
account of history — including personal attacks on my
country — simply demean him and seem designed as
an excuse for Iran not to respond to international
concerns about its nuclear programme.
The attacks on the integrity of the Security
Council are an insult to my colleagues here now and
over the past four years. I hope that, on more sober
reflection, Iran will respond honestly to the concerns
that are expressed in the resolution that has just been
adopted and that have been expressed by this Council
S/PV.6335
10-3959618
over the past four years on Iran’s nuclear programme,
and that it will engage seriously in negotiations on that
programme.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council
will remain seized of the matter.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.
