United Nations S/PV.6751
Security Council
Sixty-seventh year
6751stmeeting
Saturday, 14 April 2012, 11 a.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.
12-29516 (E)
*1229516*
President: Ms. Rice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (United States of America)
Members: Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Musayev
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Li Baodong
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Osorio
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Araud
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wittig
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Rosenthal
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Loulichki
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Tarar
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Moraes Cabral
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Churkin
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Sangqu
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Menan
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
S/PV.6751
12-295162
The meeting was called to order at 11.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2012/219, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Colombia, France,
Germany, Morocco, Portugal, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Azerbaijan, China, Colombia, France, Germany,
Guatemala, India, Morocco, Pakistan, Portugal,
Russian Federation, South Africa, Togo, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.
The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2042 (2012).
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2042 (2012), which authorizes the
deployment of an advance monitoring team to Syria.
We regret that it comes only after the Syrian people
have for more than one year suffered unimaginable
brutality at the hands of a regime that has prioritized its
own survival over the needs, rights and aspirations of
the people it should serve and protect.
For more than one year, the Syrian regime has
murdered, arbitrarily detained, tortured, abused and
terrorized innocent civilians. The death toll stands at
more than 10,000; more than 10,000 remain in
detention and 45,000 have fled across the borders.
Throughout, the Syrian regime has ignored the calls of
the international community, the League of Arab
States, the General Assembly, the Human Rights
Council and the Security Council to stop the killing. It
has made numerous commitments that it has failed to
implement.
The six-point proposal of Mr. Kofi Annan, Joint
Special Envoy of the United Nations and the Arab
League, offers the last opportunity to finally put an end
to the bloodshed. We pay tribute to Mr. Annan for his
tireless efforts over the past six weeks. The relative
de-escalation of violence achieved on 12 April was a
tentative and positive first step towards ending the
crisis. But it is just that, a first step. Tens of innocent
civilians have been killed since 12 April, and heavy
weapons remain deployed in population centres.
Nevertheless, a narrow window now exists to improve
the situation on the ground. That is why the Council
has authorized the deployment of an advance mission
to monitor the cessation of violence — and why, if it is
sustained, we will work quickly to authorize a larger
mission to monitor the cessation of violence and
support the full implementation of Mr. Annan’s six-
point proposal.
Today’s resolution is absolutely clear about the
commitments that the Syrian regime must now fulfil.
First, it must end the movement of troops towards, and
begin to pull back from, population centres, and cease
the use of heavy weapons. As the Joint Special Envoy
has made clear, it must also return troops and heavy
weapons to their barracks. Secondly, it must implement
the full six-point proposal in its entirety. Thirdly, it
must ensure that the monitoring mission that we have
authorized can operate effectively, with full freedom of
movement and access, freedom to interview individuals
without retaliation against them, allow unobstructed
communications and guarantee the mission’s safety
without prejudice to freedom of movement. The
opposition, too, must refrain from violence and ensure
that it gives the regime no excuse to renege on its
commitments. Once the cessation of violence has been
sustained, all parties must move quickly to engage in a
Syrian-led political transition that meets the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): For many months now, the situation in Syria
S/PV.6751
312-29516
has, understandably, been the subject of the constant
attention and alarm of the international community.
There have been to many casualties and too much
suffering for the Syrian people, with too many
destructive consequences if the crisis continues to
ratchet up — not only for Syria itself but for regional
peace and stability.
From the very beginning, Russia has firmly and
consistently called for the non-use of force by all
parties and has emphasized the need for a political
solution to the problems confronting the country
through an inclusive political dialogue conducted by
the Syrians themselves. Based on respect for Syria’s
sovereignty, we have cautioned against destructive
attempts at external interference and against imposing
any kind of illusory fixes.
We supported today’s Security Council resolution
owing to the need for a rapid deployment to Syria of
the United Nations advance observer mission. The
resolution addresses requirements both for the
Government of Syria and for opposition groups to fully
cooperate with monitors and fulfil the Annan six-point
proposals. On the initiative of Russia and a number of
other members of the Council, the initial draft
resolution underwent substantive changes to make it
more balanced, appropriately reflect realities and take
into account the prerogatives of the Syrian Government
in receiving the observer mission on its territory.
The observers, which will include a Russian
officer, will face a difficult challenge. They will need a
high degree of professionalism, courage and
objectivity. It is necessary to establish favourable
conditions for the work of the observers, including
from the perspective of ensuring security. We now
await the Secretary-General’s early submission to the
Council of specific proposals for launching a broad-
scale United Nations observer presence following
consultations with the Government of Syria.
We also agreed to the resolution based on the
need to support the Annan mission. Russia not only
welcomed the decision of the Secretary-General to
appoint Mr. Annan but, countering those who predicted
the allegedly inevitable failure of the Envoy’s mission,
we also provided vigorous and effective support. We
are now at an extremely critical juncture. It is essential
that all Syrian parties, including the armed opposition,
quickly refrain from violence, strictly abide by the
Annan plan and begin to organize a broad-based
negotiating process. Russian will continue to be
prepared to make its active contribution to meeting this
challenge.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): This is the first Security
Council resolution on Syria since the violent repression
by the Syrian security forces started. We welcome the
unity of the Council today. It comes deplorably late
but, hopefully, not too late. Thanks to the
commendable efforts of Joint Special Envoy Kofi
Annan, the cessation of fighting has by and large held
in Syria. However, as we speak, reports are coming in
of renewed attacks by the Syrian security forces. We
must therefore remain vigilant. Too many commitments
made by Damascus in the past have not been kept. We
must not tolerate further brinksmanship. The time for
delaying tactics is definitely over.
It is clear that the Syrian Government has yet to
fully comply with the commitments made to the Joint
Special Envoy and as demanded by the Security
Council. Damascus has yet to make the fundamental
change of course demanded by Kofi Annan to enable a
durable cessation of violence in all its forms.
Damascus has to halt military forward movements and
return troops and heavy weapons to their barracks.
Only when those steps are fully implemented will the
conditions for a sustainable cessation of violence exist.
Equally important, all other forms of violence and
human rights violations — such as arbitrary detention,
torture, abduction, sexual violence and violence against
children — must end immediately.
We applaud the fact that the opposition groups
have committed to a cessation of fighting despite
having been shelled by Government forces until the
very last moment.
The swift deployment of the advance observer
team will be an important element for the sustainable
cessation of violence. We look forward to the report of
the Secretary-General on a potential observer mission
next. But one thing is clear: the conditions for the
deployment of observers must be in place. The Syrian
Government must ensure that the advance team and the
possible follow-on mission can freely and effectively
implement their mandate. We know of too many other
examples where United Nations missions have become
a pawn in tactical games. We must not let that happen
again. The credibility of the Security Council is at
stake. We must send a clear message that any such
impediments would come at a high price.
S/PV.6751
12-295164
The deployment of an observer mission should
also not lead to a mere freezing of the situation. A
United Nations mission on the ground cannot serve as
a substitute for the lack of will by the parties. Close
and early linkage with the political transition process
as foreseen in the six-point proposal by Mr. Annan is
required, not least as an eventual exit option for the
observers. One more thing: accountability for the
crimes committed must be a central element of the
transition process. There cannot be a return to the
status quo ante.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our full
support for the laudable efforts of Joint Special Envoy
Kofi Annan and his team.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China consistently maintains that the independence,
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Syria and
the choice and will of the Syrian people should be
respected. The Syrian crisis should be resolved in a
just, peaceful and proper manner through political
dialogue. We urge all parties, including the Syrian
Government and the opposition factions, to strictly
honour their commitments to cease all acts of violence
and create conditions for the launch of a Syrian-led
inclusive political process.
Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan’s mediation is
the practical way out and an important channel for the
political settlement of the Syrian crisis. China
appreciates and supports the efforts made by
Mr. Annan for a political solution of the Syrian crisis.
We urge all parties in Syria to take real actions to
support and cooperate with Mr. Annan in his mediation
and continue the process of a political solution of the
Syrian issue.
We call on the international community to
continue its support for Mr. Annan’s mediation efforts.
We need to guard against any attempt to create
difficulties or trouble for that mediation. Any words or
deeds that stand in the way of Mr. Annan’s mediation
efforts are unacceptable and must be firmly opposed.
What the relevant parties say and do about the Syrian
issue should contribute to an easing of the tensions, a
cessation of violence, the launch of a political dialogue
and the maintenance of peace and stability in Syria and
the Middle East, rather than the other way around.
The imminent deployment of the advance team of
the supervision mission in Syria with the consent of the
Syrian Government to swiftly kick off the task of
supervision and the cessation of violence will help
consolidate the progress made by Joint Special Envoy
Annan’s mediation efforts, fully implement
Mr. Annan’s six-point proposal and launch the political
process at an early date. We hope that the advance team
will fully respect Syria’s sovereignty, act in strict
accordance with the mandate of the Security Council,
carry out its mission in a neutral, objective and just
manner, make good preparations for the deployment of
the supervision mission and play an active and
constructive role in sustaining the cessation of violence
and bringing about lasting peace and stability in Syria.
We also hope that the Syrian Government and the
other relevant parties will vigorously support and
cooperate with the advance team. We hope that the
Secretary-General will put forward his proposals on the
deployment of the supervision mission as soon as
possible.
In view of those remarks, China voted in favour
of resolution 2042 (2012), which the Security Council
just adopted
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): The
Kingdom of Morocco appreciates the efforts of the
Security Council and its adoption by consensus today
of its first resolution on the crisis in the sisterly
country of Syria (resolution 2042 (2012)). The
resolution is a practical translation of the hard work
and intentions of the Security Council to further the
success of the good-faith efforts of Joint Special Envoy
Kofi Annan on behalf of the United Nations and the
League of Arab States to end the violence, achieve a
political and peaceful solution to the crisis in Syria,
and implement resolution 66/253, the declarations of
5 April 2012 and the relevant resolutions of the League
of Arab States.
Since becoming a member of the Security
Council, Morocco has worked with the other members
in all efforts to enable the Council to speak with one
voice, as that was the only way to influence events in
Syria. We have also emphasized the positive and
effective influence that all relevant parties have had on
the country. We believe that today’s resolution is an
important milestone. We hope that it will be a decisive
basis for the Security Council to address the situation
in Syria.
The League of Arab States, which, since the
beginning of the crisis, has played out an effective and
constructive role in order to end the bloodshed and
S/PV.6751
512-29516
resolve the situation in Syria in a wise manner and
without resort to violence, expressed at its most recent
summit, held in Baghdad, its strong support for the
mission of Mr. Kofi Annan as it sought to achieve a
rapid and comprehensive end to all acts of violence in
Syria, while emphasizing the complete and immediate
implementation of the six-point proposal presented by
the Joint Special Envoy and accepted by all parties, so
that a political solution for the crisis in Syria could be
found and a response provided for the legitimate
aspirations of the brotherly people of Syria.
The resolution adopted by the Security Council
today is a quick response to the beginning of the
implementation of the ceasefire in Syria as of
yesterday morning. It has come into being after one
year of violence and a period of international efforts
that required swift action to call upon the Government
of Syria and the opposition to end violence in all its
forms and in a manner corresponding to their
responsibilities, for the purpose of the allowing the full
implementation of Mr. Annan’s six-point proposal.
In today’s resolution, the Security Council
decided to deploy an advance team to Syria. We hope
that its deployment and actual work will start as soon
as possible in order to verify the end of all acts of
violence and create appropriate conditions for the
deployment of an observer mission.
In adopting all those measures, the Security
Council has reaffirmed its strong commitment to the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
unity of Syria, as well as to the principles and purposes
of the United Nations Charter. We very much hope that
our brothers in Syria, both in the Government and in
the opposition, and according to their respective
positions and responsibilities, will work with
Mr. Annan in order to enable the success of his good-
faith efforts and empower the people of Syria to heal
their wounds, unify their ranks and achieve their
legitimate aspirations to stability and dignity.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): Today is indeed an
important day for the peaceful resolution of the
situation in Syria. It is also proof that the Security
Council can indeed come together to fulfil its role in
the global scheme of things. We are deeply
appreciative of the spirit of accommodation exhibited
by all Security Council members.
The Council’s adoption of resolution 2042 (2012)
is an important step in our overall objective of
promoting a peaceful political solution to the situation
in Syria, with full respect for that country’s unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity. The Council’s
unanimous support of that objective sends a strong and
unambiguous message of unity and commitment,
urgency and responsibility, in addressing a situation
that has had tragic humanitarian consequences and that
has the potential to negatively affect an already fragile
regional situation.
A central element of the resolution is the
Council’s unanimous and strong support for the efforts
of the Joint Special Envoy, Mr. Kofi Annan. His efforts
and mission have not only brought the Council together
around a common platform, they have also given us
hope for the success of our collective goal. This is an
example of how preventive diplomacy and mediation
can deliver under principles of objectivity, balance,
engagement and dialogue. Pakistan has backed the
Special Envoy’s mission from the outset, and we will
continue to support his efforts. We believe that all sides
in all quarters should cooperate fully with him to
ensure the success of his mandate. Any steps or actions
that might undermine his work should be avoided. We
hope that the Council will stay the course in its
collective pursuit of a peaceful political settlement of
the Syrian crisis.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): The
Security Council’s message today is, first and
foremost, a call to the Syrian Government to cease its
violence and the unfettered repression of its people,
which has jeopardized peace and security in a region
that is already experiencing an extremely fragile
situation. The world has watched with the
unprecedented violence with horror; the authorities
there are responsible for enormous levels of death and
torture and violations of every human right.
Finally, after more than a year of such atrocities,
the Council has adopted a resolution (resolution 2042
(2012)) that seeks to end the violence and bring about
political dialogue. The basis for that dialogue has been
established by the Joint Special Envoy of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States, Mr. Kofi
Annan. We believe that his management and efforts
deserve our full support and gratitude. The presence of
a United Nations mission will require the full backing
and participation of the Government of Syria. That is
what we are seeking and what we hope will be
achieved.
S/PV.6751
12-295166
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2042
(2012). We hope that it will mark a turning point in the
crisis in Syria. The point is to quickly deploy a strong
and reliable United Nations mission with the task of
verifying the implementation of Mr. Annan’s plan.
With this resolution the Security Council makes that
goal its own. We hope that in the short term the
resolution will open the way to an end to brutal
violence and that we will be able to say to the Syrian
people that the time of indiscriminate violence is
finally over.
Since six o’clock Thursday morning the violence
has subsided; however, the attacks against civilians in
Homs today have confirmed the doubts that may exist
as to the reality of the Syrian regime’s commitment.
We will very soon know if Syria will fulfil its
commitment. If that does not happen, it will be the
responsibility of all members of the Council to
consider the measures that should be taken. We will
judge the Syrian regime by its acts and nothing else.
Let us be clear: this partial de-escalation of
repression comes very late, after more than 10,000
Syrians have fallen to the brutal violence of the
Damascus regime. The perpetrators of this barbaric
repression of a peaceful civilian population will not go
unpunished, and I am happy that today, finally, the
Security Council has been unanimous in recognizing
their criminal responsibility.
Above all, we cannot consider this de-escalation
of repression to be enough; it is up to the Syrian
Government to fully and immediately fulfil the
commitments it has made to the Joint Special Envoy of
the United Nations and the League of Arab States. The
collective message we are sending today is an appeal
for a halt to violence in every form — not just heavy
artillery but also torture, arbitrary arrests, forced
disappearances and sexual violence, all of which are
violations of human rights and have been committed
systematically and on a huge scale by the Syrian
regime’s security forces for 13 months.
Today’s resolution enables the deployment of an
advance mission to observe and assess the halt to the
violence and to test the seriousness of the Syrians’
commitment before authorizing a mission with enough
scope to cover the whole territory. Such a mission
cannot act without the withdrawal of the Syrian
authorities’ troops and heavy weaponry, as Mr. Annan
requested in the Security Council and as today’s
resolution recalls. Nor can it act if the Syrian regime
does not respect the guarantees required of it by the
Council. It is up to all Council members to reinforce
that message to the Syrian authorities.
In sending this first mission, and, we hope, a
second one soon after, we are not seeking merely to
freeze the situation on the ground. The Council is
supporting Mr. Annan’s plan of action, designed to
facilitate Syria’s political transition to democracy in
order to meet the aspirations that the Syrian people
have so courageously expressed. Those are the
conditions for launching the political process that we
are attempting today to create on the ground by ending
the violence and restoring the hope of the Syrian
people that a peaceful political solution is possible.
This resolution marks another turning point: the
rediscovered capacity of the international community
to speak with one voice in response to the Syrian crisis
and to contribute to a peaceful transition to democracy.
That return by all to responsible action is another
reason to rejoice. It is unquestionably a genuine reason
for hope for the people of Syria. I would also like to
stress France’s appreciation for the efforts of the
United Nations, the Secretary-General and Joint
Special Envoy Kofi Annan, whose task is as difficult as
it is crucial. It is thanks to all of their efforts that we
have been able to act as one.
But that consensus is fragile. The line separating
us from the abyss of a civil war or its regional
ramifications is a narrow one. Let us not deceive
ourselves: there can be no other process if this one
founders through the irresponsible actions of some who
have stubbornly propped up a regime that has given
proof of how unworthy it is to govern Syria. Today we
finally have a hope of a peaceful solution to the crisis
in Syria. France therefore solemnly calls on all
members of the Council to support unreservedly the
efforts aimed at meeting the aspirations of the Syrian
people.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): India has
consistently supported all efforts to resolve the Syrian
crisis through an inclusive, Syrian-led political process
that meets the legitimate aspirations of all sections of
Syrian society. To that end, we have given our full
support to the mission of Joint Special Envoy Kofi
Annan. Earlier this morning, our Minister of External
S/PV.6751
712-29516
Affairs spoke to Mr. Annan and underscored India’s
support for his mission.
It is a matter of satisfaction that Mr. Annan’s
efforts over the past six weeks have resulted in a
cessation of violence. We welcome that development
and the commitment of the Government of Syria to the
six-point plan that Mr. Annan has proposed. We expect
that the Syrian opposition will also adhere to the
relevant parts of the plan, renounce violence and
cooperate fully with Mr. Annan.
We voted in favour of resolution 2042 (2012)
today so that an advance team of the United Nations
supervision mission may be deployed expeditiously to
monitor the cessation of violence. We hope that all
parties, including the opposition, will implement their
commitments and cooperate with the mission. It is also
necessary that the mission carry out its work
impartially, fairly and independently, with due respect
for Syria’s sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity.
For the success of the Annan plan and the
observer mission, it is necessary that they be
accompanied by an inclusive Syrian-led political
process. The cessation of violence should create a
conducive environment for such a process to start as
early as possible. We have noted the commitment of
the Government of Syria to such a process. We expect
that the opposition will also engage seriously in the
process, so that the crisis is resolved without any
further bloodshed; peace, stability and security are
re-established; and the people of Syria are able to focus
their energies on socio-economic development.
For the success of the Annan mission, it is also
necessary that all countries in Syria’s neighbourhood
and beyond facilitate and extend their support for a
political resolution of the Syrian crisis under the
auspices of the Joint Special Envoy. India, for its part,
will continue to extend full support for the impartial
implementation of Mr. Annan’s six-point plan.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): My
country welcomes the Security Council’s unanimous
adoption today of resolution 2042 (2012), on Syria.
This is an important event in the light of the fact that
several times in the past the Council has failed to speak
with one voice on the serious crisis in Syria. The
adoption of this resolution constitutes still greater
support by the Council to the mission led by Joint
Special Envoy of the United Nations and the League of
Arab States Kofi Annan, reinforcing its presidential
statement of 5 April (S/PRST/2012/10).
Today the Council has authorized the deployment
of a limited observer team to Syria to monitor the
cessation of violence by all parties, so as to facilitate
the immediate and full implementation of the Joint
Special Envoy’s six-point plan, which entered into
force on 12 April. In doing so, the Council has
demonstrated its engagement and resolve to work as
one to find a timely and lasting solution to the crisis
that Syria has lived under for more than a year. My
country strongly supports the implementation of the
terms of the resolution by all parties. We take this
opportunity to renew our support for Mr. Annan and his
team.
The Syrian people have long awaited such an
action from the Security Council. It is therefore
important that all of its members — especially those
that hold some sway with the Government or any
element of the opposition — work to promote the
resolution’s implementation. The resolution should
pave the way towards an inclusive political process,
involving all Syrians in building a free, peaceful and
prosperous nation.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): From the very
beginning, Azerbaijan has consistently supported all
efforts in connection with the situation in Syria aimed
at ending violence, overcoming the crisis and finding a
solution by peaceful means and through dialogue.
From the outset, we have also expressed our full
support for the Joint Special Envoy of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States, Mr. Kofi
Annan, and for his six-point proposal. Needless to say,
the Joint Special Envoy is doing his utmost and
exploring all possible avenues to end the Syrian crisis
peacefully. We highly appreciate his efforts in that
regard. The Security Council supported the mission of
the Special Envoy right from its inception. The
adoption of resolution 2042 (2012) today is yet another
illustration of the unanimity within the Council.
We note that the parties involved committed to
implement the six-point plan of the Joint Special
Envoy and started taking important practical steps to
that end. At the same time, the resolution calls for the
urgent, comprehensive and immediate implementation
of all elements of the Envoy’s six-point plan, which
aim at bringing an immediate end to all violence and
human rights violations, securing humanitarian access
S/PV.6751
12-295168
and facilitating a Syrian-led political process leading to
a democratic, pluralistic political system.
The resolution provides for the establishment of a
United Nations supervision mission in Syria to monitor
a cessation of armed violence in all its forms by all
parties and for guaranteeing the effective operation of
the mission, including its advance team. It is important
that the resolution reaffirms the commitment of the
Security Council to the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria.
Azerbaijan voted in favour of the resolution
based on that understanding and with the hope that its
adoption would contribute to ongoing efforts aimed at
encouraging dialogue, overcoming the crisis and
putting an end to human suffering.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Portugal
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2042 (2012). The
Security Council has just sent a united message with its
unanimous adoption of a resolution on Syria. It is a
first step, although one that comes tragically late and in
the wake of thousands of dead and injured. It is only a
first step; others will have to follow to ensure the full
cessation of violence and to avoid a civil war.
Portugal reiterates its full support and
appreciation for the efforts of the Joint Special Envoy
of the United Nations and the League of Arab States.
We call on the Syrian Government to cooperate with
him fully and without delay and to immediately and
visibly implement the six-point plan in its entirety, as it
has committed to do.
Portugal also stresses the importance — indeed,
the absolute necessity — of the withdrawal of all
Syrian Government troops and heavy weapons from
population centres to their barracks. Portugal also calls
upon the Syrian Government to ensure the effective
operation of the United Nations monitoring mission,
including its advance team, as set forth in the
resolution we just adopted. All parties must guarantee
the safety of the United Nations monitors without
prejudice to their freedom of movement and access. We
reiterate our appeal for full, immediate and unimpeded
humanitarian access. We also wish to stress the need
for all those responsible for human rights violations to
be held accountable.
We call on all parties to seize this opportunity, to
cease all armed violence in all its forms and to fully
cooperate with Special Envoy Annan, to initiate a
Syrian-led, credible political process that will meet the
legitimate expectations of the Syrian people in terms of
freedom, democracy and equality.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa has
always been deeply concerned about the deteriorating
political, security and humanitarian situation in Syria.
We emphasize that there is a need for the violence to
cease. South Africa strongly supports the efforts of
Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan, which have the
ultimate aim of committing all sides to peaceful
dialogue in order to promote an all-inclusive process of
negotiations leading to a political outcome that
responds to the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people. The situation in Syria remains fragile. We
reiterate our call for all sides to the conflict to fully
implement their commitments under the six-point plan
of Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan.
We welcome the fact that the Syrian Government
has started to implement its commitments under the
plan. We call on all parties, including the opposition, to
sustain the ceasefire. In that regard, South Africa
supports the call made by Joint Special Envoy Annan
regarding the urgent deployment of a United Nations
observer mission to verify and monitor the ceasefire.
We call on all sides to the conflict to guarantee the
safety and freedom of movement of such a mission,
once it is deployed.
We are deeply pleased that the Council has been
able to unanimously adopt resolution 2042 (2012)
today, providing for the deployment of the advance
team of the United Nations observer mission.
As we work towards the resolution of the Syrian
crisis, it is vital that the international community
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria
and work with the Syrian people to bring about a
peaceful political solution to their crisis.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala voted in favour of resolution 2042 (2012),
consistent with the position that we adopted from the
very beginning of the situation taking place in the
Syrian Arab Republic. We have always maintained that
the violence must cease immediately and that the only
way out is through a process of political dialogue led
by the Syrians themselves that leads to the reforms
demanded by the people.
Our support for this resolution is not only in
pursuit of those goals, but also heralds our full support
S/PV.6751
912-29516
for the initiative of the Joint Special Envoy of the
United Nations and the League of Arab States,
Mr. Kofi Annan. Likewise, it reflects our continuing
support for the League of Arab States in seeking a
peaceful outcome to the situation that has brought us
together today.
My delegation considers today’s resolution as an
opportunity, perhaps the only opportunity, to reverse
the spiral of violence and take a first step towards a
better future for all Syrian citizens.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United States.
After more than a year of brutal violence inflicted
by the Government of Syria on its own people, after
close to 10,000 deaths, after driving almost 45,000
Syrians out of their country and many more out of their
homes, and after the grotesque destruction by Syria’s
own armed forces of Syrian towns and
neighbourhoods, the Syrian Government has claimed
that it is finally ready to step back from its murderous
policies.
Today, with resolution 2042 (2012), the Security
Council has indicated that it will judge the Syrian
regime by its actions, not its words. The Council has
authorized an advance group of monitors to verify the
Syrian Government’s compliance. In doing so, the
Council has taken a step towards fulfilling its own
responsibilities. And it is about time.
On Thursday, the Joint Special Envoy of the
United Nations and the League of Arab States, Kofi
Annan, reported that a “fragile calm appears to be
prevailing” in Syria. We all hope that it will continue to
prevail. But we are under no illusions.
Two days of diminished violence after a year of
murderous rampage hardly proves that the regime is
serious about honouring its commitments. Just today,
Syrian forces resumed their brutal shelling of Homs
and shot innocent mourners at a funeral in Aleppo. This
resumed violence has cast serious doubt, yet again, on
the regime’s commitment to a cessation of violence.
Despite that aggression, the Syrian opposition has
largely refrained from responding and has honourably
sought to extend the fragile calm. The regime’s tanks,
heavy weapons and troops maintain their chokehold on
population centres, ready to resume attacks at any time.
Towns in large areas remain cut off, and the Al-Assad
regime maintains snipers and roadblocks throughout
Syria. Reports continue to come in that protestors have
been killed and arrested and thousands of activists
remain detained.
The Syrian Government must meet all of its
commitments, not only the bare minimum. It must do
so now. The suffering of the Syrian people has gone on
far too long. For many months they protested
peacefully, only to be met with violent retribution by
their own Government. When some protestors finally
dared to respond in self-defence, the retribution got
immeasurably worse. The Arab League proposed a way
forward to end the violence and meet the aspirations of
the Syrian people. The regime of Bashar Al-Assad
responded with broken promises, only to be followed
by intensified violence.
In the final days before 12 April, we saw an
outrageous escalation of violence by the Al-Assad
regime, including the stepped-up use of heavy artillery
on civilian areas and Syrian forces firing across
borders into Turkey and Lebanon. This horrific cycle
has lasted way too long. The Syrian people must be
allowed to exercise their rights and freedoms
peacefully, without fear of attack, detention, torture or
death.
We commend the opposition for the strength it
has shown in observing the ceasefire after the brutality
it has endured. We demand that the Syrian Government
at last honour its commitments. Those commitments
are plain to everyone.
Both the Security Council and the League of Arab
States have fully endorsed Mr. Annan’s six-point plan.
As Secretary Clinton noted, the plan is not a menu of
options — it is a comprehensive set of obligations that
requires visible and verifiable actions by the
Government of Syria.
The resolution just adopted reaffirms the
Council’s support for all elements of the Envoy’s plan,
including an immediate end to violence, securing
humanitarian access and a Syrian-led political
transition that meets the democratic aspirations of the
Syrian people. The resolution stresses that the Syrian
Government must immediately fulfil its remaining
obligations to bring about a full cessation of violence.
It emphasizes the necessity of the Syrian Government
immediately withdrawing all of its troops and heavy
weapons from population centres, and returning its
soldiers and their equipment to their barracks.
S/PV.6751
12-2951610
The resolution authorizes the Secretary-General
to send an initial team of up to 30 observers, to verify
that the Syrian Government is doing what it is obliged
to do, including ensuring that the full monitoring
mission can do its job unimpeded, with full freedom of
movement, full access to people and institutions and
unobstructed communications. The resolution also
expresses the Council’s intention to establish a larger
observer mission once the Secretary-General presents a
blueprint, and if it is clear that the ceasefire is holding
and that the Government is cooperative. We see the
advance team’s deployment as an important test of the
Syrian Government’s intentions. If the Government
obstructs their work, it will raise serious concerns
about moving forward with the establishment of the
full mission.
We await the Secretary-General’s proposal for a
full observation mission and express our willingness to
work quickly with Council members to authorize such
a mission, if indeed the Syrian Government fulfils its
commitments.
The United States expresses its appreciation once
again to Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan for his
dedicated work to try to stop the violence, respect the
rights of the Syrian people and begin a transition
towards stable and legitimate governance.
The opportunity is there; the burden is now on the
Syrian Government to seize it.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): As members may recall, in the statement I
made to the Council during the meeting (S/PV.6627) it
held on 4 October 2011, I described a painful event
that had occurred that same day in Aleppo, in northern
Syria, during which armed gangs assassinated Saria
Hassoun, the son of the Imam of the Syrian Arab
Republic, and a university professor. Coincidentally, at
today’s meeting, I can, on behalf of my country — both
the Government and the people — inform the Council
that last night the Syrian authorities arrested two young
men who were involved in the assassination of the
Imam’s son. The two men — Syrian nationals — have
confessed to their crime, stating that they had each
received $800 for every crime they committed.
At the time I made that statement, some raised
questions as to the presence of armed gangs in my
country. However, today, fortunately, we have heard
many colleagues encouraging those armed gangs to
observe their commitments to the plan put forward by
Kofi Annan, the Joint Special Envoy of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States. Syria, as all are
aware, welcomed Mr. Annan’s mission from the very
beginning and has interacted with it, and the Special
Envoy, in a positive and adequate manner. It has stated
that it would spare no effort to ensure the mission’s
success, within the framework of the sentiments of
national responsibility that are impelling us all to put
an end to the painful crisis that Syria is experiencing,
which undermines the safety and stability of the Syrian
Arab Republic in its entirety — the State and the
people.
My country’s Government has taken serious
measures aimed at fulfilling its obligations under the
six-point plan. It has declared its commitment to
stopping armed confrontations as from 6 a.m.
yesterday, and has indeed done so. The Government is
providing to Mr. Annan, in writing and on a regular
basis, information on the measures taken to implement
the six-point plan. In addition, my country, Syria, has
also accepted the concept of a United Nations
supervision mechanism that would operate within the
limits of Syrian sovereignty, which the Syrian people
consider a red line that there can be no justification for
crossing. We are currently in negotiations with the
Special Envoy and his technical team in Damascus on
the drafting of a special protocol that would guarantee
the deployment of a team of observers.
In return for this openness, cooperation and
commitment on the part of Syria, and since Damascus
accepted Mr. Annan’s plan, terrorist operations have
escalated, including acts of aggression and the killing
of Government forces and civilians; the sabotage and
destruction of infrastructure; and the forcible eviction
of peaceful citizens and their relocation to
prefabricated camps in neighbouring countries, with
the objective of laying the groundwork for the creation
of a refugee crisis to be used for political ends and later
built upon to establish so-called buffer zones that
would, in turn, justify calls for foreign military
intervention.
In that context, we find worrisome the ill
intentions of some States members of the Council with
regard to Syria, in that they deliberately do not hold
S/PV.6751
1112-29516
armed gangs accountable for their crimes or for their
acts of aggression against Syrian civilians and military
personnel.
For our part, we have offered, and provided, to
Mr. Annan documented information on the violations
that were perpetrated by armed gangs after the
ceasefire went into effect yesterday. There have been
50 such violations, including the killing of dozens of
civilians as well as army and law enforcement
personnel, not to mention the destruction of many
public and private installations.
What we find puzzling in this respect is that some
of those who claim to care about human rights have
paid no attention to the information submitted by
numerous international bodies other than the Syrian
Government about the grave human rights violations
perpetrated by armed groups in Syria. Those violations
include kidnapping and the holding of hostages for
ransom as well as the torture and execution of
members of the police force, the army and civilians
who are regarded as supporters of the Government.
Moreover, armed groups in Syria are recruiting child
soldiers and using civilians as human shields. And to
all this we can add the many in-depth field exposes
published by major media organizations that confirm
the fact that armed gangs in Syria are engaging in
unprecedented criminal activities.
Here I would like to make mention of the
important article published by the German magazine
Der Spiegel concerning a meeting between its
correspondent and two criminals in hospitals in Tripoli
and Lebanon. In that interview, the latter admitted that
they had slaughtered 150 people by knife as per the
instructions that they had received from their
commanders in the armed groups.
Syria expresses the hope that Mr. Annan will deal
with the crisis in a comprehensive manner. It affirms
that in return for the official Syrian commitment to
guarantee the success of the mission, Mr. Annan must
also hold the necessary meetings with the various Arab
regional and international parties that have ties with
the armed groups in order to ensure that they abide by
the cessation of violence.
The success of Mr. Annan’s mission cannot be
guaranteed by official Syrian support alone; indeed, the
aforementioned States must abide by their commitment
to freeze and halt the funding, arming and training of
armed groups, refrain from encouraging them to
continue their acts of terrorism and stop providing safe
haven to their members. Those countries must also stop
escalating and encouraging the Syrian opposition to
reject any initiative aimed at launching a
comprehensive national dialogue with the goal of
finding at a peaceful political solution to the crisis in
Syria.
It is worth noting here that while Mr. Annan was
holding intensive talks with his Syrian interlocutors,
some parties were holding conferences in Istanbul in
parallel to Mr. Annan’s plan, in a clear attempt to
circumvent his mission and the role of the United
Nations as well as to undermine the mission’s role and
its chances of success in its attempt to help Syria
emerge from the crisis. Some have even endorsed a
funding mechanism that would enable Gulf countries to
fund armed groups by offering salaries to their
members, to say nothing of the pledges made by those
attending the conference to provide $100 million to fan
the flames of the crisis rather than extinguishing them.
Added to that are the calls made during the
conference by the Foreign Minister of Qatar urging
military intervention in Syria and the establishment of
so-called safe zones on our territory. In that regard, we
also note the statement made by the Foreign Minister
of Saudi Arabia that arming the Syrian opposition was
necessary.
We wish to raise the question here of what it
means when some States say that they support
Mr. Annan’s mission while at the same time they
undertake parallel efforts aimed at ensuring the
necessary funding for armed groups — to provide them
weapons and militarize them — impose sanctions on
the Syrian people and call for direct military
intervention in my country.
All of that completely contradicts the text of
Mr. Annan’s plan. We would therefore like to affirm
before the Council that the ongoing support for armed
groups will pose a genuine threat to Mr. Annan’s plan.
The parties involved are responsible for shedding the
blood of Syrians and spreading terrorism in the
country. The countries that have imposed unjust
economic sanctions on the Syrian people are also
complicit in the crisis. Those States cannot shed
crocodile tears over the difficulties facing Syrian
citizens every day while they are themselves to a large
extent responsible for those hardships.
S/PV.6751
12-2951612
What else could be the purpose for externally
manipulating the exchange rate of the Syrian pound?
What is the purpose of preventing Syrian expatriates
from wiring money to their families in Syria? What
could be the goal in damaging Syria’s energy sector? Is
the goal of all that to guarantee the well-being of the
Syrian people and meet their demands for reform?
What about the European Union’s imposition of
sanctions on Syria’s Ministry of Energy? Will that help
to deliver electric power to the Syrian people? All of
this adds up to an unethical crisis that we must
examine.
What is happening in Syria is a manifestation of a
geopolitical conflict over regional roles. It is a settling
of scores, some of them old and others of newer
vintage. The main weapon in the conflict seems to
involve pitting political pan-Arabism against extremist
political Islam. Extremist manifestations are being
spread in order to fuel future wars in the region that
will come in the form of sectarian, religious and ethnic
crises intended to fragment the region. All this aims at
bringing an end to the last locus of coexistence,
brotherliness and diversity in the region, as well as to
entrench the concept of a confrontation among
religions, cultures and civilizations.
In conclusion, Syria reiterates its commitment
with regard to the Joint Special Envoy’s plan. We are
prepared to continue to cooperate with him in order to
bring an end to the crisis in Syria. We hope that
Mr. Annan will not allow any party to bypass his plan
or circumvent its provisions. The resolution that the
Council has adopted today requires the commitment of
the countries that proposed it and voted in its favour
and have continued to support armed groups in Syria.
While we believe that the resolution is not
balanced, Syria believes that it is in its own interests to
ensure the return of security and stability to our
country. We hope that the countries that supported the
resolution will implement it effectively and refrain
from sending lethal and non-lethal assistance alike to
the terrorists and armed groups.
Before I conclude my statement, I should also
like to reiterate that the suffering, hopes and
aspirations of the Syrian people go beyond being mere
commodities in the hands of speculators in the
marketplace of political interests and deals. The Syrian
people do not need a few million dollars to buy
bulletproof vests. Instead, they need help to live in
safety, peace, freedom and stability without increasing
tensions among its various factions. The Syrian people
need the lifting of the unjust sanctions imposed against
them, for they are resulting in billions of dollars in
losses. That is the only way in which those who
adopted today’s resolution can help the Syrian people,
rather than providing Israel with six submarines that
can be equipped with nuclear weapons and creating
tension in the region conducive towards more war and
aggression. Whether Arab or not, the people of the
region will serve as the fodder for such war.
(spoke in French)
My colleague the Ambassador of France
mentioned the Syrian people in saying that the time of
violence is a thing of the past. I completely agree with
him. I would just remind him, however, that the time of
trusteeship is over as well. His statement to the Syrian
people is at the very least untimely, given that, on
17 April, they will celebrate their day of independence
from French occupation.
The President: There are no more names
inscribed on my list of speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.
