United Nations S/PV.6756
Security Council
Sixty-seventh year
6756thmeeting
Saturday, 21 April 2012, 11.15 a.m.
New York
Provisional
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.
12-30478 (E)
*1230478*
President: Ms. Rice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (United States of America)
Members: Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mehdiyev
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Li Baodong
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Osorio
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Araud
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wittig
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Rosenthal
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Loulichki
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Tarar
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Moraes Cabral
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Churkin
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Sangqu
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Menan
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 19 April 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2012/238)
S/PV.6756
12-304782
The meeting was called to order at 11.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 19 April 2012 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2012/238)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2012/245, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by China, Colombia, France,
Germany, Morocco, Pakistan, Portugal and the Russian
Federation.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/238, which contains a letter dated
19 April from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Azerbaijan, China, Colombia, France, Germany,
Guatemala, India, Morocco, Pakistan, Portugal,
Russian Federation, South Africa, Togo, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2043 (2012).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Russia presented the initiative to swiftly
adopt a Security Council resolution on establishing the
United Nations Supervision Mission in Syria, in order
to pave the way for a United Nations presence with a
stabilizing influence in that country. Resolution 2043
(2012) is of fundamental importance in pushing
forward the process for a peaceful settlement in Syria
and enshrines the Council’s consensus on supporting
the six-point proposal of Joint Special Envoy Annan.
We now believe the main aim to be the unwavering and
clear respect by all parties for the provisions of the
resolution. Any deviation, whether from the
resolution’s provisions or in their interpretation, will be
unacceptable. The Libyan model should remain forever
in the past.
The resolution establishes clear parameters of
responsibility for all Syrian parties on the cessation of
violence and on the need to cooperate with United
Nations observers and the mission of the Joint Special
Envoy. However, that is not all.
In order to achieve comprehensive
implementation of the resolution, it is very important
for the external players involved in the Syrian issue to
also act very responsibly. They too should take action
while bearing in mind the provisions adopted by the
Security Council so that all Syrians may participate in
an inclusive political process with respect to the
establishment of a democratic, pluralistic system in
Syria, for all Syrians, irrespective of ethnic or religious
background. Only through that process will Syrians be
able to take their own decisions on their country’s
future political situation. Any external influence
imposed by us on that process could risk exacerbating
the crisis.
We call upon all Syrian parties — both the
authorities and the opposition — to refrain from
violence and to fully uphold the provisions of the
Annan plan and the requirements of the resolution.
Once again, we issue a call to all States with influence
on the opposition to encourage them to do the same. In
that context, we will continue to work with Damascus.
The resolution sends an important international
legal signal, namely, that only the Security Council has
the prerogative to take a decision regarding the
settlement of a regional crisis, including the Syrian
crisis. Any other forum, such as a group of friends or a
coalition of mutual interests, should clearly uphold the
resolutions of the Security Council and not undermine
its activity. The Russian Federation will closely follow
those developments.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): We
welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution 2043
S/PV.6756
312-30478
(2012), which establishes the United Nations
Supervision Mission in Syria, with a mandate of
monitoring the cessation of violence and the full
implementation of the Joint Special Envoy’s six-point
proposal. After so many months of obstruction, Syria
must understand the unanimous message being sent by
the international community as well as the meaning of
its commitments to put an end to an intolerable
situation.
One week ago, we adopted a resolution providing
for the deployment of an advance observation mission
(resolution 2042 (2012)). After 13 months of senseless,
bloody repression, which has produced more than
11,000 dead and has destabilized the entire region, a
strengthened mission is absolutely essential. It should
be deployed as soon as possible.
The adoption of today’s resolution, however,
should not lead us to forget that the situation on the
ground remains worrying owing to the refusal of
Damascus to genuinely meet its commitments. As the
Secretary-General emphasized in his letter to the
Council last Thursday (S/2012/238), the Syrian
authorities have not implemented the measures to be
immediately put in place, as they committed to the
Joint Special Envoy to do. They Syrian army has only
given the impression of having retreated.
Bombardment and firing with heavy weapons
continues.
The deployment of the first observers in Syria has
in no way changed the regime’s lethal behaviour. Homs
and Idlib continue to pay the heavy price of unbridled
repression. In Dar’a and Duma, snipers are continuing
their heinous deeds. Throughout the entire country, as
it has done for 13 months, the regime is continuing its
bloody repression of demonstrations, to carry out
torture, arbitrary arrests, forced disappearances and
sexual violence. The humanitarian urgency is greater
than ever. By its daily nefarious actions the Syrian
regime is violating the decisions of the Security
Council and demonstrating its contempt for it, as well
as for the Joint Special Envoy and, more generally, the
entire international community.
Against that backdrop, we know that we are
taking a risk in voting for today’s resolution. We
believe that Mr. Annan’s plan is a last opportunity for
peace that we should not miss. That is the reason that
France supported the adoption of resolution 2043
(2012). We did so with determination and without
illusions.
As the Secretary-General has said, in order to
fully carry out its mandate, this Mission should be
provided with significant personnel, who should be
deployed as soon as possible to cover all the regions
affected by the developments. The observers must have
full freedom of movement. Any obstruction by the
Syrian authorities is to be reported to the Security
Council. In implementation of resolution 2043 (2012),
the Syrian authorities must ensure the security of
observers while guaranteeing that there is no hindrance
to their deployment throughout the country, in their
contacts with the population or in their
communications; nor are there to be any reprisals of
any sort against the population. In that regard, I should
like to underscore that the use of air transport is
absolutely crucial to the success of the Mission. It is
only under those conditions that the observers will be
able to effectively carry out their duties. France will
remain vigilant vis-à-vis its demand for Syria’s full
cooperation with the observation Mission.
I would like to recall that our goal in deploying
the Mission is not just an end to repression; above all,
it is the launching of a political transition in Syria
towards a democratic system, so that the Syrian people
can at last freely choose their destiny. Both of those
must move ahead in tandem. We can wait no longer.
More civilians are dying with each passing day.
The observers must be deployed now and must be
able to work without obstruction. Violence must stop.
The Annan plan must be comprehensively
implemented, in particular when it comes to the
freedom to demonstrate, which must be fully observed.
We will judge the Government of Syria on its actions.
The observers should be able to tell us whether Syria’s
obligations are properly being met. Were that not to be
the case, we will have to consider other options,
including possible sanctions available to the Security
Council and the international community.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): Today’s unanimous
authorization of the United Nations Supervision
Mission in Syria (UNSMIS) is an important, far-
reaching step. We supported resolution 2043 (2012)
because we stand entirely behind the efforts of Joint
Special Envoy Kofi Annan to achieve a sustainable
cessation of violence and to facilitate a political
transition process in Syria. We supported the resolution
S/PV.6756
12-304784
because we share the assessment made by Mr. Annan
and the Secretary-General that the deployment of
observers under the right conditions could positively
influence dynamics on the ground.
At the same time, we must all be aware that the
decision taken today is not without risks. Clearly, the
cessation of armed violence is incomplete. The
authorities in Damascus continue their attacks on the
population, they continue to shell the city of Homs
with artillery and they have not withdrawn their troops
and tanks to their barracks.
Other forms of violence continue unabated, such
as arbitrary detention, torture, abduction, sexual
violence and violence against children, women and
minorities.
The Syrian Government continues to play for
time, despite its own commitment made to the Joint
Special Envoy and the repeated demands made by the
Security Council for the immediate and full
implementation of the six-point plan.
Our work is not done with the adoption of today’s
resolution. To the contrary, our work has only begun.
We must now ensure that the observers have the
necessary security and can operate freely and in the
right conditions to effectively implement their
mandate. The new United Nations Mission must not,
under any circumstances, become a pawn in tactical
and political games.
We have made every effort to ensure that
resolution 2043 (212) adequately reflects those
concerns. It is now for the Syrian authorities to prove
that they live up to their responsibilities. If they do not
do so the Security Council has made it clear that it will
consider further steps.
We must remain vigilant. Too many commitments
made by Damascus in the past have not been kept. We
have therefore asked the Secretary-General to carefully
assess the conditions on the ground before deploying
personnel. We have also asked him to report
immediately and in short intervals on any obstruction
of the Mission. It will be our task to act appropriately.
The observers may contribute to solidifying a
cessation of armed violence, but they cannot substitute
for a political solution. The deployment of observers is
only one, albeit crucial, element of the six-point plan
by the Joint Special Envoy. We therefore welcome the
fact that UNSMIS will comprise civilian personnel
with relevant expertise, such as on human rights and
gender, to monitor and support the implementation of
the other aspects of the six-point plan.
Here, too, urgent action is required by Damascus.
As stated by the Secretary-General, actions on the
ground must be consistent with stated commitments to
carry out the six-point plan. For instance, the status and
circumstances of thousands of detainees remains
unclear and there are reports of significant abuses. No
substantive progress has been achieved on
humanitarian access to those in need, or on increasing
the capacity of the humanitarian organizations on the
ground.
Clearly, the elements of the six-point plan are all
closely interlinked. We have today made an important
step on one of the six elements. Others need to follow
with the goal of enabling, as quickly as possible, a
political transition process towards a democratic and
pluralistic system. In our view, accountability for the
crimes committed must be a central element of the
transition process. We have repeatedly stressed that
there cannot be a return to the status quo ante.
In conclusion, I would like to applaud Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his strong leadership, and to
reiterate our full support to the efforts of Joint Special
Envoy Annan and his team.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia associates itself with this second
pronouncement by the Security Council within one
week, which shows our firm determination to deal with
the Syrian crisis. It is clear that violence in all its forms
has not ceased and that there continue to be attacks and
incidents that constitute violations of the ceasefire
declared on 12 April. That is why we support the
establishment of the United Nations Supervision
Mission in Syria (UNSMIS), with a mandate to
monitor a cessation of armed violence in all its forms
by all parties and to oversee and ensure the full
implementation of the six-point plan of the Joint
Special Envoy of the United Nations and the League of
Arab States, Mr. Kofi Annan.
We would hope that the broad presence on the
ground will make it possible for us to follow up and
monitor on an ongoing basis the fulfilment of the
conditions set out in the six-point plan, to which the
Syrian Government and the opposition have committed
themselves. To that end, the resolution requests the
Secretary-General to inform the Security Council
S/PV.6756
512-30478
immediately of any obstacles preventing UNSMIS
from doing its job. In that respect, we hope that the
Syrian authorities will assume the responsibilities
incumbent upon them.
The coordination and efforts of the Joint Special
Envoy deserve our full support and gratitude. My
delegation believes that his proposal is an ideal one to
immediately put an end to all violence, ensure access
to humanitarian assistance and to provide for a political
transition, led by Syria towards a democratic pluralistic
political system through the establishment of the
necessary conditions for beginning a broad-based
political dialogue between the Syrian Government and
the entire spectrum of the Syrian opposition. That is
why it is urgent that all parties effectively meet all of
the conditions provided for in the proposal and in the
commitments they have made and that the Syrian
authorities put an end to violent repression and
atrocities.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me first to express our sincere condolences to
our colleagues from Pakistan for the crash of the
aircraft yesterday. May God have mercy on the souls of
the victims.
My delegation wishes to express the satisfaction
of the Kingdom of Morocco at the fact that, in just one
week, the Security Council has been able to adopt two
important resolutions by consensus concerning Syria
(resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012)). We first
welcomed the initial agreement between the Joint
Special Representative and the Syrian Government on
an immediate cessation of fighting and violence
throughout Syria. However, while violence has
decreased as compared with the immediate past, the
fact that it continues to exists shows that both parties
have not fully committed to their responsibilities. Now
we are calling for a full cessation of all forms of
violence.
The ministerial committee on Syria of the League
of Arab States met this week. Among the meeting’s
results were a condemnation of the continuing acts of
violence against Syrian civilians, a demand on the
Syrian Government and all other parties to commit to a
full cessation of violence, a call for close cooperation
with the Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations and
the League of Arab States, and the full implementation
of his six-point plan. The committee also called on the
Council to speed up the deployment of observers to
Syria and to ensure the conditions and means necessary
for the implementation of their mandate.
Today the Council has responded to those calls. It
has unanimously agreed to the establishment of the
United Nations Supervision Mission in Syria
(UNSMIS), to be rapidly deployed on the ground at the
discretion of the Secretary-General with the goal of
putting an end to armed violence by all parties and
fully supporting Mr. Annan’s six-point plan. We
sincerely hope that conditions will be met to allow for
the deployment of UNSMIS on the ground as soon as
possible.
We are convinced that the deployment of a
United Nations mission will contribute to monitoring
the commitment by all parties to a cessation of all
forms of violence and to the success of the Annan six-
point plan. In its resolution, the Security Council
rightly expresses appreciation for the major efforts
made by countries neighbouring Syria to assist Syrian
refugees. It also expresses gratitude for the assistance
provided by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to countries hosting
refugees until they can return home.
By reaffirming its strong commitment to Syria’s
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity, as well as to the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations, today’s resolution sends a very
clear message to those who have any doubts as to our
full commitment to a complete cessation of violence in
Syria and to the success of Mr. Annan’s six-point plan,
so that work can begin as soon as possible towards a
peaceful political settlement of the crisis in Syria in a
manner that responds to the aspirations of our Syrian
brothers and sisters.
The past few weeks have shown the importance
of unity in the Security Council, as well as the effect of
that unity on the course of events and on the parties’
commitment to their promises. We hope that such unity
in the Council will have an impact on the full
implementation of Mr. Annan’s six-point plan and on
the return of stability and a future of democracy for the
Syrian people — one which responds to the aspirations
of all segments.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): It has
been one week since the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2042 (2012), authorizing the deployment of
an advance team of 30 unarmed military observers to
Syria. The Council was clear about the obligations on
S/PV.6756
12-304786
the regime to cease troop movements towards
population centres, end the use of heavy weapons and
begin the pull-back of military forces from in and
around population centres. It was also unambiguous in
its call for the advance team to operate under
appropriate conditions, including the requirement that
the regime ensure full and unimpeded freedom of
movement. We committed to deploy a larger mission
only after a sustained cessation of violence.
Unfortunately, since the adoption of resolution
2042 (2012), the regime has done little to demonstrate
that it has any intention of taking the steps necessary to
end the crisis. On the contrary, we have witnessed a
further escalation of the regime’s brutality. It has
continued to use heavy weapons, shelling Homs and
other cities, in violation of its commitments to the
United Nations. It has restricted the advance team’s
freedom of movement, in a flagrant effort to hide the
truth about its shameful acts of brutality and
destruction.
Nevertheless, the Secretary-General has
recommended that a larger team be deployed. We share
his judgment that such a mission could help shift the
dynamic on the ground. We have therefore worked
constructively on ensuring the rapid authorization of
the Mission. We welcome the unanimous adoption
today of resolution 2043 (2012).
The United Kingdom believes that a mission that
is able to operate effectively could have a positive
impact on the ground, in terms of both saving lives and
ushering in a Syrian-led political transition. The
resolution comes following the preliminary
understanding reached between the Syrian Government
and the United Nations on the mandate and operating
conditions of the Mission. It is essential that it now be
implemented in full.
A larger mission, provided that it has freedom of
movement and the use of air assets as called for in the
resolution, will be able to monitor more locations. The
mandate is not just to monitor a cessation of violence,
but to monitor and support the full implementation of
the six-point proposal, including the elements related
to political detentions, ensuring freedom of
demonstration and association, human rights, access
for journalists and the political transition. That is why
it will include a strong civilian component, with a
range of skills, including political, human rights and
civil affairs.
It is a measure of the depth of international
concern that we are ready to deploy unarmed United
Nations personnel into such a dangerous environment.
It is fraught with risk. The Mission will fail in its task
if the regime continues to violate its commitments and
obstruct the work of the Mission. The Mission and the
Joint Special Envoy’s six-point proposal represent the
last opportunity for the Syrian regime to reverse course
and to allow a peaceful solution to the crisis in Syria to
emerge. Continued failure of the regime to meet its
commitments or any attempt to hinder the work of the
Mission must be met with robust sanctions by the
Council.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): In his letter of
19 April 2012 (S/2012/238), the Secretary-General
recommended that the Security Council authorize the
United Nations Supervision Mission in Syria
(UNSMIS). The Mission will have to not only monitor
a cessation of armed violence in all its forms by all
parties, but also to monitor and support the full
implementation of the Joint Special Envoy’s six-point
proposal. Resolution 2043 (2012) is the Council’s
unified and swift reaction to those recommendations.
Today, the Security Council has sent yet another
clear and united message to the Syrian authorities that
the cessation of armed violence must be respected in
full and that immediate action is needed on all aspects
of the six-point proposal. In that regard, we express our
grave concern over the escalation in violence and
casualties in recent days and over the fact that the
cessation of armed violence in all its forms remains
clearly incomplete, in a serious breach of resolution
2042 (2012).
Also, the widespread violations of human rights
continue unabated, as stated in shocking detail in the
Secretary-General’s letter. They must cease forthwith,
and accountability for such violations must be
guaranteed. Likewise, the humanitarian situation is
worsening by the day. Full and unimpeded
humanitarian access is of the utmost urgency. Portugal
renews its call to all parties, in particular the Syrian
authorities, to cooperate fully with the United Nations
and relevant humanitarian organizations.
In that regard, allow me to express my country’s
deep appreciation for the assistance that neighbouring
States have been providing for over a year now to those
fleeing violence, persecution and repression, despite
S/PV.6756
712-30478
the disruption that the situation in Syria has brought to
their own countries.
As we have repeatedly stated, the six-point
proposal represents the last chance for a peaceful
political solution to the Syrian crisis. The Syrian
authorities must, once and for all, demonstrate serious
intent and match actions with stated commitments.
Portugal sincerely hopes that, following 13 months of
horrific repression, which has caused many thousands
of deaths and unimaginable human suffering, the
deployment of the United Nations Supervision Mission
will indeed help to change the dynamics on the ground
and create the conditions conducive to a Syrian-led
political transition that meets the legitimate democratic
aspirations of the Syrian people.
For that to happen, the Syrian Government must
implement immediately and visibly all its commitments
under the six-point plan in their entirety, including the
withdrawal of troops and heavy weapons from
population centres to their barracks to facilitate the
sustained cessation of violence. It must also ensure the
technical operation of the Mission as set out in today’s
resolution and the preliminary understanding of
19 April 2012.
As I already stated, the six-point proposal
represents the last hope of avoiding an all-out civil war
in Syria with dire consequences for both the people of
Syria and the region. That is why we voted in favour of
today’s resolution, notwithstanding all the inherent
risks.
We call upon all parties to seize the opportunity
that today’s resolution represents for a sustained peace
and a meaningful political process in Syria, and
therefore to cease all armed violence in all its forms
and cooperate fully with the United Nations
Supervision Mission. We also reiterate our appreciation
and full support for the efforts of the Secretary-General
and of the Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations
and the League of Arab States. We urge all parties to
engage constructively with Joint Special Envoy Annan
on a credible Syrian-led political process that will meet
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people for
peace, freedom, democracy and equality.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): Azerbaijan has been
consistent in its support of the efforts aimed at ending
the violence, overcoming the crisis in Syria and finding
a solution by peaceful means and through dialogue.
Like all Security Council members, we have also
expressed our full support for the Joint Special Envoy
of the United Nations and the League of Arab States,
Mr. Kofi Annan, and his six-point proposal. As we all
want a peaceful solution to the Syrian crisis, it should
be emphasized once again that there is no alternative to
the mission of the Joint Special Envoy. He should enjoy
the uninterrupted support of the international
community for the work that he is doing.
With the adoption of resolution 2043 (2012)
today, authorizing the deployment of the United
Nations Supervision Mission in Syria, another
milestone has been reached in addressing the Syrian
crisis through peaceful means. We believe that the
United Nations Supervision Mission will be
instrumental in monitoring the cessation of armed
violence in all its forms by all parties and in monitoring
and supporting the full implementation of the Joint
Special Envoy’s six-point proposal. It is very important
that the resolution adopted today once again reaffirms
the strong commitment of the Security Council to the
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Syria.
Azerbaijan voted in favour of today’s resolution
with the hope that its adoption will contribute to
ongoing efforts aimed at ending violence and human
rights violations, facilitating a dialogue, overcoming
the crisis and sustaining the progress achieved on the
ground.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): Following the
adoption of resolution 2042 (2012), a week ago, South
Africa welcomes the acceptance by the Syrian
Government of the advance team of the observer
mission and its rapid deployment on the ground. We are
pleased to note from the letter of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/238) that, despite some challenges, the advance
team has enjoyed freedom of movement and has not
observed major military concentrations or conflict.
We welcome the news that the advance team has
been able to visit key hotspots of the conflict, including
Homs, and that it has observed calm and an end to
major hostilities. The deployment of the advance team
has already proved to be a calming influence, as
violence has decreased with its presence. The marked
decrease in violence should now be sustained. We
emphasize that there is an urgent need for the violence
to cease and for all parties to comply with all aspects of
the six-point proposal put forward by Joint Special
Envoy Kofi Annan.
S/PV.6756
12-304788
In view of the Secretary-General’s statement that
a supervision mission will be important to sustain peace
and a meaningful political process in the country, we
welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution 2043
(2012) by the Council today, thereby providing for the
expeditious deployment of the United Nations
Supervision Mission in Syria (UNSMIS). We urge all
sides to help assure UNSMIS’s effective operation by
facilitating its work and guaranteeing the safety of its
personnel. Its deployment will be important for
ensuring that Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan’s six-
point plan is implemented; it will also play a crucial
role in efforts towards the goal of ensuring that all sides
commit to a peaceful dialogue, designed to promote an
all-inclusive negotiation process leading to a political
outcome that responds to the legitimate aspirations of
the Syrian people.
Finally, it is equally important that all members of
the international community give this resolution and the
Annan plan the chance to succeed, and that they uphold
and respect the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Syria, as well as the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China was a sponsor of resolution 2043 (2012), which
we have just adopted. China has always maintained that
Syria’s independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity — as well as the choice and will of the Syrian
people — should be respected. We have always
supported and are actively committed to promoting a
just, peaceful and proper settlement of the Syrian crisis
through political dialogue. The good offices of Joint
Special Envoy Kofi Annan constitute a practical way
out and an important channel through which to steer a
political settlement of the crisis, and he has made
positive and significant progress. We urge all parties,
including the Syrian Government and the opposition, to
cooperate fully with his efforts in order to create the
conditions for launching a Syrian-led, inclusive
political process.
We also call on the international community to
maintain its firm support for Mr. Annan’s efforts and to
help consolidate the results achieved so far. We are
strongly opposed to any words or deeds that may create
difficulties for Mr. Annan in his work. The immediate
and full deployment of the United Nations Supervision
Mission in Syria (UNSMIS) is critical to solidifying
Mr. Annan’s progress and promoting the full
implementation of his six-point proposal. We hope that
the Supervision Mission will fully respect Syria’s
sovereignty and dignity, act strictly in accordance with
what the Security Council has authorized, adhere to the
principles of neutrality, objectivity and impartiality, and
play an active and constructive role in pushing for a
sustained cessation of violence in Syria. We also call on
the Syrian Government and other relevant parties to
support and cooperate with UNSMIS.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Exactly one week ago, Guatemala voted to adopt
resolution 2042 (2012). In spite of the fact that not all
the conditions laid down in that resolution have been
met before the next step is taken, today we again voted
to adopt the new resolution, 2043 (2012). We did so on
the recommendation of the Secretary-General and of
Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan, and in order to be
consistent with the position we have taken on the
events in Syria since their beginning.
While we share the scepticism expressed by
various members of the Council regarding the
commitment of the Government of Syria to complying
with all six points in the Special Envoy’s proposal —
points that the Government has committed to — we
believe that the best course of action is to give the
Government and the members of the opposition the
benefit of the doubt, and to trust that the presence of
United Nations observers on the ground will make a
genuine difference to the capacity of the United Nations
and the League of Arab States to help find a way out of
this crisis.
We should remember that while the task at hand is
to put an immediate end to the violence, a lasting
solution requires negotiations among every sector of
Syrian society to reach a peaceful agreement
characterized by inclusive democratization and a
respect for human rights. That is a noble objective, and
we believe that it is worth taking this chance to see it
fulfilled — perhaps the last chance of avoiding far
worse evils.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Let me begin
by thanking the Russian delegation for introducing the
draft resolution that the Security Council has adopted
unanimously today as resolution 2043 (2012). It is a
significant step in the Council’s collective support for
the efforts of the Joint Special Envoy, Mr. Kofi Annan.
It is a matter for satisfaction that Mr. Annan’s
efforts over the past seven weeks have resulted in an
improvement in the situation in Syria. Although there
S/PV.6756
912-30478
have been reports of violations, the ceasefire that came
into force on 12 April has been observed by all parties
in a large part of Syria. Obviously, there is a need to
sustain the gains made so far. That should be facilitated
by the expeditious deployment of the United Nations
Supervision Mission in Syria (UNSMIS), authorized by
today’s resolution.
That resolution is also an appeal to all parties to
walk back from violence, so that impartial supervision
and monitoring of the ceasefire can contribute to the
parties’ observing and upholding their commitment. We
voted in favour of resolution 2043 (2012) with the
expectation that UNSMIS will implement its mandate
impartially, objectively and fairly, and will help the
Syrian parties build on the ceasefire and begin an
inclusive, Syrian-led political process that will meet the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. For the
Annan plan to succeed, all parties must implement their
respective commitments under the six-point proposal.
We note that the preliminary understanding signed on
19 April by the Syrian Government and the United
Nations sets out clear conditions that have to be met by
the Government and the armed opposition groups. We
hope that all parties, including the opposition, will
abide by those conditions.
While the Syrian parties cooperate with UNSMIS
and the Joint Special Envoy, it is also essential that all
countries interested in securing peace and stability in
Syria lend their full support to Mr. Annan and
UNSMIS, and that they refrain from any action that
might cause further bloodshed. This will help to
expeditiously resolve the Syrian crisis, as well as to
ensure that it does not spill beyond Syria’s borders.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): Let me begin by thanking
the Kingdom of Morocco for its condolences on
yesterday’s tragic air crash in Pakistan.
Pakistan welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2043 (2012), which builds on resolution
2042 (2012) and earlier agreements of the Council.
Today we have taken another significant step forward in
the process that we hope will lead to a peaceful
resolution of the crisis in Syria. It is also another
reaffirmation of the Council’s united backing of the
efforts of the Joint Special Envoy, Kofi Annan. The
continuing spirit of accommodation exhibited by all
Council members in this regard is highly appreciated.
With this resolution, the Council has authorized
the establishment of the United Nations Supervision
Mission in Syria to monitor the cessation of armed
violence in all its forms by all parties, and to monitor
and support the full implementation of the six-point
proposal of the Special Envoy. By authorizing the
Mission, we hope that the dynamics on the ground will
change, resulting in a complete cessation of violence
and creating conditions conducive to an inclusive,
Syrian-owned and Syrian-led dialogue process. It
would thus lead to achieving the overall objective of
the Council of promoting a peaceful political solution
to the situation in Syria, with full respect for its unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We call upon all sides in Syria to fully cooperate
with the Mission so as to enable it to carry out its
mandate effectively and in full safety and security. All
sides, particularly the Government of Syria, must fulfil
their responsibilities and commitments.
We also expect the Mission to undertake its work
with the utmost neutrality and objectivity. At the same
time, we would like to recall and caution that any steps
or efforts that could undermine the work of the mission
or the Special Envoy must be avoided.
Finally, let me reiterate Pakistan’s continued
support for all efforts towards the fulfilment of our
common objective of a peaceful political settlement of
the Syrian crisis. It is that spirit that we decided to
co-sponsor the resolution.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): Togo, like
the other members of the Security Council, welcomes
the adoption of resolution 2043 (2012), which reflects
the unity of action that has prevailed within the Council
since we adopted resolution 2042 (2012) a week ago.
By voting in favour of the resolution, Togo has
reaffirmed its firm support for Mr. Annan’s mission as
well as for the efforts made by the Secretary-General
and all stakeholders striving for a swift return to peace
in Syria.
Togo remains convinced that the achievement of a
peaceful and prosperous Syria is first and foremost the
responsibility of the Syrians themselves — presidential
and opposition supporters alike. It is for that reason that
Togo calls on all Syrians, from whatever side, to strive
for a more effective implementation of the resolution
that the Council has just adopted.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the United States.
S/PV.6756
12-3047810
The United States voted in favour of resolution
2043 (2012) authorizing the establishment of the United
Nations Supervision Mission in Syria, but we are sober
about the risks, all the more so given the Al-Assad
regime’s long record of broken promises, deceit and
disregard for the most basic standards of humanity.
The Syrian people, like us, know that the
deployment of 300, or even 3,000, unarmed observers
cannot on its own stop the Al-Assad regime from
waging its barbaric campaign of violence against the
Syrian people.
What can bring a halt to that murderous rampage
is continued and intensified external pressure on the Al-
Assad regime. The Syrian opposition has said that it
welcomes the deployment of the United Nations
military observers and additional human rights and
other civilian monitors, because they will be impartial
eyes and ears on the ground to bear witness to the
Syrian Government’s flagrant and persistent violations
of its commitments. Even more so, the Syrian people
expect, and deserve, that the Council will stand behind
today’s resolution and ensure that swift and meaningful
consequences are imposed should the regime continue
to flout its obligations.
Since the adoption of resolution 2042 (2012),
exactly one week ago, in which the Council
unanimously called on the Syrian Government to
honour all its obligations, including a sustained
cessation of violence, the regime has unleashed yet
another wave of horrific violence against its own
people, resulting in the death of scores of Syrians daily.
The Government’s use of shelling and heavy weaponry,
in particular in Homs, has reached levels that surpass
those before the ceasefire. Syrian Government troops in
armour have not been withdrawn from cities and
returned to barracks; protesters are still being
intimidated and murdered by Government forces; the
status of thousands of detainees remains unclear; and
precious little progress has been made on the issue of
humanitarian access, with an estimated 1 million
civilians still in urgent need of humanitarian assistance.
The Security Council has called upon the
Government to take concrete action. The Syrian
Government has ignored the Council. In the United
States, our patience is exhausted. Let me be plain: no
one should assume that the United States will agree to
renew this Mission at the end of 90 days. If there is not
a sustained cessation of violence, full freedom of
movement for United Nations personnel and rapid,
meaningful progress on other aspects — all other
aspects — of the six-point plan, then we must all
conclude that the Mission will have run its course.
We will not wait 90 days to pursue measures
against the Syrian Government if it continues to violate
its commitments or obstruct the monitors’ work. We
express our deep gratitude to the monitors who are now
embarking on this unprecedented and risky mission. We
should be under no illusions: they are going to be
dependent for security on the very Government that is
responsible for the main security threats.
They are going to be deployed in the midst of
protesters who are desperate for a protection that the
monitors are not equipped or mandated to provide, and
they will be deployed in numbers too small to cover the
entire country but large enough to give rise to
expectations that will be impossible to meet if the
Syrian Government does not fulfil its commitments
towards a sustained cessation of violence.
All of our experience with United Nations
peacekeeping over the last 65 years teaches us that such
missions require that there be a peace to keep in order
for them to succeed.
The opposition has said that it wants and needs
this Mission, hoping that the presence of the monitors
will have a restraining effect on the Syrian Government
and help uphold the rights of the Syrian people to
assemble and express themselves freely. If that hope
does not materialize, however, the failure will be the
Syrian Government’s, and it must be held accountable.
And we must be prepared to do so, given the Al-Assad
regime’s track record to date.
The United States strongly supports the full
implementation of the Joint Special Envoy’s six-point
plan. Yet let there be no doubt: we, our allies and others
in this body are planning and preparing for those
actions that will be required of all of us if the Al-Assad
regime persists in the slaughter of the Syrian people.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I followed with great interest the statements
made by my colleagues members of the Council, and I
S/PV.6756
1112-30478
noticed that some of the statements calling on the
Syrian Government to scrupulously implement the
provisions of the resolution that has just been adopted
are themselves not in consonance with those provisions,
as they use — probably owing to a lack of awareness —
the term “regime” in referring to the Syrian
Government. I studied the resolution but I did not come
across the term “regime” therein. I saw the words
“Syrian Government”.
Yesterday morning, I met with the Secretary-
General and his senior aides. I appealed to him to
continue his good offices, as mandated of him by the
Charter, and to further engage positively in the efforts
being made to guarantee the desired national political
solution, with Syrian leadership. That is crux of the
Annan plan. I should now like to take this opportunity
to address to the Council the same appeal I addressed to
the Secretary-General yesterday morning.
Since the beginning of the crisis, the Syrian
Government has been open to any sincere and impartial
efforts and initiatives to help it emerge from the current
crisis affecting the Syrian Government, State and
people, while preserving its sovereignty without
prejudice to the independent national resolution of the
crisis and guaranteeing its stability and security.
My country has demonstrated considerable
cooperation and commitment vis-à-vis the efforts of
Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan, based on our interest
in achieving a peaceful political solution to the Syrian
crisis. The Syrian Government has implemented the
part of the Annan plan relating to its responsibilities.
We continue to inform the Special Envoy regularly in
writing of the measures being taken in that regard on a
daily basis, including the release of a number of the
detainees who were not responsible for crimes, the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to the affected
regions in cooperation with the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and the granting
of visas to a great many members of the media — over
600 all told.
I am pleased to announce today, on behalf of my
country’s Government, that Syria has informed
Mr. Annan today of its implementation of article 2 of
the plan, as well as all of the subsidiary paragraphs of
that article, namely, (a), (b) and (c).
The forces responsible for maintaining public
order and the police forces will ensure the maintenance
of security, order and law and will exercise the utmost
degree of restraint. They will be prepared, as the
Governments of the countries represented here and
those of any State of the world would be, to carry out
their duties in responding to armed terrorist groups if
they continue to attack citizens, Government forces and
public and private property and if they continue to
commit acts of violence. Our national army and armed
forces will remain prepared to defend our homeland’s
territory and borders against any aggression, ensuring
the protection of strategic centres and sites such as
ports, airports, international routes, oil refineries and
infrastructure facilities.
The dispatching of impartial monitors to the
Syrian Arab Republic was a basic Syrian demand,
which stems from a position of strength and self-
confidence. The motive behind that demand is the fact
that global public opinion is well aware of the reality of
the situation and monitors the crimes of armed terrorist
groups, disregarding political and media
misinformation.
That Syrian position was initially demonstrated by
the reception of the team of the Arab League monitors,
which submitted an objective report documenting the
crimes of terrorists against our people and institutions.
This prompted the Governments of Qatar and Saudi
Arabia to withdraw their monitors, which led to the
termination of the mission, fully ignoring the mission’s
report.
My Government has reiterated once again its
willingness to cooperate and its openness by recently
signing, in Damascus, the preliminary agreement that
governs the work of the United Nations Supervision
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic in the framework
of respecting Syrian sovereignty and guaranteeing the
commitment of all parties. Our Government is ready to
sign the protocol regulating the deployment of the
United Nations monitors when the United Nations is
ready to do so, on the basis of the preliminary
agreement.
My country has a vested interest in the success of
the work of the Mission, given our keenness to achieve
stability, safety and security for our country and our
citizens. We would like to state here that the monitors
must carry out their work on the basis of objectivity,
impartiality and professionalism.
Some parties have responded to this clear-cut
commitment by the Syrian Government by carrying out
a hysterical campaign of questioning, which clearly
S/PV.6756
12-3047812
reveals their bad intentions in principle towards the
Syrian Arab Republic, its homeland and its people. This
demonstrates that they are frustrated by the initial
return of stability and calm to Syria.
Armed terrorist groups met that Syrian
commitment to the Annan plan with a lengthy series of
violations that undermine the Annan plan. They have
escalated their terrorist acts, their killings of civilians
and the forces of public order, and their destruction of
public and private property. We have regularly provided
Mr. Annan, the Secretary-General and the President of
the Council with documented information on the total
number of violations perpetrated by the armed groups
since the 12 April ceasefire went into effect. As of
yesterday, those violations now total 593 in number.
In that regard, we are gravely concerned about the
curious ongoing disregard for the actions of those
groups, which coincides with a systemic political
misinformation campaign demonizing the Syrian
authorities and the Syrian army and accusing the Syrian
State of the crimes perpetrated by those groups by
turning the facts on their heads while saying nothing
about the crimes perpetrated by them.
All of that is designed to bring about the failure of
the Annan plan and to hold Syrian authorities
responsible for that failure, with a view to initiating
military action under humanitarian pretexts. That is
similar to the mendacious allegations that led to the
destruction of Libyan infrastructure and the
assassination of 150,000 civilians at the hands of NATO
forces with the participation of Qatar.
Once again, Syria would like to reiterate its hope
that Mr. Annan and the Security Council will address
the crisis in a comprehensive manner, given the need to
redouble efforts to achieve commitments by the armed
groups and those standing behind them so that violence
will cease.
The Syrian Government’s support for the Annan
mission is not enough to bring about its success. In
word and deed, international, regional, Arab and other
groups must cease to fund, arm and train the armed
groups, desist from encouraging them to continue their
terrorist acts and refrain from inciting the opposition to
reject the comprehensive national dialogue.
Some of those who predict the failure of the
Annan plan are doing their best to ensure that it does. A
case in point is the statement made by the Emir of
Qatar. Two days after the adoption of resolution 2042
(2012), he stated that the chance of the Annan plan
succeeding did not exceed 3 per cent.
Creating parallel tracks to the Annan plan would
undermine it and squander the efforts made to achieve a
peaceful solution to the crisis. That includes the
conferences attended by a number of States in Tunis,
Istanbul and Paris, among others, at which alternative
plans outside international legitimacy were sanctioned
on the arming of the opposition and imposing sanctions,
while rejecting peaceful solutions. Depriving the Syrian
people of stability and development constituted the
considerable triumph to which they aspire.
It is paradoxical that, following Syria’s openness
in dealing with the initiative, yet another parallel
conference has been held to exacerbate the crisis, take
the solution out of the political framework and
undermine any positive efforts to stop the bloodshed.
I would like to emphasize an absolute truth: we
reject interference in our internal affairs. We are keen to
protect the sovereignty of our homeland while pressing
ahead with the process of reform and comprehensive
national dialogue, and we reject any type of
dependency, trusteeship and direct or indirect
occupation. Syrians are well aware that the forces that
bear grudges against their country target all Syrians,
trading on their suffering and legitimate aspirations in a
bloody stock market in order to protect the interests of
Israel, its defenders and allies.
On this occasion, the Ambassador of Germany
said that his country is eager to protect minorities in
Syria. In a previous statement, I said that there are no
minorities or majorities in Syria, just one Syrian people
proud of its religious and cultural diversity. That people
does not want any radical wahabi or salafist factions to
penetrate its ranks vis-à-vis terrorist trends propagated
by Saudi Arabia and Qatar.
The President: There are no more names
inscribed on the list of speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present state of its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.
