United Nations S/PV.7161
asdfSecurity Council
Sixty-ninth year
7161stmeeting
Monday, 28 April 2014, 10 a.m.
New York
Provisional
President: Mr. Wali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nigeria)
Members: Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Perceval
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Quinlan
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Cherif
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Barros
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Liu Jieyi
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Araud
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Hmoud
Lithuania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Murmokaitė
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Lucas
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Oh Joon
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Iliichev
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Gasana
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . Sir Mark Lyall Grant
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Power
Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Security sector reform: challenges and opportunities
Report of the Secretary-General on Securing States and societies: strengthening
the United Nations comprehensive support to security sector reform (S/2013/480)
Letter dated 1 April 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2014/238)
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.
*1431258*
14-31258 (E)
2/30 14-31258
S/PV.7161 Maintenance of international peace and security 28/04/2014
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Security sector reform: challenges
and opportunities
Report of the Secretary-General on Securing
States and societies: strengthening the
United Nations comprehensive support to
security sector reform (S/2013/480)
Letter dated 1 April 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2014/238)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome
the Secretary-General, the Ministers and other
representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their participation is an affirmation of the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Algeria, Brazil, the Czech Republic,
Egypt, Estonia, Guatemala, Japan, India, Indonesia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Kazakhstan, Malaysia,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Pakistan, Senegal, Slovakia, South Africa, Spain,
Switzerland and Turkey to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/480, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on “Securing States and societies:
strengthening the United Nations comprehensive
support to security sector reform”. I also wish to draw the
attention of Council members to document S/2014/238,
which contains a letter dated 1 April 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of Nigeria addressed to the
Secretary-General transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I thank Nigeria for
convening this important debate.
The purpose of security sector reform, simply put,
is to make people’s lives safer. Security institutions are
at the core of the compact between the State and its
citizens. The legitimate authority to use force comes
with a corresponding responsibility to protect and
respect human rights. A professional and accountable
security sector under the framework of the rule of
law can strengthen public confidence in the State and
provide the stability necessary for peacebuilding and
development.
However, security institutions that lack the
right training or adequate governance and oversight
mechanisms may fail to provide basic security or even
violate the rights of the very people they are entrusted
to protect. We have also seen institutions misused in
support of narrow political and sectarian interests, with
destabilizing effects.
Earlier this month, I visited the Central African
Republic and saw the terrible consequences of
disintegrating security institutions. I also observed
the pressing need to extend State authority and ensure
public safety and the rule of law. Today’s discussion is
especially timely, for the future of the Central African
Republic and for many other situations.
Security sector reform is a core element of
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development. The
United Nations has strengthened the assistance we
provide to national authorities to undertake critical
and complex security sector reform processes. Our
support has included assisting in the development and
implementation of national security strategies in Côte
d’Ivoire and Mali; contributing to public financial
management of the security sectors in Liberia and
Somalia; and supporting defence sector reform in
the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. A majority of Security Council
resolutions on post-conflict contexts contain requests
to address security sector reform.
We have also enhanced our ability to deliver
support through the dedicated Security Sector Reform
Unit in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
the Inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task Force,
which brings together 14 United Nations partners. The
14-31258 3/30
28/04/2014 Maintenance of international peace and security S/PV.7161
rights and on how to ensure the flexible resources
needed to meet the needs on the ground.
I am very encouraged that the Council will adopt
the first thematic draft resolution on security sector
reform. That will boost political momentum for such
efforts.
The sight of an officer in uniform should evoke
feelings of order, discipline and security. Our collective
goal is to help States build professional security
institutions solidly anchored in a culture of service
rather than an unchecked and unaccountable exercise
of power and force. Together we can make that a reality.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I will now deliver a statement in my national
capacity as the Foreign Minister of Nigeria.
I would like to begin by thanking the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his presence at this
debate and for sharing his perspectives on security
sector reform. I also wish to thank the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and European
Integration of Montenegro, His Excellency Igor Lukšić;
the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway, His
Excellency Hans Brattskar; and the State Secretary of
the Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs of the
Slovak Republic, His Excellency Peter Burian, whose
participation in today’s debate is another illustration of
the strong commitment of their countries to security
sector reform.
It is gratifying to note that security sector reform
has become firmly established as an essential element
of multidimensional peacekeeping. Effective security
sector reform contributes to conflict prevention by
making security institutions effective and accountable.
That fosters a sense of safety and security among the
population and sustains the conditions of peace.
Security sector reform (SSR) is of cardinal
importance for the entire peacebuilding continuum,
extending beyond post-conflict reconstruction to
include conflict prevention, peacebuilding and
development. In October 2011, during its presidency of
the Council, Nigeria had the privilege of presiding at
an open debate (see S/PV.6630) that culminated in the
Council’s adoption of a presidential statement on SSR
(S/PRST/2011/19). That statement built on previous
initiatives of the Council on the subject. It is my pleasure
and honour to be here today for this important debate,
United Nations has developed standards and guidance
to strengthen the impact of our efforts, and we have
fostered strategic partnerships, including with the
African Union and the World Bank. We stand ready
to work with other interested partners on that strategic
track.
As we make progress, we also know that much
remains to be done. In our support to national
authorities, we need to ensure that security services
have the adequate capacity to perform their duties.
Nowhere else is this as evident today as in the Central
African Republic, Mali and Somalia. It requires
improved mapping of needs and gaps and facilitating
a coordinated response from partners. Strengthening
operational effectiveness must be combined with
efforts to build a strong governance framework, robust
accountability and oversight mechanisms and a culture
of integrity and respect for human rights. National
ownership is imperative.
There is an increasing gap between the growing
expectations of what the United Nations could and
should do and our resources to meet those expectations.
Contexts and mandates are complex, requiring the
United Nations to engage in delicate political processes
such as national security dialogues, vetting, public
expenditure reviews or defence sector reform. Looking
ahead, I have identified four priorities.
First, we must recognize the links between security
sector reform and the broader reform processes,
including legal and institutional reform, national
reconciliation and political dialogue. Security sector
reform is not just a matter of technical support. I intend
to instruct my Special Representatives to leverage their
good offices functions in support of that work.
Secondly, since security sector reform takes
time, host nations must do more to meet immediate
security needs. In accordance with the United Nations
human rights due diligence policy, the Organization is
obligated to withdraw support to security actors who
commit human rights violations or fail to address them.
Thirdly, all actors involved in that work should place
more emphasis on sector-wide approaches that address
the strategic and governance framework underpinning
all security institutions.
Fourthly, we must reflect on the institutional
capacities within our Organization, on links to other
key areas of work such as the rule of law and human
4/30 14-31258
S/PV.7161 Maintenance of international peace and security 28/04/2014
the United Nations. Nigeria is committed to working
closely with other members of the African Union for
the effective implementation of the AU SSR policy
and to ensure its integration in the African peace and
security architecture.
At the subregional level, the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) is also in the
process of drawing up a regional framework on SSR
and governance. The aim of that initiative is to enable
ECOWAS to fulfil its role of assisting member States
to put in place early warning mechanisms and rapid
response to threats to regional peace and security. In
addition, ECOWAS has adopted a code of conduct
for armed forces and security services and a conflict
prevention framework, which contains elements of
security sector governance. Those instruments seek to
address transnational threats to security that are beyond
the capacity of the security sectors of any one country
in the subregion. Such threats include transnational
organized crime, piracy, human trafficking and
terrorism.
We are also seeking to expand our existing
partnerships in SSR. In that regard, the partnership
with the Republic of South Africa on developing
African perspectives on SSR here in New York is
particularly significant. That is an important forum at
the level of permanent representatives, which began
in May 2010 and has since become a biannual event.
A second forum was held in 2012. Nigeria will have
the privilege of hosting the third forum this year. We
are reminded, by the nature, complexity and sources
of insecurity in the world today, that security cannot
mean the well-being of the State alone. Enduring
security must therefore address human security in all
its ramifications. That implies that the State cannot be
safe while the well-being of its citizens is constantly
threatened or jeopardized.
Security institutions can be alienated from the very
societies they are meant to serve and protect. In such
contexts, they cannot be viably reformed without a
transformation of the broader relationship between the
State and society. That requires addressing the social
contract on which the entire governance framework
is based in order to achieve greater transparency,
accountability and adherence to the rule of law. I
therefore wish to stress that viable reform of the security
sector must extend beyond train and equip activities to
include democratic governance and civilian oversight.
That is the only way to guard the guardians and to
which seeks to explore further the crucial question of
United Nations support for SSR as a vehicle for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The presidential statement of October 2011 requested
the Secretary-General to conduct a comprehensive
review of the United Nations engagement in security
sector reform. We are pleased to note that the Secretary-
General responded to that request by issuing his second
report on security sector reform in August 2013,
entitled “Securing States and societies: strengthening
the United Nations comprehensive support to security
sector reform” (S/2013/480). We welcome that report
with appreciation and stand ready to work with both the
Secretariat and Member States in the implementation of
that important recommendation therein.
In our efforts at international and multilateral
security cooperation, one major lesson that Nigeria
has learned is the increasing value and, indeed, the
indispensability of horizontal exchanges of experiences
by countries that have undergone or are undergoing
SSR. We have come to recognize than an exchange of
experiences is a valuable element of security sector
reform support, in addition to a traditional focus on
technical and financial assistance. Nigeria reiterates
its commitment to South-South exchanges and strongly
encourages the Secretary-General to further explore the
possibilities offered by such horizontal relationships
between Member States in supporting national
security sector reform processes. Nigeria is also firmly
committed to engaging the General Assembly on the
critical issue of the United Nations role in supporting
SSR.
Nigeria would like to send a message of solidarity
to other States that have shown commitment to
promoting SSR on the agenda of the United Nations.
Worthy of particular mention and commendation is the
United Nations Group of Friends of SSR, initiated by
Slovakia, and now co-chaired with South Africa. That
Group has played a commendable role in expanding the
perspectives of security sector reform among United
Nations Member States.
At the regional level, Nigeria takes note of the
progress made by the African Union (AU) in its efforts
to define an African framework for SSR. One major
development in that regard was the adoption by the AU
Heads of State and Government, in January 2013, of
the first continental policy framework on SSR. That
represents a major initiative at the regional level to
help define the global framework being elaborated by
14-31258 5/30
28/04/2014 Maintenance of international peace and security S/PV.7161
the national level has harmful transnational impacts. A
State without security is a State where terrorists and
criminals will thrive, the smugglers of illegal arms
and narcotics will base their operations, internal strife
may generate a flood of refugees, corruption runs
rampant and shortages of food and other resources lead
to humanitarian disaster. We cannot forget that public
security is a prerequisite for economic and social well-
being. Freedom from fear is critical to achieve freedom
from want.
It is highly appropriate, therefore, that the
United Nations do all it can in partnership with
Governments and other international actors to support
the establishment of effective security structures.
That task is especially relevant when a country is in
the process of recovery from conflict. The absence of
credible security sector reform (SSR) has had dramatic
consequences for such societies. For example, in
Liberia inadequate management of the security sector
contributed to a resumption of civil conflict in the
mid-1990s. The transition from weak or non-existent
security institutions to ones that are viable and strong
is never easy. That is why security sector reform has
become a more important part of United Nations efforts
in post-conflict rebuilding.
The creation of effective, accountable, rights-
respecting and sustainable security structures that
respond to national needs and priorities is critical to
forestall a return to violence. It is also an essential
ingredient for the successful exit of United Nations
peacekeeping and special political missions. Last
month, the United Nations was able to conclude 20 years
of peacekeeping and political activities in Sierra Leone
in part because improved security institutions were
in place. Sierra Leone now contributes peacekeeping
forces to the African Union Mission in Somalia.
Too often, approaches to SSR are limited to base
training or the building up of individual security
units and fail to create security institutions that can
effectively manage national forces and be responsive to
the complex needs of societies. Reforms to the security
sector — for example, in places like Mali and the Central
African Republic — have to be nested within broader
political reforms aimed at national reconciliation and
transitional justice. In places like the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, it is imperative that security
sector reform include not only training in military
tactics, but also in responding to threats to civilians and
guarding against sexual violence in conflict.
ensure that those who are charged with the provision of
security do not themselves become threats to the larger
society. National ownership of the process is therefore
important. The United Nations should bear that in
mind as it seeks to implement aspects of its mandate
to support the national processes of SSR in various
countries.
We now have a unique opportunity to take another
important step towards consolidating the progress
made in the United Nations on that important matter.
A Council draft resolution on SSR will be the first of
its kind, if agreed by all members of the Council. It
would enable the Council to codify and operationalize
the key principles of SSR. In adopting that important
draft resolution, we would be demonstrating our
resolve as member States to effectively address the
vulnerabilities in our security environment. We would
also be providing the strategic direction and leadership
that is expected and required of the Council.
It is my privilege and honour to be part of such a
pioneering enterprise. I thank all Council members for
making that possible and, on behalf of the people and
Government of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, I thank
all other delegations for participating in this debate.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the other members of the Security
Council.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing and for his
constant efforts to enhance the United Nations support
for security sector reform. I also want to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on organizing this debate on a
topic that is central to the Council’s role in preserving
international stability and peace. I applaud Nigeria’s
leadership on this issue.
My Government looks forward to the adoption this
afternoon of the Council’s first draft resolution on the
subject, which spells out the need to the strengthen our
collective commitment to improve governance with an
emphasis on security structures that are better designed,
more capable and more fully respectful of public needs
and individual rights. We all know that basic security
is a fundamental civic need. Without it, families live
in fear, economic investments are not made and the
rules by which a society can live in harmony are not
enforced. Furthermore, the lack of effective security at
6/30 14-31258
S/PV.7161 Maintenance of international peace and security 28/04/2014
well as for the concept note (S/2014/238, annex) that has
been circulated among delegations. We would also like
to thank His Excellency the Secretary-General of the
United Nations for his briefing.
We hope that our debate today will contribute to
putting into effect discussions on security sector reform
(SSR) — from defining the United Nations concept
and role therein to creating guidelines and practical
mechanisms for defining the form of assistance
that should be offered. Security sector reform is an
important aspect of peacekeeping at large and of
United Nations special political missions. It serves as
an important element of the peacebuilding agenda in
achieving stability in post-conflict situations.
Jordan believes that the United Nations has an
important role to play in providing assistance in SSR,
given its legitimacy, objectivity, neutrality and the
public acceptance it enjoys among national authorities,
local communities and host countries, in addition to
the experience and expertise it enjoys in that area,
whether at Headquarters or in the field. The efforts of
the United Nations should be focused on the main goal
of achieving SSR, namely, to produce a security sector
that is professional, effective and efficient, can be held
accountable and respects the rule of law and human
rights values.
In that regard, Jordan underscores that United
Nations participation in providing assistance must
always be based on fundamental rules, which include
host countries providing security, their having national
ownership of the reform process and their coordinating
assistance in line with national priorities. In addition,
national authorities must bear in mind the needs of
the population and their aspirations. Jordan supports
the comprehensive approach adopted by the United
Nations in order to support national SSR efforts. We
believe that the Security Council has an important
role to play in that respect, as well as in providing a
strategic vision — especially given the marked increase
in the number of mandates that include SSR and their
increasing complexity.
At the same time, Jordan underscores that the
General Assembly has a role to play that is no less
important than peacekeeping operations and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. Jordan
appreciates the efforts exerted by the Secretariat.
We calll for increasing coordination and cooperation
system-wide, including between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations and deepening
In that connection, my Government welcomes the
development of the Integrated Technical Guidance
Notes on Security Sector Reform drafted by the
inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task Force and
including guidance on such critical issues as national
ownership, gender responsiveness and consistency
with democratic principles. That guidance should
give rise to a United Nations system-wide training
regimen. We support the United Nations’ work with
host Governments on strategic planning, international
dialogues and the sharpening of oversight capacity. We
appreciate the United Nations commitment to acquire
the diverse expertise needed to implement its security-
sector-reform programmes in countries with specialized
requirements, and we have seen the benefits of this
in the rapid deployment of support to United Nations
missions, such as that in Somalia.
Finally, we firmly endorse both the Secretary-
General’s emphasis on national ownership of the SSR
process and the need for appropriate SSR capacities
within United Nations missions. We will take those
imperatives into account when formulating future
mandates for United Nations peacekeeping and political
operations. We also share his expressed desire to build
stronger partnerships between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations to support
security sector reform in countries recovering from
conflict and undergoing transitions.
In conclusion, I want to thank you again,
Mr. President, for presiding over this meeting, and the
Secretary-General for his leadership and guidance.
Security sector reform is one of many topics that come
before the Council where the problems are easy to
identify yet extremely difficult to solve. We know what
a good security system looks like, but we also know
that creating one involves a multitude of variables
and requires a major investment of energy, resources
and time. Without a strong and enduring political
commitment by the State itself, international efforts
cannot succeed. But where national partners truly
desire progress, we must do all we can to assist them in
that quest. Lasting international peace and security and
reliable respect for human rights around the world will
not be possible without additional meaningful progress
on security sector reform.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Mr. President, I would like to welcome you and
to extend my thanks to the delegation of Nigeria for
holding this open debate on security sector refore, as
14-31258 7/30
28/04/2014 Maintenance of international peace and security S/PV.7161
Security sector reform consists of several elements
and is an important instrument for both peacebuilding
and conflict prevention. Such reform must therefore
be comprehensive and include all the elements that go
to make up the security sector — police, the military,
intelligence and border-control services, the protection
of civilians and more. It must establish effective,
accountable and professional institutions in order to
strengthen the security of peoples and States.
Chad welcomes the fact that SSR has become
an essential component of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations as well as United Nations-
initiated development. We commend the significant
achievements of the United Nations in this area,
including, among others, the creation and strengthening
of special inter-agency SSR teams, SSR capacity-
building in missions and at Headquarters, and the
establishment of SSR expert groups and of dialogues
and partnerships with regional organizations, Member
States and civil society. The United Nations has also
provided assistance to several national processes,
including through technical, legal and political advice,
the assessment and analysis of needs, and technical
support for developing political strategies and plans for
SSR.
Successful security sector reform depends primarily
onnationalauthorities’ownershipoftheprocessandfirm
commitment to designing and implementing national
strategies and priorities. In that regard, beyond the
support forthcoming from the international community,
national authorities must allocate supplementary
resources in order to operationalize the process. Chad,
which underwent several successive armed conflicts
after its independence in 1960, has become a place of
relative peace and stability, thanks to reforms in the
areas of defence, policing and justice. Those reforms
were implemented thanks to national dialogue and
reconciliation efforts and an effective disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme, coupled
with subregional efforts backed by agreements with
its neighbours, leading to the professionalization and
strengthening of the security sector. Chad is happy to
share its modest experience and proud to be able to
contribute today to regional and international efforts
aimed at promoting and maintaining peace and stability
in the subregion and the world.
In the face of the growing threats in the Sahel-
Saharan region, which include terrorism, organized
crime and trafficking in drugs, humans and arms, to
partnerships with them. In recent years, the United
Nations has achieved much in the assistance it provides
in the SSR area. However, the increase in the number
of conflicts and transnational threats such as terrorism
and drug trafficking, along with changes in the security
environment, require us to continue exploring means
to increase the United Nations capability to respond to
such changes.
In that regard, Jordan calls on Member States to
enhance United Nations capabilities and provide the
resources that will enable it to effectively support
national authorities. As a troop-contributing country,
we know how essential it is that support and financing
are provided to peacekeeping operations in general
so that they can carry out their mandates, including
security sector reform.
We support the vital role the United Nations plays
in facilitating national dialogues on security sector
reform, bsaed on the Security Council’s mandates.
We agree that universality is crucial to security sector
reform and to ensuring that a national process is
embraced by host Governments. It is important that
consensus be achieved between national authorities at
every level, and that those authorities are in constant
consultation with national human-rights institutions
and civil society. We also believe it essential that the
Security Council consult host countries when designing
mandates that concern them. It is important that we
increase understanding of security sector reform and
awareness of the role of the United Nations in providing
assistance in this area with concepts, for example, such
as the rule of law and non-proliferation of weapons,
particularly since the concept of security sector reform
itself is relatively new.
In conclusion, Jordan looks forward to cooperating
with other Member States in enhancing the momentum
that has been created in security sector reform in order
to meet the needs of our peoples and improve national
Governments’ capacities. A sense of safety, security and
confidence among the people is essential to achieving
sustainable peace and security.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to welcome you to the Security Council, Mr. President,
and congratulate you on presiding over today’s meeting,
as well as to thank Nigeria for taking the initiative in
organizing this open debate on security sector reform
(SSR). I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his statement.
8/30 14-31258
S/PV.7161 Maintenance of international peace and security 28/04/2014
professionalism of the security services, which must
evolve in a judicial and penal context that respects
human rights.
Among all the foregoing measures, the
rehabilitation of police and gendarmerie services and
relaunhing justice services are priorities. Because of
their visibility in everyday places, police officers and
gendarmes are part of restoring the population’s sense
of security and trust in the State. We see that in the
Central African Republic. Faced with the collapse of the
State and with organized, stirred-up and manipulated
intercommunal violence, everyone feels threatened
and no lasting political dialogue will be established
if the citizens do not see police patrolling for their
safety, judges prosecuting perpetrators of crime,
and criminals going to prison. All those actions help
build the security system that countries need and to
which we can subsequently transfer our peacekeeping
responsibilities. They are therefore the basis of our exit
strategies.
Of the 47 resolutions adopted by the Council in
2013, 24 make explicit reference to SSR, which is a
sign that the Council will not be satisfied with a short-
term response to crisis situations. For example, the
SSR missions are central to the mandate of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire. The SSR unit seeks
to foster the fusion of two armed forces that clashed
in the past. The goal is to set up a united and cohesive
army. Training is therefore being conducted in the field
of human rights, and support for equipping the forces
is being provided.
It is not easy. In South Sudan, we have failed. The
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan
was present at the creation practically ex nihilo of
police forces that have been committing human rights
violations since December. That is unacceptable. It
shows — as if that were necessary — the full importance
of the Secretary-General’s policies, in particular his
due diligence policy on human rights. SSR missions
cannot benefit from forces that are guilty of massive
violations of human rights. The Council must now bear
all the consequences of that.
SSR cannot give tangible results without the full
support and cooperation of national authorities. The
State must be prepared to commit itself to a thorough,
long-term effort. Permanent and inclusive dialogue
among the units in charge of SSR, civil society and
authorities is essential. In addition, security sector
reform must be based on close coordination between
which we can add the challenge presented by porous
borders, it is important to think more deeply about
reforming the security, customs, intelligence and
border-control sectors within a subregional framework
and linking such reforms to regulation of small arms,
light weapons and mines. Chad welcomes the increasing
number and diversity of the stakeholders involved
in the process of security sector reform at both the
national and regional levels. Such growth can enrich
the exchange of knowledge and experience between
Member States on a regional and subregional scale.
In that context, we commend the complementary
nature of efforts in the Sahel region, aimed at
strengthening cooperation by sharing information and
experience on security sector reform. Such efforts,
which complement and consolidate efforts within the
States concerned, should therefore receive support
from the United Nations and all development partners.
To that end, the African Union, as part of its strategic
partnership for implementing its Policy Framework
on Security Sector Reform, could help in developing
guidelines for reform, based on regional perspectives
and taking into account the aforementioned threats
In conclusion, in spite of the ground that has
been covered since the Secretary-General’s 2008
report (S/2008/39) and the many achievements I have
mentioned, there is still much to do in order to tackle
the many challenges linked to security sector reform.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Nigeria for organizing this open debate, and
you, Mr. President, for your statement. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his statement.
In the context of the maintenance of international
peace and security, security sector reform plays a
primary role in two ways. It enables the establishment
of the elements that contribute to lasting stability in
post-conflict situations and prevents such situations
from relapsing into violence.
In crisis situations, the implementation of
transparent, effective and fair security institutions,
working within a system of good governance and
respecting democratic principles and human rights,
is essential to restoring a sense of confidence and to
providing an environment conducive to the development
of a State. SSR can consist of defining a national
security strategy or even a legislative strategy; it can
also be a support for governance structures of security
institutions or used to strengthen the competence and
14-31258 9/30
28/04/2014 Maintenance of international peace and security S/PV.7161
his briefing, which show how central security sector
reform is to the concerns of the United Nations in many
conflict and post-conflict situations.
I fully associate myself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.
In The Republic, Plato has Socrates say he should
take the necessary measures, including in terms of
education, to prevent the guardians of the city from
becoming predators rather than benevolent protectors
of their citizens, whom they surpass in power. In
the real world of today, the lack of mechanisms for
appropriate management and control unfortunately
leads to situations in which the institutions responsible
for security become predators and impose their own
law, thereby threatening the populations they are
supposed to protect .
Based on the excellent concept note prepared by
Nigeria (S/2014/238, annex), I will focus my remarks
on three aspects — country ownership, the role of the
United Nations and regional organizations, and the
contribution of my country to security sector reform.
The main purpose of security sector governance
and reform is to create or restore trust between the
State and its citizens. The legitimacy of a State arises
from its ability to perform its public administrative
functions, the first of which is to protect and ensure
the safety of its population. It is the very essence of
the social contract. It is therefore clear that if it is to
succeed, security sector reform should be carried out
by national authorities with the aim of making the
security sector accountable, effective and responsive to
the needs of the population. National ownership of the
work of security sector reform is therefore the key to
its success.
I would mention in that regard the example of
Guinea, which I have had the honour of working with as
President of the Guinea country-specific configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission. In Guinea, the
President of the Republic himself is chairing the
strategic committee for the reform of the security
sector, including the reform of the justice system.
That clearly expresses the political will at the highest
level to break with a past in which the representatives
of law enforcement had protected their own interests
instead of providing for the safety of the population. In
Guinea, national efforts are now rightly focused on the
modernization and professionalization of the police and
gendarmerie — key institutions to restore confidence
the host country and the various actors who support the
programme.
For several years, the number of actors involved
in SSR has markedly grown. We are pleased to see
the international community and Member States
mobilize on those matters. The European Union has
thus become a leading player. It is present in Somalia
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo through
advisory missions and training missions, and through
its significant financial support .
In its national capacity, France has participated
through its bilateral cooperation — conducted by the
Security and Defence Cooperation Directorate — not
only in Africa but also in Bosnia, Kosovo, Afghanistan
and Haiti. We have also created, within the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs, a pool of national experts in security
sector reform, which shows the importance we attach to
SSR and justifies our decision to co-sponsor the draft
resolution that will be adopted this afternoon. But the
increased number of actors does not mean we can do
without close coordination. Too often, support for SSR
involves duplication of effort. The draft resolution is an
opportunity to emphasize the necessary effort that is
key to the success of SSR missions.
Finally, we believe that the United Nations must
develop a more coherent approach to SSR. Indeed,
SSR is a complex process that is based not only on an
accurate analysis of the needs ex ante, but also on a
regular assessment of results and improvements to be
made. That recommendation is made in the latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2013/480), and the Council
must do its all to ensure that this evaluation exercise is
conducted in a systematic fashion. It is important that
the Special Representatives and Special Envoys of the
Secretary-General take full measure of the importance
of SSR and give it the place it deserves in their missions.
Quality support to SSR is the guarantee of the success
of those processes and, ultimately, a factor that favours
stability and development in the countries concerned
and thus a guarantee of their efficiency for the United
Nations.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg welcomes the Nigerian delegation’s
initiative in organizing today’s public debate. The
presence here today of the country’s Minister for
Foreign Affairs emphasizes the importance that Nigeria
attaches to security sector reform. Mr. President, we
welcome your leadership in the area. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2013/480) and for
10/30 14-31258
S/PV.7161 Maintenance of international peace and security 28/04/2014
In conclusion, Luxembourg can only congratulate
Nigeria on having proposed the first resolution of the
Security Council on security sector reform, of which my
country has willingly become a sponsor. We welcome
in particular the inclusion, in the extension of resolution
2143 (2014), of strong provisions to encourage Member
States to take account of the need to protect children
in the context of SSR and to establishment monitoring
mechanisms to exclude national security forces
responsible for violations and abuses against children.
Security sector reform must indeed meet the needs of
all citizens, including the most vulnerable.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I welcome the participation of Foreign
Minister Aminu Bashir Wali of Nigeria as President of
the Security Council at this meeting, which reaffirms
the importance of security sector reform to African
countries.
We are considering security sector reform in the
context of post-conflict peacebuilding efforts aimed
at achieving lasting peace and at effectively reducing
crisis-related tensions in order to prevent the recurrence
of armed conflict. It is the sovereign right of national
Governments to undertake reforms in that sector.
International assistance, including through the United
Nations, must be provided with the concurrence of the
host country.
Security sector reform is a complex and
multifaceted process. Even minimal success in early
stages of reform can strengthen the trust of citizens
in their authorities, create conditions conducive to the
return of the population to normal life, and establish
the preconditions for lasting peace. Moreover, broad
popular support for comprehensive reforms undertaken
by the authorities and their security forces can play a
decisive role in national reconciliation.
Countries emerging from conflict or that have
recently overcome the critical phase of a crisis often
have limited resources to ensure security. That is
why the assistance of the international community
is so necessary. We believe that, given the great
importance of and frequent lack of alternatives to
such assistance to national authorities in security
sector reform, we must recall the essential nature of
such fundamental principles as the agreement of the
recipient States and respect for national sovereignty
and political independence. Governments themselves
must define the priorities for carrying out such reforms,
in everyday life between the State and all of its citizens
without exception.
I now turn to the role of the United Nations.
While respecting the principle of national ownership,
the United Nations has a vital contribution to make
to support security sector reform. As shown in
14 operations peacekeeping and special political
missions that the Security Council has mandated for
that purpose, United Nations support is necessary,
especially in contexts where the conflict has
considerably weakened State institutions.
We see a special role for the United Nations in
the coordination of support for security sector reform
and the implementation of a comprehensive approach
to reform including the defence, police and justice
sectors and aspects linked to parliamentary control.
In terms of coordination, I would cite the example of
the Democratic Republic of Congo. Under the mandate
of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General was
instructed in resolution 2098 (2013) to play a leading
role in coordinating support for security sector reform,
provided by international and bilateral partners and
by the United Nations — a crucial area for sustainable
stability.
To support the key role of the United Nations,
Luxembourg has provided regular financial support to
theOfficeofRuleofLawandSecurityInstitutionsandthe
Department of Peacekeeping Operations — especially
its Security Sector Reform Unit. In particular, we
supported the establishment of a roster of experts in
SSR and rapid and flexible deployment of these experts
in the field, when necessary. We have lent our support to
specific United Nations SSR projects in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in Somalia.
Luxembourg is also proud to have supported the
development of the policy framework on security
sector reform that the African Union adopted last year.
Regional organizations have indeed an indispensable
role to play in guiding the efforts of their members
states. Finally, through its personnel’s participation
missions of the European Union, my country strongly
supports the reform of the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo, the training of
the Malian armed forces, and capacity-building for the
internal security forces in Niger and, soon, in Mali.
14-31258 11/30
28/04/2014 Maintenance of international peace and security S/PV.7161
We thank the delegation of Nigeria for its
coordination of work on the draft resolution on this
issue, and we support its adoption.
Mr. Barros (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
you, Mr. Minister, and the presidency of Nigeria for
convening this open debate to address the challenges
and opportunities of security sector reform. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and the
report before us (S/2013/480).
The establishment of an effective, professional
and accountable security sector is central to laying
the foundations of peace and sustainable development.
Security sector reform ultimately plays a fundamental
role in strengthening the rule of law at the national level.
It is therefore a key component of the peace process, in
which we highlight the role played by the Peacebuilding
Commission by including security sector reform
programmes for countries on its agenda. Moreover,
the Peacebuilding Fund, to which Chile contributes
regularly, has resources that can be used in security
sector reform or police training programmes. The
number of Security Council mandates that incorporate
this issue increased from 14 in 2008 to 37 in 2012,
confirming that security sector reform has been fully
integrated into peacekeeping, conflict prevention and
development.
International cooperation is particularly relevant
in ensuring that security sector reform processes can
effectively and efficiently achieve its goals. There are
numerous examples of collaboration with the United
Nations and bilateral cooperation on security sector
reform processes. We note that countries that were
previously recipients of cooperation are now able to
share their experiences and cooperate with others
facing similar challenges. With regard to bilateral
cooperation, since 1996 my country has run technical
assistance programmes between our police and the
National Police of Haiti, through which between 30 and
60 Haitian officers are trained every year.
Nonetheless, without detracting from the role of
international cooperation, it is the responsibility of
each State to guarantee security on its territory, and
every State has the sovereign right and responsibility
to determine its own national approach and national
priorities with respect to security sector reform. This
requires political will on the part of all parties involved
in order to make progress in the establishment or
strengthening of security institutions and mechanisms,
coordinate their implementation and bear the primary
responsibility for the outcome. We also must avoid
excessive external pressure and the imposition on the
recipient State of the essential vision for the reform
process. Strong mentoring, bording on intervention in
the internal affairs of a State, can only do harm.
As we have seen from experience, it is critically
important to take into account the specific country
situation in providing assistance to States. Ignoring
such specifities while seeking to apply a universal
approach to reform in such an important area can
only lead to the failure of such ready-made formulas,
including in the form of recurring conflict situations,
as we are seeing, for example in the Central African
Republic and South Sudan.
Without a doubt, the United Nations and, first and
foremost, its peacebuilding missions have a central
role to play in the provision of assistance to post-
conflict countries by the international community.
As an objective factor, the Security Council has been
assigning multidimensional mandates, including
peacebuilding tasks, to peacekeeping operations on a
more frequent basis. Peacekeepers play an important
role in supporting security sector reform, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, the rehabilitation of
law enforcement agencies, and the restoration of the
rule of law as a whole.
Another body that plays an important role in post-
conflict reconstruction, and security sector reform
in particular, is the Peacebuilding Commission. The
development of a balanced and comprehensive approach
to the coordination of mutually complementary advisory
and financial support in post-conflict countries
significantly increases the stability, accountability
and professionalism of national security structures.
Moreover, we must not underestimate the potential of
the Peacebuilding Fund as a flexible instrument for
financing security sector reform projects.
The format of cooperation among the States of a
given region, as well as with regional and subregional
organizations, also demonstrates strong potential
for security sector reform. Broad exchanges of best
practices among them, as well as the provision of
timely financial support, will enable the more effective
resolution of existing and emerging issues in the reform
process. A clear example of such regional cooperation
is that of Africa and the activities of the African Union.
12/30 14-31258
S/PV.7161 Maintenance of international peace and security 28/04/2014
here today. I also thank the Nigerian presidency of the
Security Council for all of its important efforts on the
potentially transformational task of security sector
reform.
In May 2006, four years after Timor-Leste’s
independence, as the United Nations Office in Timor-
Leste was preparing to withdraw, a crisis in the security
sector sparked a political, security and humanitarian
emergency. This was precipitated by the dismissal of
nearly one-third of the Timorese armed forces, and saw
the police and army fighting each other again in the
streets. The unravelling of law and order left dozens
dead and some 150,000 displaced. In response, at
Timor-Leste’s request, Australia, New Zealand and
Portugal deployed an international stabilization force
and, in August 2006, the Council mandated another
peacekeeping mission, the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).
We must heed the important lessons of this and
other experiences of relapse regarding the centrality
that security sector reform (SSR) can have to long-term
stability and how SSR should be supported. There is
a very positive ending with Timor-Leste, which has
made great strides in reforming its security sector,
strengthening not just capacities but governance and
civilian oversight. In March 2011, the national police
resumed primary policing responsibilities after a phased
handover from UNMIT. Our understanding of SSR has
evolved — an evolution helped by the experience in
Timor-Leste. From a narrow conception of training and
equipping institutions, we now view SSR as a process
that needs to encompass the security architecture as a
whole and is as much political as technical.
I will focus on three issues. The first if national
ownership. National authorities need to generate and
drive a strategic vision for reform, but SSR is in many
ways about the contract between the security sector and
population, so to be effective it must have community
buy-in. The involvement of civil society, including
women’s groups, is vital.
How do we better foster such ownership and
leadership? Second-generation SSR in Timor-Leste is a
good example. The Government took strong leadership,
with UNMIT and international partners — with their
relatively small footprint — in support. There was
significant community outreach. UNMIT’s final stages
were guided by a best-practice, jointly agreed transition
plan, including a framework for the final assumption
of functions by Timorese security institutions and the
and sufficient resources for implementation must be
guaranteed.
Security sector reform processes must be consensual
and inclusive, ensuring the participation of civil society,
especially of women, both in policy discussion and
formulation, and in the subsequent implementation.
In this sense, the establishment of quotas for minority
groups in security institutions promises to be a useful
tool for ensuring the legitimacy of new institutions
among populations. Such processes, in addition to being
transparent, inclusive and participatory, should also be
subject to the control and supervision of democratic
institutions so as to ensure that they function in full
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Security sector reform initiatives must also
provide for accountability, avoid impunity and thereby
promote national reconciliation processes, favouring
the reconstitution of the social fabric. In this regard,
we believe that all such reform processes should
incorporate expedited access to national courts and
the International Criminal Court, in accordance with
the principle of complementarity. We underscore the
central role of the General Assembly in developing the
approach of the United Nations in this area.
At the same time, the importance of coherent and
integrated planning and implementation, including
general guidelines, civilian capacity-building and
strengthened mechanisms for coordination and
cooperation with regional and subregional organizations
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations. In this regard, we recognize the
work of the inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task
Force and its specialized units, both in the field and
at Headquarters, and of the Security Sector Reform
Unit of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
In this context, we underscore the importance of the
United Nations security sector reform guidelines and
policies, the human rights due diligence policy, and the
comprehensive technical background notes on security
sector reform.
I conclude by affirming that my country agrees
with the presidential statement of 12 October 2011 that
“the establishment of an effective, professional
and accountable security sector is at the
cornerstone peace and sustainable development”
(S/PRST/2011/19).
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this debate and for your presence
14-31258 13/30
28/04/2014 Maintenance of international peace and security S/PV.7161
in any peacekeeping operation, in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic. In that country, rebuilding
the shattered security sector is absolutely vital.
When thinking of United Nations police, our
minds often jump to images of formed police units
patrolling. But let me emphasize the important part
police and civilians in United Nations missions can
play in supporting rebuilding and reform of host-State
policing.
Policing reform is often overshadowed by the
higher-profile reform of militaries. Yet police are the
public face of the security sector, the ones the population
should turn to for protection, and the guardians, as
the representative of Luxemburg reminded us this
morning. Building professional, accountable policing
and law enforcement agencies focused on serving the
community — and UNMIT supported such efforts well
in its later years — can be central to restoring the rule
of law and building trust in the authorities. We urge
more Council focus on that, including in mandates.
The United Nations can be uniquely placed to
coordinate international support, but it needs to get
better at coordinating its own policing assistance,
including by harmonizing the various approaches
adopted by different contributors to missions. The
Police Division’s new strategic guidance framework
will contribute significantly to standardizing United
Nations policing activities, including capacity-building.
In conclusion, at its core, security sector reform
is about ensuring that a State’s institutions serve
and protect its population. Support to security sector
reform is increasingly and rightly an integral part of the
mandates the Council authorizes. It is, effectively, our
exit strategy. When done well, security sector reform’s
legacy is the stable and potentially transformational
foundation it provides for long-term peace, security and
development.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important thematic debate on security
sector reform, which is critical to ensuring sustainable
peace and stability in post-conflict countries. I also
thank His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his
statement. Your presence here today, Mr. President, is
an indication of your country’s continued commitment
to post-conflict peacebuilding activities in which
security sector reform has been an integral part.
continuation of support by other partners. Separately,
Australia has signed an innovative New Deal
agreement with the Timorese Government, including
a commitment to supporting Timor-Leste’s goals for
security sector reconstruction and reform across crime
prevention and investigation, public safety and border
control.
My second point concerns measuring impact. We
need to find new ways to evaluate the real impact of
SSR, including public confidence in security services.
In Solomon Islands, an innovative tool — the annual
people’s survey — covers perceptions of the police
force. This informs planning by the Government and
the Australian-led Regional Assistance Mission to
Solomon Islands on police reform and law and order.
My third point concerns the role of the United
Nations. Many SSR initiatives fail because of a narrow
technical focus, but the United Nations can be uniquely
placed to support a holistic perspective across the
sector. UNMIT, for example, supported Timor-Leste’s
comprehensive security sector review, which led to new
legislation for the security and defence sectors.
Security sector reform is most effective when
complemented by the development of strong democratic
institutions. Those are inherently political processes,
and today’s draft resolution rightly encourages Special
Representatives and Envoys of the Secretary-General
to focus on security sector reform in their good offices
roles.
Finally, I would like to mention two particular
areas of United Nations engagement on security sector
reform.
First, on sanctions, the Côte d’Ivoire regime, where
lethal equipment importation is linked directly to the
Government’s security sector reform process, is one of
the most striking examples of the nexus between arms
embargoes and security sector reform. Embargoes
can assist in stopping flows of weapons that could
reignite violence and in creating the conditions for the
development of stronger security institutions. Groups
of experts can provide invaluable support — for
example, providing information on threats and illicit
flows, which can help security sector reform design.
We call for deeper cooperation among United Nations
missions, Sanctions Committees and groups of experts
on these issues.
Secondly, on policing reform, the Council has
just authorized one of the largest police components
14/30 14-31258
S/PV.7161 Maintenance of international peace and security 28/04/2014
Rwanda decided to actively contribute troops to African
and United Nations peacekeeping missions.
Having said that, this shows that security sector
reform should be a priority endeavour in order for
the security sector to gain credibility and trust and
for the population to identify with it. That is possible
with the delivery of effective and efficient security
and justice services by security sector institutions that
are accountable to the Government and the people and
operate without discrimination and with full respect for
the rule of law.
We believe that re-establishing the Government’s
authority and control in all sectors in the aftermath
of conflict is a prerequisite for sustainable peace and
stability. State-building at all levels is therefore a key
policy objective in the international community’s post-
conflict intervention.
We also recognize security sector reform as
an essential but not sufficient condition for lasting
peace and security. It needs to be part of broader
democratization and reform processes in any post-
conflict setting. That is why we are of the view that
security sector reform should be integrated as early
as possible in peace processes as one of the essential
elements of conflict prevention, early recovery,
peacebuilding and sustainable development.
On the SSR process itself, there is a need to focus
on three issues that we are believe are crucial to the
successful implementation of SSR and that the Council
should encourage in this record. They are national
ownership, coordination, and capacity-building.
Once initiated, it is vital that the SSR process be
based on national ownership and be aligned to national
security needs, as defined by the Government. We are
aware that national ownership also entails national
responsibility and commitment. This responsibility
includes the effective use of donor support, as well as
the planning and implementation of the process with
long-term security outcomes. Furthermore, national
ownership cannot be viable or realistic if the financial
burden for reform is borne exclusively by external
actors and partners. Member States implementing
SSR should also commit some national resources to
the process. Given the multiplicity of actors involved,
coordination between national Governments, regional
and subregional organizations, the United Nations
and other international organizations is very critical.
Such coordination should be streamlined in a way that
We are always saying, without pride, that more
than two thirds of the agenda of the Security Council is
concerned with African conflicts. What we need to add
is that, in all those conflicts, there has been a failure of
the security forces to protect the national institutions,
the territorial integrity of the country and, worst of all,
civilians. Over the past few years, we have witnessed
situations where the weakness of national armies has
enabled armed groups to make progress and even
overthrow Governments. In other situations, national
armies were used to commit mass atrocities against the
very civilians they were mandated to protect. That was
the case in Libya and Rwanda, where the Forces armées
rwandaises, which had been ethnicized and regionalized
since independence in 1963, were the main perpetrators
of the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi, together with the
infamous Interahamwe militias.
Allow me to share with you, Sir, and our colleagues
here our humble experience. Rwanda has learned from
its dark past. After the end of the genocide in July 1994,
which was stopped by the Rwandan Patriotic Front,
the country embarked on an unprecedented security
sector reform, starting with the integration in the new
security forces of members of the defeated army. One
of them even became a Minister of Defence. Given the
nearly failed state of Rwanda, the first thing was to
ensure security by integrating and forming a coherent
national defence force. The policy of integrating the
military and the militia into a coherent force — what
would become the Rwanda Defence Force — served as
a role model for the greater society, which had been
polarized and divided. With security in place, it was
easier to start building capacity in all the other sectors.
It is in that context that Rwanda, under the Rwandan
Patriotic Front, found its defining mission: to integrate
and reintegrate its people, beginning with the military.
The move towards security sector reform has been
described as a process for developing professional
and effective security structures that allow citizens to
live their lives in safety. As is the case for other heads
of public institutions, the main military and police
commanders in Rwanda have committed themselves
to achieving clear and measurable targets through an
annual performance contract, which is assessed every
year before the President of the Republic.
Over recent years, research has shown that
most Rwandans have confidence and trust in their
police and army. With its rapid achievements in
institution-building, including in the security sector,
14-31258 15/30
28/04/2014 Maintenance of international peace and security S/PV.7161
to the prevention of conflicts. As the Secretary-
General’s report (S/2013/480) states, reforming the
security sector depends on the political climate in
which it is carried out, and therefore such reforms are
not only related, but are part of broader transformation
processes, in particular in conflict and post-conflict
societies. In that regard, security sector reform involves
a broad range of public policies aimed at promoting
effective, democratic and accountable security policy
of the State, leading to greater economic and social
development and promoting the trust and participation
of the community. It is therefore a question of ensuring
that security institutions carry out their functions
effectively in a framework consistent with democracy
and strict respect for human rights.
Security sector reform is increasingly one of the
key elements in the multidimensional mandates of
peacekeeping missions, which have become more
complex and comprehensive, and of special political
missions, when circumstances require, in support
of national authorities in conflict and post-conflict
situations. Such support requires not only the proper
implementation of protection measures for the civilian
population, in particular those at imminent risk of
physical violence, but also the coordinated inclusion of
security sector reform with other aspects related to the
rule of law, such as cooperation in institution-building
in general; the holding of free and transparent elections;
the implementation of inclusive political processes; the
design and implementation of effective disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration plans; and the
effective implementation of gender-based guidelines,
and sometimes even leading to the adoption of a new
constitution. However, it is clear that only dialogue and
the political commitment and involvement of rule of law
institutions on a sustained basis can lead to long-term
reforms that contribute to conflict prevention. In that
regard, in order for such reform to be sustainable, the
education and training of civil servants and members of
the security forces are needed.
Effective and coordinated security sector reform can
only benefit the national Governments of the countries
concerned, as well as local human rights groups and
institutions, in their efforts to promote and protect the
human rights of vulnerable populations, particularly
women and children, contribute to the eradication
of impunity, and ensure that those responsible for
human rights violations and violations of international
humanitarian law will be held accountable before the
law. They also provide advice and assistance to national
prioritizes building national capacities for the Member
States to eventually take over.
The United Nations must do more to help build up
expertise outside the United Nations system, particularly
those of regional and subregional organizations
working to address the challenges around them. We
appreciate the efforts and work of the United Nations
inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task Force and
the SSR Unit in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in advancing those endeavours, and we call
on the Secretary-General to strengthen both entities.
We also call upon the Council to ensure that issues
of peace agreements, disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, and other SSR components are
considered when it authorizes peacekeeping operations
so to ensure that they contribute to the restoration of
sustainable security. The Council should take SSR as
one of the cornerstones of sustainable peace.
The Peacebuilding Commission should encourage
the coordination and coherence of SSR efforts in
countries emerging from conflict and advise the
Council, where appropriate of important steps to be
taken when it is considering initiating SSR processes.
That will ensure that the involvement of the Council
in security sector reform remains country-specific and
is derived from a comprehensive United Nations SSR
strategy for the establishment of peace and stability,
while at the same time ensuring that the United Nations
delivers as one.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank His Excellency Mr. Aminu Wali, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, for
organizing this open debate on a topic concerning which
Argentina has been very active since the organization
in 2009 of the seminar of Latin America and the
Caribbean on regional perspectives on the United
Nations approach to security sector reform and, since
December 2012, through our participation in the Group
of Friends of Security Sector Reform, co-chaired by
the Permanent Representatives of Slovakia and South
Africa. Your presence here today, Mr. Minister, and
that of Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon are a testament
to your country’s leadership on this issue, which
Argentina recognizes and values.
Argentina attaches great importance to recent
developments on the issue of security sector reform in
the framework of the United Nations. We recognize that
the close relationship between security sector reform
and the strengthening of the rule of law contributes
16/30 14-31258
S/PV.7161 Maintenance of international peace and security 28/04/2014
and the Peacebuilding Fund in defining an inclusive
national approach to security sector reform.
In conclusion, we must move from societies
living in fear of instability towards societies free of
fear. The recent historical experience of countries in
Latin America, as well as in Africa, tells us that they
have much to offer to the international approach of
the United Nations on this issue. Important lessons
have been learned on security sector reform: from
strengthening political governance over the security
sector and ensuring effecive security for people, to the
professionalization of personnel and strict compliance
with human rights as a priority. In the particular case
of Argentina, since democracy was restored, and
since 2010, with the establishment of the Ministry of
Security, security is based on the principles, values and
public policies that underpin strict compliance with the
rule of law.
I would like to conclude by recognizing the
remarkable work done by Nigeria as President of the
Council in the month of April. We are pleased that we
will be adopting a draft resolution on the issue this
afternoon. We would have liked for that process to have
been more clearly inclusive, as we see security as part
of an overall set of reforms. In any event, we convey our
congratulations and support as well as our conviction
that we must continue to work in this area.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Mr. President, for initiating and presiding over
this important debate. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his informative briefing earlier
today.
When people are asked to rank what is most
important to them, they respond that personal safety
and security and trust in those providing that security
are the highest priorities. Today we will recognize that
fact with the adoption of the first-ever Security Council
draft resolution on security sector reform. The United
Kingdom is pleased to sponsor the draft resolution.
When citizens are safe, countries are able to recover
from conflict and to grow their economies. Sierra Leone
and Timor-Leste are successful examples of how the
patient work of reforming a country’s security sector
as part of a broader effort to strengthen the rule of law
is fundamental to countries’ growth. Conversely, in
many of the countries in which we have seen a relapse
into conflict, such as the Central African Republic
and South Sudan, the collapse or mismanagement of
Governments in the investigation of such atrocities.
For that reason, security sector reform is also closely
related to the reform of the legal system.
Thus, the reform process cannot be perceived as
an imposition, as wehave often said. We must ensure
national ownership of the reform process by taking
into account the real and effective particular needs
and circumstances of those countries and structure it
according to on national decisions. The United Nations
must not impose solutions, but instead it must help the
societies that so require to rebuild, based on their own
experiences, cultures, needs, desires and expectations,
and to establish the institutional foundation for
achieving a just and peaceful development.
In developing that endeavour, we believe that there
should be greater coordination between the entities
of the Organization entrusted with reform, and we
therefore encourage the Secretary-General to establish
concrete operational ties between the inter-agency
Security Sector Reform Task Force, the Rule of Law
Unit and the “Rights up front” initiative. It is also
important to implement the instruments developed
by the Organization, such as the Secretary-General’s
principles to guide activities in support of security
sector reform and human rights due diligence policy in
the context of the United Nations support of security
forces outside the Organization. We agree with the
Secretary-General’s reports on the issue when it comes
to the importance of focusing on regional arrangements
in this area as well as on the primary task to be played
by the various regional and subregional organizations
in supporting security sector reform processes carried
out at the national level by individual countries.
Finally, the work of the Organization also
requires that, in order to implement new, complex
multidimensional mandates when appropriate,
peacekeeping missions increasingly depend upon
the possibility of deploying specialized personnel,
in particular related to police and civilian tasks of
varying types, such as experts in human rights, gender,
comprehensive treatment of victims of sexual and
gender-based violence, security sector reform and
institution-building for the rule of law. We have seen
positive developments in that regard with the important
potential for innovation in technical cooperation and in
strengthening South-South cooperation. We should also
underscore the importance of security sector reform
in peacebuilding processes, preventing a relapse into
conflict, and the role of the Peacebuilding Commission
14-31258 17/30
28/04/2014 Maintenance of international peace and security S/PV.7161
can help reinforce ongoing political processes and
national dialogues. If managed well, those efforts can
be mutually reinforcing.
Thirdly, United Nations missions cannot
successfully take forward security sector reform alone.
Effective interventions in the security sector must
employ the full United Nations toolbox — political,
security, peacebuilding and development. To do that,
we must strengthen the internal mechanisms within the
United Nations, both in the field and at Headquarters, to
coordinate security sector reform activities. In addition,
the United Nations needs to deepen its partnerships
with regional organizations, such as the African Union
and European Union, which can play an important role
in delivering key security sector reform tasks.
The United Kingdom will continue to support
security sector reform around the world. We have kept
our promise to spend 0.7 per cent of our gross national
income on overseas aid. We are the only Group of 20
country to do so. At least 30 per cent of that aid will
be spent in conflict-affected States. Over the past
decade, we committed $278 million to support security
and justice programmes in 25 countries across various
regions of the world. For example, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, a United Kingdom programme
has helped to improve the capacity and accountability
of the Congolese national Police and of the internal
security sector with a particular focus on the needs of
women and girls.
The United Kingdom treats security and access
to justice as a basic service on a par with health and
education and a fundamental right as recognized in the
Universal Declaration on Human Rights. In all of the
United Kingdom’s security and justice activities, we
take a people-centred approach, focusing not only on
State security but also on how individuals experience
insecurity and access justice.
I thank you again, Mr. President, for convening this
debate and for submitting the important draft resolution
to be adopted this afternoon. Building accountable and
responsive security services in countries recovering
from conflict should remain a priority for the Council
so that everyone everywhere can live safely and free
from violence.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): The Republic
of Korea appreciates Nigeria’s initiative in convening
this open debate, and we are grateful for your personal
participation in the meeting, Mr. President. I would
the security sector is often a major contributor to the
violence.
One of the most acute challenges facing the United
Nations on security sector reform is how to take forward
such reform when there has been a complete collapse
in State authority, where political legitimacy remains
contested and where serious violence persists. In
places such as Libya, Somalia and the Central African
Republic, United Nations missions are grappling with
security sector reform challenges in extremely fragile
contexts.
Our end goal should be to build capable, accountable
and responsible security sectors with full national
ownership. But in the early stages of a reform process,
we need to be realistic about what is achievable and
to prioritize and sequence interventions accordingly.
In violent and unstable contexts, security cannot wait
for security sector reform. The immediate focus must
be on reducing violence and protecting civilians. We
must seek to stabilize the situation in the short term
while working to create the conditions for sustainable
political settlement and the longer-term reform of the
security sector.
Too often, we embark on wholesale reform of the
security sector when the requisite political preconditions
do not exist. We train, man and equip security forces
without considering how that will impact the fragile
political balance in the country or how those security
forces are perceived by the citizens they are entrusted to
protect. At times, our eagerness to get something done
means that we do more harm than good and contribute
to further instability. We can avoid those mistakes.
First, as a Council we have a responsibility to
provide missions with clearer, more credible mandates
that are better sequenced and prioritized by the most
urgent security-related needs. In the early phases of a
mission’s deployment, we should not aim for expansive
security sector reform activities. We must focus on the
most urgent issues to stabilize the situation.
Secondly, missions cannot afford to de-link their
good offices and political functions from their security
sector reform tasks. The two are intimately linked.
The Secretary-General’s Special Representatives
should work to generate the political space for security
sector reform and gain commitments from leaders to
drive forward that reform. Similarly, swift action in
the security sector to reduce violence, protect citizens
and build trust between citizens and State authorities
18/30 14-31258
S/PV.7161 Maintenance of international peace and security 28/04/2014
Finally, I would once again like to thank the
Nigerian presidency for leading the Council towards
the adoption to come of its first-ever draft resolution
on security sector reform, in the wake of the 2011
presidential statement on SSR (S/PRST/2011/19),
also the work of the Nigerian presidency. We believe
the Security Council should continue to develop the
concept of SSR as a key element in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends Nigeria’s initiative in convening this open
debate on security sector reform (SSR), and welcomes
you, Mr. President, as you preside over today’s meeting.
I am also grateful to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his briefing.
The maintenance of international peace and
security is one of the purposes of the United Nations
as laid down in its Charter. As such, it is a cornerstone
of the work of the Organization. The establishment of
stable, sustainable and secure environments is a basic
premise and foundation for achieving general security,
promoting economic and social development and
advancing progress in various areas in post-conflict
countries. United Nations assistance to the SSR efforts
of countries emerging from conflict and restoring an
effective and professionalized security sector is not
only critically important to those countries, it can
also help the Organization and the Security Council to
better carry out their sacred duties, as enshrined in the
United Nations Charter.
Through its peacekeeping and peacebuilding
activities in recent years in places such as the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Liberia and Sierra Leone, the
United Nations has provided strong support to SSR
efforts in the countries concerned and has mobilized
the international community to step up assistance
to them. It has also continued to cooperate closely
with regional organizations. All of this has produced
positive and results. A shared understanding of the
importance of SSR has grown among Member States.
All parties have participated actively in discussions
on SSR through such platforms as the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations and the Group of Friends of Security Sector
Reform, where proposals and recommendations on
improving the related work of the United Nations have
been exchanged. The Secretariat has also worked hard
to take stock of its experience, improve its working
methods and strengthen inter-agency coordination
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing on security sector reform
(SSR).
Security sector reform is a crucial tool for conflict
prevention and post-conflict peacebuilding activities
whose importance when the Security Council considers
peacekeeping and special political missions is growing.
In reality, however, the normative operations for SSR
are often blurred during the operational process. In
order to narrow the differences among the relevant
stakeholders and support SSR more effectively, a
review of SSR strategy should focus on various aspects.
First, the importance of national ownership cannot
be overemphasized. National ownership, however,
presupposes a certain degree of national unity. In
situations where grievances and animosity are not
adequately addressed through reconciliation and
traditional justice mechanisms, security sector reform
cannot be expected to produce its desired effects.
It can hardly be successful if it lacks broad support.
Host Governments must therefore prioritize national
reconciliation with a view to creating an environment
conducive to sustainable security sector reform.
Secondly, security sector reform should be
pursued within the context of the rule of law and good
governance. It is not supposed to be designed to support
specific regimes, but rather to strengthen the security
and judicial systems of societies as a whole. In that
regard, we hope the United Nations and host countries
will seek to maximize their common understanding of
the rationales, goals and strategies for SSR in a country-
specific context.
Thirdly, the concept and scope of SSR continue
to evolve. We should therefore strike a balance
between expansion and concentration from a results-
oriented perspective. In the broader context, SSR is a
coherent element that runs throughout the sequence
of conflict prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and development. Given its multifaceted character,
the United Nations is best placed to coordinate both
comprehensive and streamlined responses. The
modalities of the system-wide approach of the United
Nations, including the inter-agency Security Sector
Reform Task Force, should be further developed.
Regional and subregional organizations, as well as
donor communities, should also strengthen their
partnerships in order to achieve optimal outcomes.
14-31258 19/30
28/04/2014 Maintenance of international peace and security S/PV.7161
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
and the Group of Friends of Security Sector Reform.
In the meantime, the role of such mechanisms as the
inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task Force should
be brought into full play, and coordination and division
of labour among various departments of the Secretariat
should also be strengthened so as to foster synergy.
Fourthly, the United Nations should give priority
attention to its coordination and cooperation efforts
with regional and subregional organizations. Over the
years, regional and subregional organizations — and
the African Union in particular — have conducted a
tremendous amount of work in assisting countries
emerging from conflict. They possess a unique
appreciation of the situation and a wealth of experience.
The United Nations should strengthen its cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations in SSR
through workshops, training courses and personal
exchange. The United Nations should also build upon
its successes and beneficial practices and increase its
support for and further motivate those organizations to
participate in the relevant work.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I would like to begin
by thanking the delegation of Nigeria for organizing
today’s open debate and for preparing its comprehensive
concept note (S/2014/238, annex). I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing earlier
today.
My delegation welcomes the adoption later today
of the first-ever Security Council resolution on security
sector reform (SSR), which proves the increasing
recognition of the importance of the subject by the
Council’s membership.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.
Security sector reform may sound technical, yet its
direct impact on both security and millions of lives is
obvious. Its need becomes particularly urgent and real
when a soldier or a police officer whose only calling
should be to serve his country and people with integrity
and honour, acts as a thug, using his uniform and
weapon to spread fear and extort what few possessions
battered civilian populations might have, when security
institutions created to ensure safety and security turn
into machines of torture, forced disappearances or
oppression.
Security sector reform strategies, while often
detailed and complex, seek to respond to some very real
through mechanisms such as the Security Sector
Reform Task Force and the Security Sector Reform
Unit, with effective results.
In the meantime, as the situation has evolved, the
United Nations has encountered various new problems
and challenges that arise in offering assistance with
SSR. I would like to make the following four points
on how to better support SSR efforts for countries
emerging from conflict.
First, the United Nations must respect the wishes
and ownership of the countries concerned. The
maintenance of national security comes under the
rubric of national sovereignty. When offering support
for SSR efforts in countries emerging from conflict, the
United Nations and the international community should
always respect the principle of national ownership,
and, on the basis of full respect for the wishes of the
countries concerned, provide constructive capacity-
building training and advisory assistance. There are no
universally applicable best practices for SSR; there can
only be the formula that best fits the specific situation of
an individual country. In offering assistance, therefore,
the international community should take into full
consideration the specific requirements and situation
of each country concerned.
Secondly, the United Nations should strengthen
its overall planning in assisting the SSR process in
countries emerging from conflict. There can be no doubt
about the importance of SSR, but it is not a panacea,
and it cannot turn a country’s security situation around
alone. The United Nations should help the countries
concerned to incorporate SSR into their integrated
development strategy, so that it can be promoted in
a comprehensive and complementary fashion along
the with political process, national reconciliation, the
promotion of the rule of law, the elimination of poverty
and the pursuit of economic development. Only in this
way can the United Nations help countries attain lasting
peace and sustainable development.
Thirdly, the United Nations should leverage
its advantages by coordinating the efforts of all
parties concerned. There is a multitude of actors
and stakeholders in the SSR process at the moment.
On the one hand, the United Nations should be a
coordinator among the countries concerned and the
potential assistance providers. On the other hand, the
United Nations should encourage Member States to be
actively engaged in the discussions on SSR through
such platforms as the Peacebuilding Commission,
20/30 14-31258
S/PV.7161 Maintenance of international peace and security 28/04/2014
the social contract between the State and society.
In order to achieve that goal, it is key to ensure that
all parties to a conflict and all segments of society,
including women, youth and vulnerable groups, are
involved in the SSR process.
As noted in the report of the Secretary-General,
success or failure of SSR efforts depends on the
broader context of transformative processes in a
society, such as national dialogue, reconciliation efforts
or transitional justice initiatives, all of which require
genuine inclusivity. Time and again, we have seen how
exclusion of certain armed groups from SSR leads to
continued threats to communities, undermining overall
peace efforts.
All national stakeholders must be genuinely
involved in the reform process, since the trust between
security institutions and the society at large can be
reinstated only if past abuses do not go untold and if
proper accountability is ensured. In that respect, the
link between an effective, transparent SSR process and
ensuring justice and accountability for past crimes is
key.
Also key is the need for the most stringent vetting
for those who are reintegrated into security structures
during the course of SSR. As my delegation has noted
on other occasions, blanket amnesties can undercut
the success of SSR and heighten perceived insecurities
among local populations if perpetrators of major crimes,
including crimes against humanity or mass rape, are
included in new security and law and order structures.
In order to maximize the effectiveness of United
Nations involvement and tailor international efforts
to the exact needs of each country, it is important to
know how useful particular measures have been so far,
which measures proved to be effective and why in any
given situation they have proved to be effective. As the
concept paper rightly points out, measuring only the
quantitative elements of reform may not be enough, and
we may need to find ways to assess and measure deeper
change. The complexity of measuring impact should
not deter us from trying to do so. We therefore welcome
efforts in Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia to develop a set of
indicators and benchmarks to monitor implementation
of national SSR strategies.
The United Nations system should also be constantly
reviewing the effectiveness and coherence of its own
assistance to Member States and building on lessons
learned. In that regard, we are pleased that the draft
questions and situations. How does one restore trust in
men in uniform who have just recently spread fear and
imposed their will on local communities by raping and
sexually abusing women, girls, boys and men? How
does one give back a childhood to a child soldier, whose
life has so far taught him that killing and maiming
others is the way to ensure his own survival? How
does one convince a Government propped up by armed
militias used to turning a blind eye to graft and other
abuses that investing in accountable security sector will
bring greater dividends through stability, security, and
eventually through the ballot box? Building sustainable
peace requires sustainable answers to those and many
other questions related to security sector reform.
While originally perceived as an element of
peacekeeping exit strategies, security sector reform
is now widely accepted as an integral part of conflict
prevention, peacebuilding and efforts to avoid relapse
into conflict. Security sector reform is also a vital
element of the rule of law, which can hardly be achieved
without a security sector that is accountable, effective
and responsive to the needs of the population.
As noted in the concept paper, linkages between
SSR and other related areas, such as countering
illicit flows and destabilizing accumulations of small
arms, should also be kept in mind. In particular,
close links must be established between SSR and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes, and former combatants must be offered
alternative livelihoods, as for example in the case of
the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration Programme
supported by the United Nations Development
Programme, which provides anti-Government militants
with an opportunity to give up their arms and become
reintegrated into their communities.
While the United Nations has developed an
impressive toolbox for assisting Member States, long-
term national ownership remains key for the legitimacy
and sustainability of any SSR effort. National
Governments should undertake both sector-wide
initiatives and reform of individual components, such
as armed forces, police, law enforcement, judiciary
and corrections, complemented by horizontal measures
aimed at fighting corruption, strengthening governance
and accountability and ensuring the protection of
human rights.
As the report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/480)
rightly notes, the United Nations must make sure it
supports inclusive and accountable SSR that enhances
14-31258 21/30
28/04/2014 Maintenance of international peace and security S/PV.7161
border management and civil emergency, inter alia.
It is indeed much more. If we truly want to have an
effective, legitimate and accountable security sector,
we need to consider SSR within a broader, more
comprehensive approach that should be consistent with
the values and principles of democracy, the rule of law,
good governance and respect for human rights.
The main objective of SSR is to help ensure that
people feel safer. But if we wish to have safe and stable
societies, because of their closely interconnected
nature, we have to look at SSR through the prism of
security and development. In that context, security
threats must be tackled through joint efforts and
in an integrated manner across the entire nexus of
development, peacekeeping, peacebuilding, the rule
of law and human rights. That will allow us to have
societies with durable peace and in a position to gain
from SSR efforts.
Taking into account its vast accumulation of
expertise and knowledge, the United Nations, through
its inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task Force, is
well positioned to provide such holistic and customized
support to nationally led undertakings of member
States. Moreover, as stated in the Secretary-General’s
latest report,
“partnerships must be deepened and expanded
given the increase in the number and type of
actors providing support to security sector reform”
(S/2013/480, p. 2).
I would like to echo the message from today’s
draft resolution that security sector reform is critical
to addressing impunity for grave violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law, as that is a
vital enabling factor for the success of SSR.
We could not agree more with the Secretary-
General’s assessment that
“experience has shown that the viability of security
sector reform efforts depends on the political
environment in which reform is carried out” (ibid.).
It is in that sense that inclusivity is one of the instrumental
factors for the success of SSR. To be transformative and
sustainable, SSR processes, with host Governments
playing a primary role, need to promote inclusiveness,
including in institution-building. That assumes the
active engagement of national and local authorities,
along with parliaments, communities, civil society,
academia and women’s groups. Only in that way will
resolution we will be adopting later today recognizes
the need for the inter-agency Security Sector Reform
Task Force and United Nations operations to further
strengthen the monitoring and evaluation of SSR
initiatives, with the aim of ensuring the effectiveness
of the support provided to Governments.
To conclude, I wish to commend the United
Nations Group of Friends of Security Sector Reform,
co-chaired by Slovakia and South Africa, for being
a driving force in giving the issue the visibility
it deserves. We also acknowledge an important
contribution of the inter-agency Security Sector Task
Force, now comprising 14 United Nations entities and
the United Nations Inter-Agency SSR Support Unit, all
of which are working towards an integrated, holistic
and coherent United Nations approach to SSR issues.
The Council can count on my delegation’s support in its
further efforts to advance that important issue.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing
and deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I now give the floor to the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs and European
Integration of Montenegro.
Mr. Lukšić (Montenegro): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate the delegation of Nigeria on its successful
conduct of the presidency of the Security Council this
month. We thank the Secretary-General for his briefing
and for his second report and recommendations on
security sector reform (S/2013/480). Montenegro
particularly welcomes this afternoon’s adoption of
a draft resolution that I am sure will provide for a
strengthen United Nations role in support of the security
sector reform (SSR) agenda.
Montenegro fully aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I would like, however, to add some remarks in my
national capacity.
Seven years after the first Security Council
presidential statement on this topic (S/PRST/2007/3),
our understanding of security sector reform (SSR) has
significantly evolved. We realize that SSR is not only
about activities directed towards the professionalization
of individual security pillars, such as police, defence,
22/30 14-31258
S/PV.7161 Maintenance of international peace and security 28/04/2014
capable security and justice institutions is a major
cause of conflict and relapse into conflict. It is also
hampers conflict resolution, stabilization, and longer-
term peacebuilding. Lack of security and justice affects
individuals in a profound way. It limits their aspirations
and potential, and restrains their ability to lift
themselves out of poverty. A well-functioning security
and justice system is a precondition for development.
The effective delivery of service within a framework
of the rule of law, good governance and accountability
is essential in moving the SSR agenda forward. Human
security must be at the core of those efforts. We attach
great importance to the gender dimension of SSR and
in combatting sexual violence. The United Nations
plays a role in promoting SSR. We have long supported
its normative work on SSR, as well as United Nations
assistance to member States , particularly in countries
affected by violent conflict. We welcome the report
of the Secretary-General on SSR of August 2013
(S/2013/480).
The United Nations has made significant progress
in strengthening its coherence and effectiveness in
support of SSR. We welcome initiatives to strengthen the
cooperation between the United Nations Development
Programme and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in that respect, such as the global focal point.
The Nordic countries congratulate the United Nations
on its new policy on policing in peace operations. We
will continue to support that effort, including in the
African setting.
Integrating SSR principles into broader mechanisms
for engagement, such as civil service reforms, poverty
reduction strategies, mediation, peace agreements and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration design
and implementation is necessary to ensure both the
required political support for SSR and the right type
of platform for medium- to long-term initiatives. We
need to enhance the SSR capacities of United Nations
field missions. The Security Council is responsible for
matching mandates and expectations with the necessary
resources.
Security sector reform is not just purely a technical
activity. It is essentially about building confidence
between the people and those entrusted to protect them.
Support for security sector reform therefore needs to be
better linked to broader transformative processes such
as reconciliation, political dialogue and mediation.
We therefore encourage elevating the importance of
security sector reform as a strategic priority in United
the political reforms be allowed to take root and open
a space for national dialogue, reconciliation efforts
and other initiatives to develop. Focus also needs to
be equally placed on transparency, accountability and
effective management and oversight, with a view to
strengthening the legitimacy and integrity of security
institutions.
Fully cognizant of this dynamic, Montenegro
has been diligently working to improve the overall
functioning of its security sector in order to be able to
respond successfully to the threats of our age. Along
with an intensive campaign and activities in the area
of the rule of law as our national priority, we have
undertaken further security and intelligence sector
reforms. As a result, new legislation has recently been
passed to ensure that the national security agency and
military intelligence service operate in accordance
with international standards and best practices.
Aware of contemporary challenges in the area of
cyberterrorism, we are implementing a cybersecurity
strategy for the period 2013-2017 and other
cybersecurity-related regulations. The implementation
of a law on parliamentary oversight of the security and
defence sectors will further strengthen the legislative
and oversight role of the Montenegrin Parliament. We
also participate in the Building Integrity programme,
which seeks to increase capacity to combat corruption
in the security sector. Montenegro is also committed
to the implementation of measures related to gender
equality, with special emphasis on resolution 1325
(2000) as well as to training concerning gender-based
violence.
Let me conclude by expressing our firm support
for the full implementation of the first ever stand-
alone resolution on SSR and to all efforts of the United
Nations system, complemented by the activities of the
Group of Friends of SSR, that aim to contribute to
further advancing the concept of SSR within the United
Nations and beyond.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Norway.
Mr. Brattskar (Norway): I speak on behalf of the
Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden,
and Norway.
There can be no doubt that security sector
reform (SSR) is fundamental for conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Its importance is
growing. The absence of professional, sustainable and
14-31258 23/30
28/04/2014 Maintenance of international peace and security S/PV.7161
to note that the draft resolution to be adopted today
seeks concrete approaches to implementing the many
important recommendations of the Secretary-General’s
report on SSR.
Slovakia is committed to building such partnerships,
as suggested in the report of the Secretary-General,
in support of the comprehensive and sustainable
implementation of the recommendations made therein.
We seek to enhance three types of partnerships: among
Member States, between the United Nations and
regional organizations and among the United Nations,
Member States and civil society.
First, in its capacity as founder and co-Chair of the
Group of Friends of SSR, Slovakia, based on its own
experience of transformation, has made significant
efforts to raise awareness and knowledge regarding
SSR and related United Nations processes among
Member States. Through regular meetings and events,
we have sought to forge consensus around the United
Nations SSR agenda. As an example, the launch of the
Integrated Technical Guidance Notes in New York in
December 2012 and in Geneva in March 2013, and the
high-level meeting on the Secretary-General’s second
report on SSR in November 2013 in New York, served
to consult Member States on priorities for further
developing the United Nations approach to SSR.
Secondly, Slovakia endeavours to support the
forging of partnerships between the United Nations
and regional organizations. It is only natural to seek
ways for fostering cooperation in the domain of SSR
between the United Nations and the African Union, as
well as the European Union, the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Slovakia has already
co-organized a couple of events in Africa in order to
encourage stronger partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union in the field of SSR,
and we plan to continue with that effort in the near
future. Likewise, Slovakia aims to enhance cooperation
between the United Nations and the OSCE. In July
of this year, Slovakia will be co-host a joint United
Nations-OSCE event on SSR, in partnership with
Switzerland as the current chair of the OSCE.
Thirdly, Slovakia also seeks to further strengthen
working partnerships among the United Nations,
Member States and civil society. Civil society should
be integrated at every stage, from the development of a
common national security vision, to the implementation
of reform processes, and the review of progress. Most
Nations mission structures and operations, including
through the good offices of senior United Nations
officials
There can be no sustainable SSR without national
ownership. Furthermore, we fully agree on the
importance of strengthening regional ownership of
SSR processes. We encourage the United Nations
to develop further its partnerships with regional
organizations, such as the African Union. I take this
opportunity to commend the African Union and the
Economic Community of Western African States
for their engagement in SSR, and we look forward to
continued cooperation. We furthermore appreciate the
work of the United Nations Group of Friends of SSR,
which contributes to inclusive dialogue and coherence.
It is important to ensure that the right sets of skills are
available in all parts of a Government to support SSR
activities. The Nordic countries are considering how
they can contribute to that end.
Lastly, I would like to stress the fact that SSR does
not affect only countries emerging from conflict. SSR
is in fact relevant to any country. Review and reform of
security and justice services should be an integral part
of public policy and good governance in all countries.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Slovakia.
Mr. Burian (Slovakia): I would like first and
foremost to applaud Nigeria for initiating this important
open debate on security sector reform (SSR) with a view
to achieving the first-ever resolution on SSR, which
Slovakia strongly supports and plans to co-sponsor. I
take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General
for his inspiring statement as well as for his report on
SSR (S/2013/480), issued last year, which gives a clear
vision for the way forward.
Slovakia fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting on behalf of the
European Union and its member States. In addition, I
would like to make few remarks in my national capacity.
Slovakia has been a proud sponsor of the issue of
security sector reform within the United Nations system.
In that regard, I am proud to note that the first Security
Council open debate on this subject took place under
our presidency in February 2007 (see S/PV.5632). In the
seven years that have passed since, the Organization
has achieved significant accomplishments. That
progress is required given the growing number of cases
the Security Council is dealing with. We are pleased
24/30 14-31258
S/PV.7161 Maintenance of international peace and security 28/04/2014
monitoring and evaluation processes, the United
Nations could not only improve its endeavours with
lessons learned, it could also ensure that its resources
are allocated in the most effective, efficient and
sustainable manner possible. In that regard, I welcome
the ongoing efforts of the United Nations inter-agency
SSR Task Force to develop a specific integrated
technical guidance note on monitoring and evaluation.
In conclusion, I would like to assure you, Sir, that
Slovakia will continue to be engaged in supporting the
Secretary-General’s efforts to build a comprehensive
approach within the United Nations to SSR as an
important element contributing to the maintenance of
sustainable international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Ms. Mxakatop-Diseko (South Africa): My
delegation wishes to congratulate the Federal Republic
of Nigeria on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We are grateful to Nigeria for
its foresight in choosing to focus on security sector
reform (SSR) as a key topic for this month. We thank
Nigeria for sponsoring the first draft resolution on this
topic, and pledge South Africa’s support for it.
We wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his statement, welcome his second report on SSR
(S/2013/480) and look forward to playing an active role
in implementing its recommendations.
South Africa attaches great importance to SSR.
Nigeria, together with South Africa, co-hosted a high-
level forum on African perspectives on security sector
reform in May 2010. Building on the outcomes, a
follow-up high-level forum was held in October 2012
on building partnerships for security sector reform in
Africa. Both outcomes were submitted to the Secretary-
General.
Furthermore, in November 2013, South Africa and
Slovakia co-hosted a high-level meeting of the United
Nations Group of Friends of SSR to launch the latest
report of the Secretary-General on SSR and to discuss
the way forward in implementing the second report of
the Secretary-General.
We have noted several achievements in the report,
such as the provision of support to countries in the
development of national security policies, strategies and
plans, facilitating national dialogue on issues related to
security sector reform, assisting national authorities
recently, we have addressed these issues in international
conferences and seminars, including an event organized
in New York together with the Japanese and Tanzanian
Governments on inclusivity in SSR. I would like to
highlight the instrumental expertise and support that
has been provided by non-governmental organizations.
In particular, Slovakia maintains a long-standing
partnership with the Geneva Centre for the Democratic
Control of Armed Forces and its international security
sector advisory team. They, I note, provided their
valuable support to many SSR events as well as
assistance to individual countries in supporting SSR.
They have also greatly contributed to the development
of the United Nations Integrated Technical Guidance
Notes with their expert inputs.
I would like to highlight three areas that I believe
merit particular attention when reflecting on the way
ahead. They relate to the need to strengthen core
capacities for the United Nations to deliver support, to
coordinate its support and to review the progress of its
delivery on the ground.
First, there is a need to strengthen its internal
capacities. The significant increase of SSR structures
in peacekeeping operations and special political
missions, as well as the rise in mandates of missions to
support SSR-related tasks, underline the real demand
for strengthened resources. I encourage further
reinforcement of United Nations capability to deliver
coherent support, including the strengthening of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operation’s SSR Unit,
as that will translate, in our view, into more advanced
collaboration in the field and an enhanced ability to
provide adequate guidance and assistance to Member
States.
Secondly, the United Nations should continue
to enhance its coordination capacity to deliver SSR
support as one. Significant progress has already been
achieved in that regard. Besides the efforts of the
inter-agency SSR Task Force and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operation’s SSR Unit as its secretariat,
I would like in particular to emphasize the Integrated
Technical Guidance Notes, which are a landmark in
fostering a “Delivering as one” approach to supporting
the nationally led SSR efforts of Member States. Finally,
we fully support request of the Security Council to
make SSR an integral part of the good offices role of
the Secretary-General’s Special Representatives.
Thirdly, by enhancing its capacities in carefully
reviewing the progress on SSR through systematic
14-31258 25/30
28/04/2014 Maintenance of international peace and security S/PV.7161
to intensify its efforts to mobilize resources, including
by supporting national aid coordination and resource
mobilization efforts by countries under its purview.
The inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task
Force and the Security Sector Reform Unit have
emerged as important sources of expertise on SSR.
The 2013 report of the Secretary-General outlines the
increasing complexity of mandates and activities in
support of national SSR processes. It also concludes
that a number of steps need to be taken in order to
strengthen the United Nations delivery on the ground.
We must support that.
In conclusion, the legitimacy and global character
of the United Nations gives it a particular responsibility
in facilitating a coordinated approach to security sector
reform based on the principle of national ownership and
inclusivity. That all-inclusive process must always have
a capacity to address the needs of the people, including
in particular the role that women and youth can play.
We are optimistic that the debate today will move us a
step closer to further enhancing and coordinating our
approach to SSR.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): I thank you, Sir, for giving
me the floor and for the concept note prepared by
your delegation (S/2014/238, annex). It is a sign of the
importance you attach to this issue, Sir, that we are
discussing it once again under Nigeria’s presidency.
We would recall that we participated in the meeting
presided over by Nigeria on 12 October 2011 (see
S/PV.6630). I also thank the Secretary-General for his
contribution to this discussion.
India has experience relevant to the subject we
are discussing today, having participated in 43 United
Nations peacekeeping missions, in which almost
170,000 Indian peacekeepers have served. Security
sector reform (SSR) is mentioned in several Security
Council resolutions. We note that as many as 24 of the
47 resolutions adopted by the Council in 2013 include
an explicit reference to SSR. Also, six peacekeeping
operations and eight special political missions have
been mandated to carry out SSR. In many of those
peacekeeping operations, troops from my country are
directly involved.
It was only a few days ago that two Indian
peacekeepers wearing the Blue Helmet were injured
with the development of executive and oversight
mechanisms and supporting countries in coordination
and resource mobilization, which is a step welcomed
by my delegation. While we welcome those positive
developments, we believe that more can still be done,
especially in the light of the noteworthy setbacks that
have been experienced in countries such as the Central
African Republic, South Sudan and Somalia.
Drawing on the lessons learned on the African
continent and South Africa’s own homegrown
experience undergoing SSR, we can attest to the fact
that each country faces its own unique challenges, and
therefore, whatever approach is adopted, it has to be
context-specific.
A key political and practical challenge in
supporting SRR is facilitating national ownership. We
welcome the development of the Integrated Technical
Guidance Notes on that important issue by the
inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task Force, which
recognizes that national ownership requires countries
to develop their own national vision for their security
sectors that is informed by their own circumstances,
to commit sufficient resources to ensure the long-term
sustainability and viability of reforms and to review the
progress in their implementation.
SSR challenges and opportunities are regional
in nature. Cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations is therefore important. We appreciate the
cooperation between the African Union (AU) and the
United Nations. The strategic partnership developed
between the United Nations and the African Union
on SSR is an expression of the important role that the
United Nations could play in advancing security sector
reform on the African continent.
Therefore, we welcome the African Union policy
framework recently adopted by the African Union Heads
of State and Government and the ongoing capacity-
building programme by the AU, United Nations and
European Union. South Africa is committed to the
implementation of that framework.
We also recognize the important role United Nations
peacekeeping missions play in security sector reform,
where they have become increasingly multidimensional.
TheimportanceofSSRanddisarmament,demobilization
and reintegration programmes are essential elements
for peacebuilding, and we welcome the increasing
involvement of the Peacebuilding Commission in that
regard. The Peacebuilding Commission should continue
26/30 14-31258
S/PV.7161 Maintenance of international peace and security 28/04/2014
be given to issues such as ensuring impartiality in
recruitment, vetting new recruits and training. A focus
on the political dimension of police reform will only be
controversial and perhaps counter-productive.
Thirdly, we would also like to take this opportunity
to caution against an over-reliance on what are often
termed “innovative” approaches, particularly when
there is a need to cut costs. There is, somehow, a belief
that United Nations missions can be asked to do more
with less. We can understand that, at some level, such
logic will appeal to some people. The truth, however, is
that costs cannot be cut without also cutting corners. We
would therefore urge Member States to recognize that
and to be pragmatic by including only mandates that
are deliverable and for which resources are available.
I would, in conclusion, like to underline our view
that SSR capacity-building needs to necessarily occupy
centre stage in the entire process of security sector
reform. Such an approach would be both cost-effective
and sustainable.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Umemoto (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to express my appreciation to the Nigerian presidency
for its leadership in convening today’s open debate on
an issue that is important for all of us.
As other colleagues have mentioned, there is no
doubt that security sector reform (SSR) is one of the most
significant elements in peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and conflict prevention. Japan fully recognizes its
importance and has implemented programmes in the
field, such as those in Afghanistan. Let me point out one
challenge in dealing with security sector reform. The
concept note prepared for this debate prepared by the
presidency (S/2014/238, annex) emphasizes that there
is an excessive focus on “hardware” issues relating to
training and equipping the security sector, compared
to efforts to enhance the delivery of “software”-related
support. With regards to this software-related support,
I believe that enhancing inclusivity in the security
sector, especially in the context of rebuilding post-
conflict States, is critical.
The reason is simple. If components and members
of the military and police are not inclusive enough in
the eyes of local people in post-conflict States, those
security institutions may be perceived as either biased
or serving only specific political groups. This mistrust
between local people and the security sector can easily
while protecting civilians at the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan base in Bor, South Sudan. That
attack is another example of the unresolved political
issues in South Sudan and reflects the importance of
understanding the complex political environment of
peacekeeping missions, where SSR has to take root
as part of the internal political process of the Member
State concerned.
SSR is an important element of post-conflict
peacebuilding. Our Heads of State and Government in
2005 agreed that that issue would be best considered by
a specialized body created for that very purpose, that is,
the Peacebuilding Commission. The fact that, despite
the work of the Peacebuilding Commission, the Council
still feels it necessary to discuss this issue today shows
the complexity of the subject. It is therefore for reasons
of pragmatism that we will use this opportunity to
outline three basic principles that, in our view, must
guide SSR.
First, it is important to keep in mind that the most
sustainable way to achieve effective SSR is by ensuring
national ownership of the process. It is because of
this that General Assembly resolution 60/180, which
established the Peacebuilding Commission, affirms
the primary responsibility of the national Governments
of countries emerging from conflict to identify
priorities and strategies for peacebuilding in order to
ensure national ownership. We have, in the past, also
emphasized that the footprint of external elements,
including the United Nations, should be light in order
to avoid any possible overtones of neocolonialism.
Secondly, the establishment and maintenance of
public order is important. A security vacuum after a
peace agreement is dangerous. The late Sergio Vieira
de Mello noted:
“Unlike other nation-building tasks, the
maintenance of law and order cannot wait. If there
is no law from day one, criminal activity thrives.”
Although vitally important, the focus has to be on what
is doable, and not on an agenda driven by the priorities
of donor countries. We hear, at times, references to
the importance of cultural change in police reform.
The concept note itself decries what it refers to as an
excessive focus on issues of training and equipment at
the cost of democratic governance and management.
That is a prescription that we find difficult to agree
with. Given the importance of national ownership and
the scarcity of resources, priority, in our view, should
14-31258 27/30
28/04/2014 Maintenance of international peace and security S/PV.7161
As recognized in the draft resolution to be adopted
today, the security sector is a fundamental element of
sustainable peace. If a national security sector fails in
its obligations to ensure protection to all citizens, even
for a hard realist as Hobbes the very legitimacy of the
State as a whole will be at stake. Therefore, unmet tasks
related to the establishment of a democratic, accountable
and stable security apparatus in post-conflict situations
are rightfully pointed out as a threat to durable peace
and stability.
Here at the United Nations, there is already a well-
established consensus on the importance of security
sector reform (SSR) for peace and development.
We commend all efforts to ensure that SSR-related
challenges are given due consideration in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding mandates, and that the United
Nations is well equipped to provide assistance in this
area. There is enough experience to show that the
development of a democratic security sector goes well
beyond strengthening its individual components. As we
focus on the challenges of implementation, however, it
is essential to recall some fundamental realities. I would
like to make five brief observations in that regard.
First, we must again recognize that SSR is both a
process in itself and a moment in a political continuum
that begins with peace processes, runs through
efforts related to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR), and should continue in tandem
with peacebuilding strategies into sustainable and
democratic development and the promotion of human
rights. In this context, the DDR-SSR link is a critical
one. It is essential to integrate SSR considerations early
into the peacemaking and reintegration efforts. We
fully concur with the recommendation of the Secretary-
General that “security sector reform needs to be better
linked to other critical practice areas” (S/2013/480,
para.61 (h)). As important and interconnected as those
areas may be, the fundamental nexus between SSR and
DDR deserves special attention.
Secondly, being a fundamentally political process,
SSR implementation also requires a deep understanding
of the underlying sociological components of conflict,
which are likely to shape realities and different visions
on security. The United Nations needs to be equipped
to take those factors into account and to sharpen its
analytical tools so as to adequately inform the policy-
setting and decision-making processes. Again as
stressed by the Secretary-General, the Council can play
a key role in ensuring the practical application of the
lead to a relapse of violent conflict as we have often
witnessed in the past.
Recognizing these challenges of inclusivity in
SSR, last week, along with the Tanzanian and Slovak
Missions, the Japanese Mission co-hosted a seminar
entitled “Inclusivity in rebuilding States: focusing
on the inclusivity in SSR”. It was part of a series of
seminars on inclusivity in rebuilding States that
Japan has co-hosted since last year with Tanzania.
In the seminar, prominent panelists consistently
emphasized that it was crucial for post-conflict States
to invite different political, social and ethnic groups,
including traditional leaders and women’s groups, into
the decision-making and implementation process of
building the new security sector. By doing so, these
institutions can enjoy legitimacy and impartiality in the
local community.
The discussions at the seminar clearly suggest
that this dimension of inclusivity should receive more
attention and focus in the context of United Nations
assistance in SSR. Rather than putting too much focus
on the number and equipment of officers in military
and police sections, the international community and
the United Nations must pay more attention to and show
commitment in supporting an inclusive and nationally
led process in designing, planning and developing the
security sector so that a wider range of local people
may participate in the process of creating new security
sectors. This inclusive and participatory process will
help local people perceive those institutions as their
own military and police, functioning based on the rule
of law and not on their affiliations to political leaders.
I believe that the United Nations, perhaps through
its good offices functions, should and can help and
facilitate more such inclusive and participatory process
among all stakeholders.
In closing, let me reiterate that Japan is ready to
continue to provide assistance for Security Sector
Reform in post-conflict situations.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Brazil.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): Let me express my
delegation’s satisfaction, Sir, at having you preside
over our proceedings today. I thank you for organizing
this debate on an issue of such crucial importance to
a number of situations on the Council’s agenda. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
28/30 14-31258
S/PV.7161 Maintenance of international peace and security 28/04/2014
development of the security sector. 1 invite the Security
Council to make further use of this resource, in line
with the draft resolution to be adopted later today.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Guatemala.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Nigerian presidency for having organized this
open debate and its concept note (S/2014/238, annex) and
for your personal participation, Mr. Minister. We also
thank Secretary- General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing
and for his second report on security sector reform
(S/2013/480).
We wish to highlight four points that relate to the
challenges and opportunities related to security sector
reform (SSR).
First, we believe that such reform is the primary
responsibility of States and must be a process driven by
national needs and priorities. We recognize that there is
no single model of SSR, since the approach depends on
the culture, the level of development and the historical
relationship between the people and State institutions,
among others. Achieving mutual trust between citizens
and their security institutions — the police and/or army,
for example — remains a challenge for States.
Secondly, the United Nations and the international
community have played an important complementary
role in assisting States to build and strengthen effective
security systems. We consider it important to continue
to promote coherence and coordination in the efforts and
activities of all relevant stakeholders. The Organization
has accumulated a wealth of experience, especially since
the establishment in 2008 of the inter-agency Security
Sector Reform Task Force, which has created the ability
to provide support in the field and at Headquarters. We
consider it important to continue developing guidelines
in all relevant respects, in close consultation with
Member States.
Thirdly, we believe that the role of the United
Nations, in cooperation with bilateral, regional and
subregional partners, can provide technical assistance
for security sector reform through peacekeeping
operations when a country so requests and according
to its specific needs. For example, we recognize the
important role that the African Union plays in ensuring
regional stability. The crises in Mali and the Sahel
region show that international threats often transcend
the borders of a single country and that more interaction
central principle of national ownership by, inter alia,
taking additional steps to ensure that its mandates
incorporate the perspectives and needs of the countries
under consideration.
Thirdly, as we approach the turbulent political
environment surrounding SSR, we cannot simplify
notions such as political will. SSR entails complex,
difficult and sometimes very risky decisions. Painful
decisions on financing, on recruiting, on transitional
justice, and even on how to shape historical narratives
are intrinsic to SSR processes. An encompassing
strategy to bolster SSR implementation will benefit
from being fully informed by such political realities
and devise the best mechanisms to mitigate risks.
Furthermore, the importance of regional and
subregional contexts comes to the fore not only because
the regional and subregional components of conflict
continue to be determinant for peace, but also because
regional and subregional organizations can be effective
operative partners in articulating international support
into viable political strategies. For that to happen, of
course, strong coordination at those levels is essential.
We welcome in this regard the African Union resolve to
strengthen its capacities in SSR.
Finally, it is also crucial to think of SSR as a process
that should contribute to meaningful transformation
and stability through representative and inclusive
recruitment. In many societies, the authority and power
associated with weapons is viewed as an end in itself
and, in some circumstances, as a path to economic
gains. In such contexts, it is also critical to ensure that
SSR does not give rise to new classes of privilege to
replace old ones, but instead builds institutions that
serve the interests of all. This highlights the need for
SSR to go hand in hand with the promotion of equality
before the law, and with the exercise and protection of
social and economic rights through job creation, social
inclusion programmes, capacity-building and enhanced
opportunities for social mobility.
Let me conclude by stressing the important
contribution the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
can give to our reflections on SSR. The PBC is deeply
involved in the daily challenges of SSR. The experience
of country-specific configurations, combined with
the policy-setting platform of the Organizational
Committee, can provide a very adequate locus for a
discussion of those fundamental political dimensions
of SSR, attuned to the realities of its implementation on
the ground and understood as a process of democratic
14-31258 29/30
28/04/2014 Maintenance of international peace and security S/PV.7161
in response to the needs of conflict and post-conflict
countries, of those in a transition stage or of developing
countries at large. In doing so, we have at our disposal a
wide range of instruments: diplomacy, crisis response,
development and security policies. Allow me to make a
brief review our engagement on security sector reform
activities.
Most of the EU civilian and military crisis-
management missions and operations deployed
worldwide have an SSR component. The European
Union trains, monitors and advises police, justice and
military institutions and their personnel in countries
such as Bosnia and Herzegovina, Afghanistan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali and Somalia.
From a development cooperation angle, over the period
2001-2009 the EU disbursed approximately €1 billion,
targeting justice and security sector reform worldwide.
That number multiplies if we consider the overall
interventions through the crisis response and Common
Security and Defence Policy missions mentioned
earlier.
In addition, the Instrument contributing to
Stability and Peace, and more specifically its crisis-
response measures, have become a key instrument in
operating in the security-development nexus and to
enable a more timely response by the European Union.
Under the Instrument, the European Union is providing
SSR-related support, inter alia, in the Central African
Republic, Chad, Guinea-Conakry, Libya, the Niger,
Mali and Myanmar, to name just a few countries.
The European Union’s main approach to security
sector reform is to assist partner Governments in their
efforts to provide effective, legitimate and accountable
security and justice services to their citizens in a
manner that is consistent with democratic norms,
principles of the rule of law, good governance and its
respect for human rights. The EU shares the view that
SSR should be part of a comprehensive approach. Such
an approach should not only cover the wide-ranging
conflict prevention, peacebuilding, peacekeeping and
State-building agendas, but also take a whole-of-society
approach, recognizing interconnections with economic
revenue management, youth employment, access and
quality of public services, and effective oversight and
governance.
Furthermore, the 2007 Council conclusions
on security and development underlined the great
importance of building SSR capacity in regional
with regional and subregional mechanisms is therefore
necessary.
Finally, we believe in the promotion of
comprehensive security sector reform that recognizes
its link to development. The World Bank has indicated
that no low-income, fragile or conflict-affected State
has so far achieved the Millennium Development Goals,
which suggests that stability and security are important
prerequisites for establishing an environment conducive
to development. In our region and in our own country,
insecurity and violence have had an adverse impact on
economic growth, the quality of life of our people and
the sustainable management of natural resources.
The establishment of an effective, accountable
and professional security sector is a critical element to
laying the foundations for lasting peace and sustainable
development. We hope that the draft resolution to be
adopted today will assist in achieving those goals.
The President: I give the floor to the observer of
the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its member States. The candidate countries
Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilisation
and Association Process and potential candidates
Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as
Ukraine, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
At the outset, let me thank you, Mr. President, for
the priority Nigeria attaches to this subject and for
your having come to make your important statement
and presiding over this very important meeting. It is
a pleasure and a privilege for us to participate in this
debate on security sector reform, and we also thank
Nigeria for providing a very useful concept note
(S/2014/238, annex) to that end.
We have taken note of the Secretary-General’s
briefing and the recommendations put forward in his
report (S/2013/480). The European Union welcomes
the Secretary-General’s report, which makes a strong
case for a strengthened United Nations role in support
of nationally owned security sector reform efforts. We
look forward to the adoption of the draft resolution this
afternoon.
The European Union has long-standing experience
of supporting security sector reform (SSR) programmes
30/30 14-31258
S/PV.7161 Maintenance of international peace and security 28/04/2014
the report of the Secretary-General also highlights.
Special attention should be paid to the participation
of women and marginalized groups, including persons
with disabilities, minorities and migrants, in planning,
leading and implementing security sector reforms.
The value of local ownership and the need for
coordinated support of different actors and instruments
is key. We fully agree with all of those who have already
made that point in the course of today’s debate.W e also
support the activities of the United Nations Group of
Friends of SSR, which serves as a very valuable vehicle
to facilitate inclusive dialogue, to foster further progress
in developing the United Nations comprehensive
approach to SSR within the United Nations system
and to build synergies among the United nations, the
European Union and other international organizations,
regional actors and stakeholders, including in particular
the African Union.
Aside from the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations and the Peacebuilding Commission, SSR
should also be regularly placed on the agenda of the
Council and be given appropriate consideration in the
mandates of peacekeeping operations. We thank you
personally, Mr. President, as well as Nigeria, for your
leadership in doing so. The issue is highly relevant to
the business of this body, especially when it comes
to a successful transition and exit for peacekeeping
operations and to building and sustaining peace.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. Given
the lateness of the hour, I intend, with the concurrence
of the members of the Council, to suspend the meeting
until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m.
organizations as a means to promote ownership. Our
support for building African Union capacities in security
sector reform is a case in point. Our regional focus is,
moreover, strengthened through the development of
targeted regional strategies, for example in the Sahel
or the Horn of Africa, where the European Union tries
to support the tackling of security-related challenges
in a comprehensive manner, committing all relevant
instruments at its disposal.
The European Union has worked in the area of
security sector reform for nearly 10 years. Among
the lessons we have learned are the need for a more
strategic, comprehensive and coordinated approach, a
better knowledge of the local context, clear objectives,
concrete and measurable benchmarks for assessing
progress and a better balance between ensuring service
delivery outcomes and building state capacity. Security
sector reform is politically and institutionally a complex
process that may take a generation or more to fully take
root. In that regard, we would like to underline the need
for preserving the results achieved through appropriate
follow up and for ensuring a smooth transition. Thereby,
we try to ensure that our short-term engagement as
part of the Common Security and Defence Policy is
accompanied by long-term measures.
We therefore support the Secretary-General in his
approach to underline the need for a better balance
between service delivery — ensuring people’s security
and safety — and long-term institution and capacity
building. Engagement with local non-state actors,
the need for dialogue among national authorities,
communities and civil society on security-related
challenges, as well as effective monitoring by democratic
oversight institutions, are also important elements that

United Nations S/PV.7161(Resumption 1)
asdfSecurity Council
Sixty-ninth year
7161stmeeting
Monday, 28 April 2014, 3 p.m.
New York
Provisional
President: Mr. Sarki/Mr. Wali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nigeria)
Members: Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dalo
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Nankervis
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mangaral
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Barros
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Zhao Yong
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Bertoux
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Omaish
Lithuania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Murmokaitė
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Lucas
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Iliichev
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Uwizera
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . Mr. Baki
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. DeLaurentis
Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Security sector reform: challenges and opportunities
Report of the Secretary-General on Securing States and societies: strengthening
the United Nations comprehensive support to security sector reform (S/2013/480)
Letter dated 1 April 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2014/238)
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.
*1431349*
14-31349 (E)
2/19 14-31349
S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1) Maintenance of international peace and security 28/04/2014
The meeting was resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Austria, Belgium, Croatia, Cyprus,
Denmark, Finland, Georgia, Greece Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Malta, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia,
Sweden and the United Republic of Tanzania to
participate in this meeting.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): We thank the Nigerian
presidency for organizing an open debate on this
important issue, and welcome the first-ever stand-alone
draft resolution on security sector reform (SSR).
One of the most important questions on post-
conflict peacebuilding relates to the ways and means
to ensure the viability of peace. Security sector
reform lies at the core of this debate. A mismanaged
and dysfunctional security sector can significantly
challenge sustainable development, stability and
peace. On the other hand, a comprehensive, coherent
and coordinated approach to security sector reform
will help form functional, effective and economically
viable States. As such, approaching security sector
reform as part of a comprehensive and inclusive
peacebuilding strategy and coupling our efforts with
the broader framework of strengthening the rule of law
is of utmost importance. Also, support to the security
sector, especially in terms of resources, training and
institutional capacity-building, should continue after
the termination of peacekeeping operations, if needed.
The role of the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Peacebuilding Support Office and the Peacebuilding
Fund in security sector reform is crucial in assisting
national authorities to define and implement a credible
security reform strategy. Every society has its own
particular structures, needs and experiences with
conflict. The experience of the past 20 years has shown
that one-size-fits-all approaches do not produce viable
results. It should be the primary responsibility of
the host country to define the shape and direction of
security sector reform.
On the other hand, the norms and principles that have
been developed by the United Nations and elaborated
in the Secretary-General’s reports and United Nations
documents provide a general framework that should be
taken into account in security sector reform. Rule of law
and human rights standards are of particular importance
in that regard. While governments have the central role
to play, SSR activities must be extended to include the
broader population and ensure the needs of all citizens
in an inclusive manner. In addition, collaboration
with all relevant stakeholders, including regional and
subregional organizations, domestic stakeholders and
civil society is essential to preventing duplication and
to making optimal use of scarce resources.
Needless to say, it is necessary to sufficiently
address the root causes of conflicts, the solutions of
which lie at the very heart of communities and groups
in terms of their aspirations and legitimate wishes.
Political reconciliation among the parties to a conflict
through mediation, negotiation and facilitation as
the main instruments is among the primary methods
to be employed in the peacebuilding endeavour.
Mainstreaming gender issues and ensuring women’s
participation in security sector reform, as well as the
more general peace processes and conflict resolution,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding, recovery and mediation
efforts is of utmost importance.
Turkey prioritizes security sector reform activities
as part of its global engagement for peace. Turkish
peacekeepers continue to serve in various United
Nations, NATO and European Union missions across
the globe, including in Afghanistan, Africa, the
Balkans and the Middle-East, where they contribute to
the training of security personnel as well as capacity-
and institution-building of military and security forces.
In the same vein, Turkey has robust security
cooperation, particularly with Afghanistan, Somalia
and other countries in Africa, the Middle East and
Central Asia on a wide range of issues, from providing
technical assistance and strengthening civilian and law
enforcement institutions to providing training courses
to law enforcement officials. Bilateral agreements have
been signed with a large number of countries including
Iraq, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South
Sudan, Somalia, Mongolia, Libya, Côte D’Ivoire and
many countries in South-Eastern Europe, Central Asia
and Africa, on various aspects of support to security
reform.
14-31349 3/19
28/04/2014 Maintenance of international peace and security S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1)
Today’s debate is an integral part of a broader
ongoing discussion about the interlinkages between
peace and security, on the one hand, and the
prosperity of people on the other, as well as about
the complementarities between conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities and their
respective impacts at different stages of conflict
resolution while supporting building the institutional
capacities of States emerging from conflicts.
Security sector reform is imperative in the context
of United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding. In
that context, Egypt emphasizes that national ownership
is not only a prerequisite for SSR but also the backbone
of any viable SSR programme. The challenge is not
to conceptualize national ownership but rather to
operationalize it in such a manner that fully guarantees
that SSR remains a demand-driven process. The
relevance of SSR to the actual needs of each country
in post-conflict situations is solely dependent on
the ability of that country to be fully engaged in the
design, implementation and monitoring of all SSR
activities. National ownership and international support
considerations should not be seen as competing with
each other.
Egypt believes that security sector reform is not a
goal to be pursued in isolation from addressing other
societal challenges to peace and security in countries
emerging from conflicts, such as youth unemployment,
organized crime, poverty eradication and the lack of
adequate education and health services. However, there
are no easy answers or responses to the complexity of
all those challenges. No one size fits all. We need to
avoid expanding SSR to encompass every challenge
in one single process, in order to attain the desirable
results and deliverables.
Moreover, Egypt underlines that international
support to security sector reform must be anchored in
broader national institution-building efforts that aim
to address the social and economic causes of conflicts
and the complex security environments to be found in
countries emerging from conflicts.
While acknowledging the Security Council’s
mandate in the domain of peace and security, we need
to bear in mind its limited membership. Hence, Egypt
believes that the development of a United Nations
strategy for SSR must take place in the General
Assembly, in order to ensure that its formulation,
including its scope, mandate and constraints, is carried
Training is prioritized by Turkey. Between 1997
and 2013, more than 20,000 foreign law enforcement
officials from 54 countries — mainly in Africa, the
Middle East and Central Asia — benefitted from
various professional and vocational training courses
held by the Turkish National Police. The Police
Vocational Training Centre in Sivas, which has trained
more than 1,500 Afghan National Police cadets since
2011, is only one example. Likewise, hundreds of police
officer candidates from various countries have attended
graduate or undergraduate studies at the Turkish Police
Academy. The Turkish International Academy Against
Drugs and Organized Crime, established in cooperation
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
has been playing an important role in boosting regional
efforts to combat drug trafficking and organized crime
through its training and capacity-building programmes
for countries in need.
Solutions in the field of security sector reform
can be viable only if they are applied within a
comprehensive framework of peacebuilding,
comprising several elements in the humanitarian,
development, democratization and governance fields.
Turkey employs this comprehensive, multidimensional
and synchronized approach in places such as Somalia,
South-Eastern Europe and Afghanistan, enriching its
efforts in the security area to include humanitarian
aid, local development, the construction of basic
infrastructure, education, health and support to peace
processes.
Let me conclude by thanking the Nigerian
presidency, Member States and all relevant United
Nations bodies that engage in conducting and enhancing
the important practice of security sector reform.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): I wish to pay tribute
to the Nigerian presidency of the Security Council
for organizing this important debate on the issue of
security sector reform (SSR), which is of significant
importance to all countries, especially those emerging
from conflict. Today’s debate in the Security Council
is adequately justified, as 24 out of 47 resolutions
adopted by the Security Council in 2013 made explicit
reference to SSR, and 14 peacekeeping and special
political missions are currently mandated to provide
SSR support to host Governments.
4/19 14-31349
S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1) Maintenance of international peace and security 28/04/2014
peacekeeping, and it must be considered across the
entire peacebuilding continuum.
SSR challenges occur in a wide variety of settings,
from fragile and conflict-affected States with ineffective
security sectors, through to States emerging from
conflict and seeking United Nations support for the
next phase of their development. However, considerable
scope still remains for the Council to coordinate more
effectively with, and to learn from, regional and United
Nations country team partners in order to ensure that
assistance is tailored to specific national needs and
realities, and that gains can be sustained beyond the life
of a given mission. The Peacebuilding Commission,
with its country-specific configurations, has particular
competence in that regard, so the Council needs to find
new and better ways of working in close partnership
with the Commission.
SSR is often a complex, politically charged process
that entails significant risk; however, in some situations,
it can represent the single most important investment
that international partners can make in a country’s
future. New Zealand is an active contributor to SSR,
particularly in the justice sector, both bilaterally and
through United Nations missions. That experience has
taught us valuable lessons about managing the difficult
transition from providing SSR programmes through
peacekeeping missions to longer-term assistance
through bilateral support, as was the case with our
policing assistance to Timor-Leste after the withdrawal
of the United Nations mission in 2012.
For us, that Timor-Leste experience also
underscored the importance of national ownership as
a prerequisite for successful SSR. Indeed, the United
Nations discussions on SSR rightly acknowledge that
the success of SSR processes depends on the sustained
political will of the country concerned. New Zealand
therefore agrees with Egypt that a core objective must
be to assist national political leadership of SSR, and
bringing international technical assistance to the
national, regional and subregional level, where local
actors can apply it to their unique local situation. New
Zealand therefore joins Turkey and Egypt in urging that
the Council avoid a one-size-fits-all approach. Instead,
it should focus on enabling national authorities to
undertake their own, inclusive SSR processes.
Recent history demonstrates that no one has a
monopoly of wisdom on managing SSR processes.
Particularly, we have learned that what works at one
time, in one place, will not always work at a later time.
out through an inclusive intergovernmental process
that guarantees the full participation of the wider
membership of the United Nations in such an important
debate, taking into account the primary responsibility
and the sovereign right of any concerned country to
determine its national priorities in that regard.
In conclusion, we also believe that the Peacebuilding
Commission is in a better position to coordinate the
activities of the different organs and agencies of the
United Nations in that regard, particularly in light of
the experience that the Commission has gained through
its engagement with the countries on its agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand thanks
Nigeria for its continued leadership on the issue of
security sector reform (SSR), a commitment that is all
the more important because most Council-mandated
SSR activities take place on the African continent.
Nigeria’s perspective—indeed, the experience of all
African States—must therefore be prominent in any
SSR setting.
New Zealand welcomes today’s proposed adoption
of the first-ever stand-alone draft resolution on SSR. The
draft resolution underlines the considerable progress
we have made since the Council’s first open debate
on the issue in 2007 (see S/PV.5632). It is progress
that has required acknowledgment of the nature and
significance of the SSR challenge; it is progress that
has required development of a more comprehensive,
coherent and coordinated normative framework; and
it is progress that has required practical operational
tools for the United Nations effective work in that
area. The engagement of local actors, the importance
of close cooperation with regional organizations, the
need for the involvement of all stakeholders, including
women, and the key, underpinning need for a rule of
law environment are all rightly stressed in today’s draft
resolution.
SSR is a long-term process — hence the progerss
that the draft resolution records — one that requires
both concerted commitment from national authorities
and sustained engagement by international partners.
The Security Council has a critical role to play in laying
the foundations for those efforts; but other bilateral and
United Nations partners also play very important roles.
It is therefore vital that the Council is able to coordinate
more effectively with those actors. SSR extends beyond
14-31349 5/19
28/04/2014 Maintenance of international peace and security S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1)
by an approach that negates the legitimacy of local
stakeholders.
In that regard, Malaysia concurs with the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report that national ownership of SSR processes must
be inclusive so as to increase the confidence in, and
legitimacy of, security institutions. It is essential that
SSR be led by the legitimate authorities of the respective
Member States, in consultation with all the relevant
stakeholders, including all levels of Government,
security sector institutions, civil society and non-State
actors. Apart from lending credibility to the SSR
process, the involvement of national stakeholders in
negotiations on SSR will also play a pivotal role in
ensuring that related SSR provisions are better tailored
to respond to specific national circumstances and
challenges.
While the importance of national ownership reigns
above all, Malaysia is well aware that SSR will require
financial resources. We have seen such SSR initiatives
under the Peacebuilding Commission. In that regard,
the training of personnel, the development of skills,
the formulation of legal frameworks and the building
of national security infrastructure require substantial
funding. Sufficient funding must therefore be made
available to ensure successful SSR efforts.
Externally funded SSR processes often risk
undermining sustainability and neglecting national
ownership. The Security Council could do its part in that
regard by engaging national authorities in formulating
appropriately tailored Security Council mandates that
are better suited to national circumstances.
Experience has shown that sufficient funding alone
may be half of the solution. Capacity and expertise are
also important aspects contributing to SSR. Countries
that are emerging from conflict can learn from others’
successful experiences. Partnerships through South-
South cooperation in such areas as identifying civilian
experts will be beneficial in developing system-wide
SSR. We feel that Member States should seriously
consider developing links to identify civilian capacities
that support SSR and institution-building.
Considering the amount of work and resources
that has been, and will continue to be, channelled to
SSR processes, the Security Council should also place
appropriate emphasis on monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms. While it is easier to measure quantitative
output, more often than not qualitative impact
If SSR fails and there is a return to violence, then
the loss of investment by the host country and by the
wider international community can be huge. We must
all therefore approach the SSR challenge openly and
inclusively, while constantly reviewing whether the
process is working and adapting our efforts accordingly.
With that commitment, and working with those
who have practical, on-the-ground regional experience,
we can certainly make the progress on security sector
reform that is recorded in today’s draft resolution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): First and foremost, I
wish to commend you, Mr. President, for convening
this important meeting on “Security sector reform:
challenges and opportunities”, and for preparing the
concept note (S/2014/238, annex) that forms the basis
of today’s debate. I also wish to thank the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive briefing.
Malaysia would like to associate itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of Iran
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
My delegation takes note of the Secretary General’s
report (S/2013/480) on strengthening the United
Nations comprehensive support to security sector
reform. The report highlights the ongoing work and
recommendations on how to strengthen the work of the
United Nations in supporting security sector reform
(SSR).
My delegation also wishes to commend the
efforts and important progress made by the United
Nations in security SSR over the years, particularly
in implementing the recommendations contained in
the report of January 2008 entitled “Securing peace
and development: the role of the United Nations in
supporting security sector reform” (S/2008/39). Indeed,
we have seen much progress and improvement in the
area of SSR. That notwithstanding, the rapid changes
in, and complexity of, today’s conflicts necessitate
continuous review and enhancement of United Nations
SSR support.
My delegation would like to reaffirm that SSR must
be premised on — and not overlook — the fundamental
principle of national ownership. Only through a process
of dialogue, reconciliation and consultation will SSR
succeed. That is important as the views, sentiments
and sensitivities of the people should not be replaced
6/19 14-31349
S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1) Maintenance of international peace and security 28/04/2014
As it is the first time that Estonia takes the floor
on this important issue, we would like to commend
Slovakia’s leadership in adding it to the Council’s
agenda. The importance of security sector reform
(SSR) in the global peace and security agenda cannot
be underestimated. “Security is the bedrock upon
which States are built” is stated in the concept note,
and we cannot agree more. Weak security institutions
cannot prevent the outbreak of conflict, and in a post-
conflict situation they often cannot avoid a country’s
relapse into chaos. Therefore, support to such reform
is one of the most important tasks of the international
community — not only in order to maintain peace
and security in a country, but also to restore the rule
of law and protect human rights. Let me make some
observations in that respect.
First, one of the key factors for success is an
inclusive reconstruction and stabilization process. SSR
is not a purely technical exercise in reforming defence
forces or law enforcement agencies; rather, it is part
of a wider political process in which the lead role of
national authorities is crucial.
The best guarantee for durable stability and
successful reform and change is the involvement
of all factions of society — religious, ethnic and
social — including the political groups of the country
and women and youth. If that can be achieved, a
society’s ownership of its future — which is another
important factor of success — will be much stronger.
As inclusiveness and ownership are fundamental
in peacebuilding, they must be considered in peace
negotiations.
Secondly, very often countries in transition or
exiting a conflict need advice and encouragement. The
international community has an important role to play
in that regard in terms of capacity-building. I would
therefore like to commend the United Nations for the
steady enhancement of its peacebuilding toolbox and
its special attention to SSR as a part of that. The fact
that the number of references to SSR in the Council’s
resolutions has increased considerably and that the
majority of mandates for both peacekeeping and special
political missions include SSR is very welcome. We also
note positively that the membership of the inter-agency
Security Sector Reform Task Force has doubled in
recent years. SSR has become an integral part of the
United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding
agenda, achieving greater prominence each year.
contributes more significantly to addressing inherent
social issues and the long-term development of SSR
processes. In that regard, Malaysia supports the call
for the United Nations to enhance its monitoring and
evaluation capacities. Again, monitoring and evaluation
priorities and mechanisms must be drawn up according
to the different circumstances and complexities faced
by the countries undergoing reform.
Turning to the prioritization of SSR, Malaysia is
of the view that planning should be undertaken early
on, when peacekeeping missions are formulated.
Experience has shown that countries in transition
require continuing engagement even after the initial
stabilization stage. In that connection, my delegation
calls for better coordination among the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, Force
Commanders and the respective United Nations
agencies when developing comprehensive approaches
on SSR.
To conclude, my delegation welcomes and
supports the Security Council draft resolution on SSR
initiated by Nigeria. The draft resolution is indeed
timely, considering the increasing significance and
immense contribution of SSR in the work of the United
Nations in peacekeeping, peacebuilding and conflict
prevention. Malaysia is certain that the draft resolution
will reaffirm the United Nations’ commitment to a
comprehensive approach in support of SSR processes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Kolga (Estonia): At the outset, let me thank
Nigeria for convening the Council’s open debate on
security sector reform and for the very comprehensive
concept note (S/2014/238, annex). This is the second
open debate, out of three in total, during this presidency
and Estonia, as a supporter of the enhanced openness
and transparency of the Council, would like to
congratulate the Nigerian presidency for this effort. It
is important that all of the States that are not members
of the Council are given an opportunity to contribute
to the discussions on issues related to the world’s peace
and security.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing, and the Council for the draft resolution
on security sector reform that is to be adopted later on.
Estonia also aligns itself with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union (EU).
14-31349 7/19
28/04/2014 Maintenance of international peace and security S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1)
Nations efforts, this year, for the first time, the Estonian
Government has decided to make a contribution to the
Peacebuilding Fund.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).
At the outset, I would like to convey the
Movement’s appreciation to you, Mr. President, and
the Government of Nigeria for convening this open
debate on security sector reform (SSR). I also avail
myself of this opportunity to express my appreciation
to His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, Secretary-General
of the United Nations, for his report on the issue,
entitled “Securing States and societies: strengthening
the United Nations comprehensive support to security
sector reform” (S/2013/480).
Since 2007, when the Security Council convened
its first open debate on the issue (see S/PV.5632),
many NAM member States considered such debates
an opportunity for Council members and the wider
membership to articulate their views on the role the
United Nations should play in SSR. This is a critical
issue for all countries emerging from conflict,
particularly in Africa.
NAM believes that today’s debate is an integral
and essential part of a broader discussion about the
interlinkage among the concepts of peace, security
and development as mutually reinforcing factors,
as well about the complementarities among conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We hope
that our discussions here will provide guidance to the
United Nations on how to build institutional capacities
in States emerging from conflict as well as those in
transition.
The United Nations enjoys a comparative
multilateral advantage over other organizations. Due
to its universal legitimacy, it is uniquely positioned to
play a leading role in policy information and security
sector capacity-building and reform.
Taking into account the primary responsibility
and the sovereign right of any country concerned in
determining its national priorities in that regard, we
agree with the Secretary-General’s report and the Notes
of the inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task Force
that national ownership “should form the cornerstone
Thirdly, see that SSR has been genuinely linked to
the rule of law. We are also happy to see that linkage
mentioned in the draft resolution to be adopted today.
But we do not believe that the rule of law should be
considered as an end or goal in itself. SSR should be
implemented in an environment where the principles
of the rule of law are already applicable, in order to
avoid a great risk of compromising any peacebuilding
or reconstruction process.
Finally, there is a lot of SSR-related knowledge
available. Many Member States have taken the path
of State-building and reformed their security sector as
part of that process. A number of Member States have
already shared such experience and knowledge with
others. That applies also to regional organizations.
Experience gained in those processes is worth collecting
and sharing with those in need. We believe that the
United Nations should coordinate such efforts, and we
commend the comprehensive approach already taken
by the Secretary-General in that regard. That further
enhances the expertise of the United Nations and
contributes to improving the Organization’s capacity to
deliver.
Estonia’s own record in reforming its security
sector could be taken as an example of success. After
the end of the Soviet occupation, our nation faced the
huge task of building up a society based on principles
and values different from those of the totalitarian
system — a society based on democracy. That meant
vigorous institution-building, adherence to good
governance, strengthening the rule of law and placing
the human being at the centre of development.
SSR became a genuine part of that process. Estonia
was lucky to have had many friends and advisers, but
real results started to emerge when we understood that
the reforms were for our own good, not for the good of
someone else. We can assure the Council that the notion
of ownership was of the utmost importance, and that is
the message that we want to reinforce today.
For the past 10 years, we have been sharing that
experience with others in supporting capacity-building.
Estonia has shared its expertise at the regional level
in the Balkans, in the Caucasus, in the Republic of
Moldova and in Ukraine. Our police and corrections
experts and trainers have been a part of the respective
European Union missions in Afghanistan and Iraq.
Step by step, we are trying to enhance the scope of our
involvement and become a part of wider peacebuilding
initiatives and missions. In order to share in United
8/19 14-31349
S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1) Maintenance of international peace and security 28/04/2014
particularly in light of the experience that the
Commission has gained through its engagement. It
is of equal importance that the recipient country be
fully in charge of formulating the strategy, identifying
gaps, needs and areas of priority and coordinating
international support.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Allow me to
thank Nigeria, Sir, for organizing this important open
debate and for your excellent concept note (S/2014/238,
annex), and especially for your leadership on the issue.
The lead role Nigeria has taken is of great importance
to my country.
The Netherlands also welcomes the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2013/480) and the
recommendations made therein. Both documents
emphasize, on the one hand, the importance of a
comprehensive approach to security sector reform
(SSR) within the United Nations system, and, on the
other hand, the need to focus SSR efforts on national
ownership. We fully support those notions.
The Netherlands aligns itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union.
My Government sees a close relationship between
security, the rule of law and development. Allow me
to note the fundamental formula of the World Summit
of September 2005, that there is no peace without
development, no development without peace and no
lasting peace or sustainable development without
respect for human rights. In post-conflict situations
that interconnection between the three elements is even
more manifest and security sector reform is relevant to
all three. In my statement I will address those, as well
as the position of women, fighting crime and the role
we see for the United Nations.
First, on the rule of law, security sector reform
(SSR) cannot be seen separately from the rule of law.
Security services must operate within the framework
of the law and be accountable to civilian authorities.
The civilian perspective should be the main focus of
SSR, to make sure that security services deliver human
security and not only State security. That will give them
legitimacy from a legal perspective and trust from the
perspective of society.
SSR must be inclusive at all stages. Governance
and national ownership of SSR efforts are crucial for
of the United Nations approach to SSR”. National
ownership and SSR tools adapted to each particular
country context must be key guiding principles
regarding the role of the United Nations in supporting
security sector capacity-building and reform.
The presidential statement adopted on 21 February
2007 (S/PRST/2007/3) also stresses the critical
importance of SSR in post-conflict environments and
underlines the sovereignty and primary responsibility
of the country concerned to determine the national
approach and priorities of SSR.
In August 2012, the Heads of State or Government
of the Non-Aligned Movement noted, in the final
document of their sixteenth Summit, held in Tehran,
the importance of SSR, among other important
components of United Nations peacekeeping in post-
conflict situations. They stressed that SSR should be
integrated in the broad framework of United Nations
rule-of-law activities, thus ensuring that SSR activities
and structures do not duplicate the work carried out in
the rule of law area. They reaffirmed that
“the development of a United Nations approach to
SSR must take place within the General Assembly,
and in accordance with the principle of national
ownership, and stressed that the formulation of
strategies to SSR, including its scope and mandate,
should be carried out through the intergovernmental
process and must be context specific”.
They also emphasized that
“SSR should be undertaken at the request of the
country concerned, and underlined the primary
responsibility and the sovereign right of the country
concerned in determining its national priorities in
this regard.”
As for the development of a United Nations
approach to SSR, the Non-Aligned Movement believes
that such development must take place in the General
Assembly to ensure that the formulation of SSR
strategies, including scope and mandate, is carried out
through the widest possible intergovernmental process.
We need thorough discussions in the General Assembly
and in the Economic and Social Council to allow for the
full participation of the United Nations membership at
large in such an important and sensitive issue.
The Peacebuilding Commission is also in a good
position to coordinate the activities of the different
organs of the United Nations system in that regard,
14-31349 9/19
28/04/2014 Maintenance of international peace and security S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1)
Nations. We supported the development of a system-
wide United Nations approach. We are a strong
supporter of enhanced cooperation between the
United Nations Development Programme and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations through the
funding of SSR projects in the field. And we support
the activities of the Group of Friends of SSR, where
inclusive dialogue, policy development and building
bridges between a variety of international, regional and
national stakeholders are central themes.
In conclusion, effective security sector reform is a
result of synergy among efforts in the field in peace
and security, governance and rule of law, as well as
sustainable development. The Netherlands is proud to
be a partner of many countries in the world as well as
of the United Nations in each of those areas. We look
forward to our continued partnership to strengthen
peace, promote justice and foster development
worldwide.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We are pleased
to see you, Honorable Foreign Minister Aminu Wali,
preside over today’s debate on security sector reform
(SSR), which is a testament to Nigeria’s consistent and
strong leadership on that important issue. We commend
Ambassador Joy Ogwu’s effective and elegant
stewardship of the Security Council this month.
The Secretary-General’s seminal report (S/2013/480),
the draft resolution to be adopted today and Nigeria’s
compact concept note (S/2014/238, annex) all steer
us from policy-making towards implementation,
monitoring and review. As a leading troop-contributing
country, Pakistan has actively supported security sector
reform in various theatres or peacekeeping operations,
including in Sierra Leone, Liberia, Côte d’Ivoire and
Timor-Leste. We, too, can testify that United Nations-
led efforts have dramatically transformed the security
landscape in those countries.
We know from experience that, when security
sector institutions collapse, conflicts erupt or societies
descend into anarchy or strife, the best way to reverse
the vicious cycle is to restore and strengthen public
security institutions.
Security sector reform has become a core
component of United Nations engagement across
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. SSR rightly targets
institutions dealing with transitional justice, security
their success and legitimacy. Therefore, the political
realities of the countries involved must be taken into
account. Substantive roles for the relevant non-State
actors and structures, national reconciliation dialogues
and activities in the field of transitional justice must be
ensured. In that respect I would also like to stress that
non-governmental organizations, the media and political
parties can play an important role in the accountability
component of SSR agendas. By establishing SSR based
on national ownership within a rule of law context, a
foundation will be laid for sustainable development.
Secondly, on the position of women, the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, must be a principal guideline
in programming and reform in the field of SSR. Steps
have been taken to implement the resolution but more
remains to be done, as the open debate of last Friday (see
S/PV.7160), also under the able leadership of Nigeria,
made clear. Combating violence against women and
promoting the recruitment of female members of the
security sector should be at the core of the agenda.
Thirdly, with regard to crime, let me point out
another under-estimated aspect of SSR: international
crime. Around the world we witness the destabilizing
effects of criminal activities attracted by regions with
weak governance and poor security institutions. In such
situations, the smuggling of drugs, human trafficking
and corruption are thriving and criminal networks are
able to establish proxy security forces. That should lead
us to think about the link with international crime and
how to deal with it in terms of security sector reform.
On the role of the United Nations — my fourth
point — the Netherlands commends the report of the
Secretary-General for developing a more comprehensive
United Nations system-wide approach. The relevant
United Nations entities involved in SSR and the rule of
law and development should cooperate more effectively.
That applies both in New York and in the field. The
United Nations has a comparative advantage in playing
a coordinating role to assist communities in formulating
and asking the right questions concerning their SSR
processes and to support countries in building a human
rights-based security sector and working on sustainable
development. The comprehensive approach is therefore
crucial.
The last point I would like to make is that the
Netherlands has been a strong supporter of security
sector reform, both through bilateral cooperation
programmes as well as in the context of the United
10/19 14-31349
S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1) Maintenance of international peace and security 28/04/2014
attention as well as adequate and predictable resources
for sustainable SSR. Along with infrastructure, training
and equipment for SSR, attention should also be given
to institutional oversight and governance.
Today’s debate complements the thematic debate
organized last week by the President of the General
Assembly on ensuring stable and peaceful societies. Last
week’s debate of the intergovernmental negotiations
process, on the relationship between the General
Assembly and the Security Council also underscored
the importance of synergy and coordination between
the two bodies. The crux of those debates was that the
Security Council and the General Assembly must work
in tandem. We fully endorse that view.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Senegal.
Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): Allow me
to say, Sir, what a pleasure it is to see you take up the
presidency of the Security Council and to reiterate to
you the full support of my delegation.
The choice of the theme of security sector reform
(SSR) clearly demonstrates the relevance of this
issue that has become central to the peacekeeping
and international security architecture. I should like
to take this opportunity to express my satisfaction at
the forthcoming adoption of the draft resolution on
this matter, which clearly illustrates the Council’s
commitment to so essential an issue.
I should also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, whose report (S/2013/480) provides abundant
information on the support of the United Nations to
SSR efforts and sheds light on what to expect in future.
The reform of the security sector seeks to
restore the effectiveness, the professionalism and the
legitimacy of the institutions in charge of providing
security to civilian populations as part of an inclusive
and participatory approach. In practice, however, its
implementation reveals a profound complexity that
is both linked to the need to convince military and
paramilitary personnel of the need to reconfigure the
security forces, as well as the need to mobilize various
types of resources so that the process has a chance of
success. The success of the reform process is based on
the premise that increasing the operational capacity of
defence forces, law enforcement bodies and penal and
immigration administration must be founded on the
need to respect the rule of law.
and police forces, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, the extension of State authority, arms
control and management and organized crime. That,
in turn, helps in addressing some of the root causes of
conflict.
A professional, effective and accountable security
sector lays the foundation for durable peace, conflict
resolution, development and a prevention of a relapse
into conflict.
We believe that United Nations system-wide
institutionalization and responsibility for the security
sector should be strengthened. We should build on
capacities both in the field and at Headquarters to fully
exploit the United Nations comparative advantages.
SSR should be conceived and implemented in
the overall framework of the rule of law, a viable
and transformative security sector that enjoys the
confidence of the populations and is responsive to their
needs is key to successful transition and exit strategies.
The United Nations peacebuilding architecture
has an important complementary role in promoting
SSR objectives. The General Assembly and its Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations directly
contribute to policy formulation and guidance for
implementation.
The United Nations needs strong partnerships
across the spectrum to enhance the performance of
security sectors. In that context, Pakistan welcomes
the growing consultation and cooperation among the
Security Council, the African Union and subregional
organizations. The United Nations should also deepen
its partnerships with international and regional
financial institutions to make SSR more resilient and
self-sustaining.
There is also the political imperative to have an
inclusive SSR process that establishes the legitimacy
and acceptability of State institutions. Conscious efforts
should be made for early engagement of the national
stakeholders to promote national ownership of security
sector reform and its internalization. The United
Nations and international support must correspond to
the host country’s priorities.
Our debate’s focus today is better implementation
of SSR mandates and objectives. Implementation
suffers due to a lack of timely and adequate resources.
Pakistan supports the call to prioritize SSR processes in
the missions so that they get the strategic and political
14-31349 11/19
28/04/2014 Maintenance of international peace and security S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1)
Seven Plus, which seeks to deal with the deep-rooted
causes of conflicts.
The advances we have just outlined are positive,
but to be consolidated they need the Security
Council to closely involve the States concerned when
elaborating the mandates for peacekeeping operations
or special political missions when dealing with SSR.
Furthermore, the viability of funding for the reform
process as well as the relative failure related to activities
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) remain important issues that need to be taken
into consideration.
In conclusion, Senegal, would like to reiterate its
commitment to elevating the reform of the security
sector to the status of a major pillar in the prevention of
the resurgence of conflicts and an essential foundation
of development.
Faithful to our tradition as a country that has
contributed to maintaining international peace and
security ever since we achieved our international
sovereignty, my country will continue fully to
support, responsibly of course, all initiatives aimed at
peacebuilding.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Khan (Indonesia): At the outset, I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s important
debate and for your helpful concept note (S/2014/238,
annex). My delegation would also like to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his comprehensive
briefing.
Indonesia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the delegation of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
Since the Security Council held its first open debate
on security sector reform (SSR) in 2007 (see S/PV.5632),
the subject, due to its fundamental importance for
international peace, security and development, has
been acquiring greater recognition. Considering that
countries affected by conflicts have different security
contexts, and that each will develop its own palette
of strategies on security, the justice system and law
enforcement suitable to its particular requirements, the
significance of national ownership for SSR approaches
cannot be emphasized enough.
We are therefore pleased that United Nations entities
have been increasingly making efforts to have an open
Such reform also has to take into account the
emergence of transnational threats that require the
pooling of efforts of the various stakeholders involved. I
am thinking, inter alia, of such threats as the trafficking
of people, the trafficking of narcotics and weapons,
terrorism and organized transnational crime.
It is also just as important that the reform of the
security sector be firmly rooted in the triad of political
consultations, national reconciliation and social and
economic recovery.
At a time when peacekeeping missions have
completed their transformation to take on a
multidimensional character, it is more important than
ever to incorporate the reform of the security sector
in a sustainable process with a particular focus on the
prevention of conflicts.
It is for all the reasons I have just outlined that the
delegation of Senegal is happy to embrace the statement
of the Secretary-General in the summary to his report
that “the viability of security sector reform efforts
depends on the political environment in which reform
is carried out.”
Furthermore, I welcome the significant
contribution of the United Nations to national efforts
at security sector reform, which is a fundamental
pillar essential to development. The establishment of a
special inter-agency SSR Task Force in support of the
country-specific configurations of the Peacebuilding
Commission is a positive response to the need to
coordinate in a harmonious way the activity of various
stakeholders.
The establishment of partnerships between the
United Nations and regional organizations such as the
African Union, as well as subregional organizations,
Member States and civil society, also contributes to
translating into practice the kind of comprehensive,
coherent and coordinated approach that we all call for.
It seems to me that that is the very thrust of the
proposed fundamental principles that were suggested
by the Secretary-General, principles to which the
delegation of Senegal fully subscribes. Their aim is to
do away with insufficient harmonization and to orient
the various interventions on the basis of priorities
defined by States in post-conflict situations.
I should also like to welcome the New Deal for
Engagement in Fragile States, adopted by the Group of
12/19 14-31349
S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1) Maintenance of international peace and security 28/04/2014
Secondly, in order to incorporate the concerns
and priorities of conflict-affected countries and to
build their national ownership, the Security Council
should more meaningfully involve the host States at
the earliest stage of creating mission mandates. My
delegation underscores the fact that providing security
to citizens and the governing security sector is the
primary responsibility of the State. Furthermore, we
reiterate that any United Nations support for SSR
through peacekeeping and other missions must be
based on the request of the host country and cater to its
particular needs.
Thirdly, the success of United Nations efforts
on SSR is also dependent on the level of its financial
resources, capacities to deliver, professional operations
both at Headquarters and in the field, as well as
coherence and cooperation among concerned United
Nations and Governmental actors. Supporting the “One
United Nations” system model, it is our view that the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund
can also play a role in increasing the United Nations
capacity to support SSR and ensure more predictable
and sustained funding for it.
Fourthly, Indonesia places high importance on
building partnerships and exchanging good practices
and lessons learned among countries and regional
organizations. As one of the members of the informal
United Nations Group of Friends of SSR, Indonesia
is actively using that platform to communicate and
enhance cooperation with other Member States in
dealing with the future challenges of SSR.
Fifthly, in order to advance conversations on
this issue in the South-East Asia region, Indonesia
has undertaken numerous consultations, including
by facilitating an international workshop in Jakarta
in 2010 with SSR as a major topic. We believe that
regional networks of like-minded countries are vital to
understanding the local culture, and can greatly enable
programmes to support SSR. Therefore, there needs
to be regular and more frequent interaction on SSR
issues between the United Nations system and regional
organizations.
Finally, we would point out that SSR is a long-term
process that should not be rushed. There is no magic
formula for implementing such reform. However, we are
sure that today’s debate is enriching the perspectives on
SSR and on how the United Nations system can better
plan and respond in assisting concerned countries.
and inclusive dialogue with countries on addressing
their priorities and improving the United Nations
response on how best it can strengthen its support and
guidance. Because security-sector-related support in
conflicted affected regions must be accompanied by
robust support on broader peacemaking, peacebuilding
and development, the United Nations emphasis on a
comprehensive approach to SSR issues is also very
pertinent.
It is in that context that Indonesia welcomes
the first-ever stand-alone Council draft resolution
on security sector reform and the maintenance of
international peace and security, to be adopted today.
We hope that its implementation will lead to enhanced
support on SSR for countries that request it, as well
as to strengthened respect for human rights and the
rule of law, as essential elements of peacemaking,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development.
As a country that studiously overcame instability
and continues to deepen peace and development for its
people and the region, Indonesia knows at first hand the
challenges of realizing a sound SSR. The SSR process
in Indonesia was driven by our political reform towards
democracy back in 1998. We started with military
reform, which separated the role of the military from
politics. We also made a clear and formal distinction
between the Indonesian armed forces and the Indonesian
police, which increased capacities in both institutions
for carrying out their respective responsibilities.
Our process reaffirmed the imperative for national
ownership, as well as civil society consultation, also
because the development of such a sensitive part of
the State must meet the expectations of the citizens.
Indeed, successful SSR first and foremost serves and
protects the people of the country. In this context,
and in response to some of the questions posed in the
concept note (S/2014/238, annex), Indonesia would like
to highlight the following.
First, with regard to the United Nations approach
to the SSR agenda, SSR work should be focused on
post-conflict contexts. While there is a need to support
training and professionalization on various security-
related aspects in other contexts, it is essential that
any process for formulating related strategies in the
United Nations system should be carried out in an
intergovernmental setting, in close consultation with
Member States.
14-31349 13/19
28/04/2014 Maintenance of international peace and security S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1)
an advantage on this issue. We therefore encourage it to
pursue action in this important area.
Thirdly, the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/480) underscores the importance of close work
collaboration with regional organizations in order, inter
alia, to promote local ownership. We fully support this
approach. The contributions of regional organizations
must be maintained and better linked to United Nations
efforts. In this context, I should like to share some of
Switzerland’s experiences in this area since my country
has assumed the chairmanship of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
The strengthening of governance in the security
sector is among our priorities as Chairman of the OSCE
in 2014. Switzerland plans to focus its efforts on two
levels — the political level and the technical level. At
the political level, we supported the creation of a group
of friends for security sector governance, chaired by
the Slovak Republic. The objective of the group of
friends is to raise awareness among States on the matter
of governance of the security sector.
At the technical level, we have tasked the secretariat
of the OSCE to establish an interdepartmental working
group on governance of the security sector, which
will be tasked with raising awareness within the
OSCE and to intervene as an interlocutor in relevant
questions in this area. The working group will also
draft internal directives on security sector governance.
The Swiss chairmanship also plans to work closely
with the United Nations so as to benefit from its
experience in governance of the security sector. To
that end, a conference will be held in July 2014 with
the participation of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations.
The draft resolution that the Security Council
will adopt today will provide supplementary support
and momentum for security sector reform and thereby
strengthen efforts under way throughout the world. We
hope that the structures concerned, in particular the
security sector unit and specialized teams deployed
in peacekeeping operations and in special political
missions will enjoy the resources they need to respond
to the growing needs in this area. Switzerland remains
fully engaged and will continue to be so, including in
the informal group of friends.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Indonesia will continue to engage actively with all
relevant actors on taking forward the discussion on
SSR, including by contributing to help develop the
United Nations civilian capacities initiative, which
offers to improve and expand the needed expertise in
countries emerging from conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative from Switzerland.
Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank Nigeria for convening this open debate. I will
limit my remarks to the three following points.
First, Switzerland shares the opinion of the
Secretary-General that security sector reform should
be placed in the broader context of peacebuilding.
This approach considers security sector reform to be a
vast multidimensional task that contributes to conflict
prevention and a lasting transformation to a peaceful
society. That is why it is important not only to better
explore the existing links between security sector
reform and other dimensions such as the rule of law,
human rights and development, but also to reflect on
partnerships in this matter. The global focal point for
police, judiciary and penitentiary activity coordination
for promoting the rule of law after conflicts and other
crises could offer the possibility of strengthening these
links.
We must also strengthen the inclusive nature of
security sector reform efforts pursuant to resolution
2122 (2013) by integrating the gender perspective. The
importance of this point was brought up on numerous
occasions during the open debate in the Security
Council last Friday on women and peace and security
(see S/PV.7160). Women must included fully and on
an equal footing in the security sector reform process
and the different needs of men, women, boys and girls
must be taken into account. Switzerland will explore
this and other possibilities so as to strengthen its
support for efforts aimed at strengthening the security
sector reform on the ground and at the conceptual
level, among others, in discussions held here at United
Nations Headquarters.
Secondly, we believe it essential that the competent
United Nations authorities continue their essential work
to draft common standards and technical directives. The
publication of the Integrated Technical Guideline Notes
for security sector reform was an important step in this
process. Given its global reach, the United Nations has
14/19 14-31349
S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1) Maintenance of international peace and security 28/04/2014
of national ownership. In fact, the countries concerned
have the sovereign right and the primary responsibility
to determine their national approach and to outline
their priorities for security sector reform. At the
same time, the States concerned and the international
community as a whole should enhance their efforts to
promote inclusiveness in the SSR process by bringing
in civil society and vulnerable groups. A particularly
critical element, in Italy’s view, is the involvement of
women in the peace and security discussion and their
participation in the national armed and security forces.
Italy is proud of its long-standing support of SSR
processes in South-Eastern Europe, the Middle East,
Asia and Africa at the national level and through
international and intergovernmental organizations such
as NATO, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and the European Union. We are
particularly proud of the internationally recognized
role of the Centre of Excellence for Stability Police
Units (CoESPU), based in Vicenza in northern Italy,
which will soon share its headquarters with the NATO
Stability Policing Centre of Excellence. CoESPU makes
an outstanding contribution to international efforts to
enhance the effectiveness and professionalism of police
and security agencies worldwide at both the theoretical
and practical levels. The Centre operates as a doctrinal
hub and a training centre. It develops doctrine and
common operational procedures for the employment
of Stability Police Units and the promotion of the
rule of law, and teaches operational planning, rules of
engagement and international and humanitarian law to
personnel from throughout the world.
In closing, I am pleased that the hard lessons
learned by our brave men and women in the field
dovetail with the recommendations put forth in the
Secretary-General’s report. Restoring public order
is unfortunately a necessary but elusive condition of
post-conflict situations. In order to avoid a relapse into
conflict, achieve a durable peace and pave the way to
socioeconomic developmentn we must develop and
implement an organic and comprehensive approach
to SSR — an approach inspired by the principles of
inclusiveness, effectiveness, accountability and good
governance, and designed to achieve the ultimate
objectives of increasing the security of the people and
rebuilding the bonds of trust between public authorities
and their citizens.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate and for the useful
concept note you have provided (S/2014/238/annex). We
appreciate the leading role of Nigeria in shaping and
promoting a deeper understanding of the critical issue
of security sector reform (SSR). The draft resolution
introduced today is a key element of this process and I
am pleased to say that Italy has co-sponsored it.
I should also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing and for his precious engagement in
this matter, which has produced the report before us
today (S/2013/480). This document gives us a very
clear picture of the state of the art, clearly defines the
challenges we face and suggests priority avenues of
action for the future.
Italy aligns itself with the statement made by
Ambassador Mayr-Harting on behalf of the European
Union, and I should like to make some remarks in my
national capacity.
We attach vital importance to security sector
reform in countries emerging from conflict. The
malfunctioning or mismanagement of this sector
exposes society to continual fear and danger of violent
death, making civilian life increasingly solitary, poor,
nasty, brutish and short. Max Weber famously defined
the State as any human community that successfully
claims the monopoly of the legitimate use of physical
force within a given territory. In line with this traditional
definition, the security sector is indeed the backbone
of the modern State. We must realize, however, that
the concept of security has long shifted from a State-
and military-centric perspective to an approach that
emphasizes human security and the legitimacy and
effectiveness of the institutions that provide security
and justice.
The establishment of an effective, professional
and accountable security sector is thus of crucial
importance to reducing the potential for internal and
external conflict, enhancing the security of citizens,
and creating the necessary conditions for development.
The existence of a symbiotic, self-enforcing relationship
between security and development has long been
established in the literature on international relations
and in the policies and practices of States.
Helping and supporting national authorities in
their efforts to build an effective, democratically
run security sector is a long-term process. It must be
carried out consistent with the overarching principle
14-31349 15/19
28/04/2014 Maintenance of international peace and security S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1)
infrastructures and institutions must be at the service of
the people. Reforms must be inclusive and based on the
principles of good governance, the rule of law, respect
for human rights and accountability, all of which are
vital in fostering long-term legitimacy, effectiveness
and sustainability.
We believe that security sector reform requires a
comprehensive and strategic approach. Flexibility in its
planning, identification of the activities that are most
appropriate at every moment, an evolving perspective,
a good knowledge of the situation in the field, and a
fluid, intense and ongoing dialogue with national actors
are crucial. In order to be effective, efforts aimed at
security sector reform require a long-term perspective
and actions sustained over time.
Security sector reform based on the principles I
have just mentioned is clearly an essential contribution
to ensuring respect for and the implementation of
international humanitarian law, including the protection
of civilians. On this point, I should like to highlight
the importance of the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission, of which Spain has been a member for
eight years, and of the Peacebuilding Fund, of which we
are its eighth largest donor.
National authorities and international partners also
needinstrumentsthatallowthemtocarryoutappropriate
follow-up and evaluation of their own actions. As my
delegation did at the debate on the strengthening of the
rule of law in February (see S/PV.7113), I should like
to highlight the recent initiative of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
develop indicators that measure the evolution of the
functioning of police, legal and penitentiary institutions
in countries in conflict and post-conflict situations in
the areas of efficiency, capacity, integrity, transparency,
accountability and the treatment of vulnerable groups.
It is a useful tool for measuring the results and progress
of our efforts in these sectors.
Spain has supported capacity-building in the
security and legal sectors in many countries. In
Sub-Saharan Africa, we have supported capacity-
building of the national police forces of Angola and
Cape Verde. Through our collaboration with the
African Union, we support the African Peace and
Security Architecture and the Common Security and
Defence Policy, as well as the African Centre for the
Study and Research on Terrorism.
Mr. Sanabria (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like first to thank the Nigerian presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this open debate and for its concept
note (S/2014/238, annex). This debate is on an issue of
great importance to the maintenance of international
peace and security. We should also like to commend
you, Sir, for having put forward a draft resolution that
Spain is honoured to co-sponsor. I should also like to
congratulate Luxembourg for its outstanding leadership
of the Council in March.
Spain aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union and wishes to add some observations
in its national capacity.
Spain welcomes the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/480), which we consider to be complete and
well-focused. We acknowledge the fundamental role of
the United Nations in security sector reform (SSR) and
its efforts of recent years to improve the coherence and
effectiveness of its actions in this area. Security sector
reform, and from a wider perspective the strengthening
of the rule of law in this context, is a key elements in two
different areas — ex ante for conflict prevention and ex
post for peacebuilding. The international community
should help and support countries finding in conflict
and post-conflict situations in the development of their
civilian capacities and in the strengthening of their
institutions.
It is critical to move from a reactive culture to
conflicts — which is often late and insufficient — to
one of prevention. The prevention requires political
will and resources to formulate and implement effective
strategies. When both elements are combined, the
results are success stories such as that of Sierra Leone,
with the recent closing of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Mission in Sierra Leone. Security sector
reform demands action on several fronts. Stable and
predictable legal frameworks must be established; the
creation of competent security and police forces that
are subject to and enforce the rule of law; the building
of an independent and comprehensive legal system
accessible to all; and the establishment of an adequate
penitentiary system. We must also ensure the protection
of society’s most vulnerable groups such as women,
children and displaced persons.
National ownership is, in this area as in many
others, key to success. Good planning is necessary if
actions designed on the basis of needs and priorities
identified by the host country are to be coherent and in
line with its decisions and national initiatives. Security
16/19 14-31349
S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1) Maintenance of international peace and security 28/04/2014
on the concept of security sector reform (SSR). I wish
to welcome His Excellency Mr. Aminu Bashir Wali,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Nigeria, to our meeting
today and thank him for his stewardship of this debate.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement by
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Today’s debate is an opportunity for Member States
to identify and clarify the main characteristics and
priorities of the United Nations on SSR, in particular
its normative and operational dimensions. We recall
that SSR was initially introduced in the United
Nations in the context of identifying peacekeeping
exit strategies. This concept has evolved significantly,
to the point where it is becoming a core component of
the Organization’s engagement across peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development contexts. We believe
that successful SSR is vital to establishing enduring
peace and stability in countries that are in a post-
conflict peacebuilding phase.
In post-conflict contexts, security institutions
are often weak and dysfunctional, ineffective in
their impact and lacking accepted legitimacy in their
foundation. The failure to address such operational
and accountability deficits has often undermined
the reconstruction efforts of the United Nations and
increased the risk of a relapse into conflict. The purpose
is to enhance the quality of security sector governance
through a focus on accountability, inclusivity and
effective management and oversight. The United
Nations should be able to provide assistance in this
area, and is particularly well positioned to support such
reforms and may have a comparative advantage relative
to other partners in providing sector-wide support.
Furthermore, the Secretary-General recognizes in
his latest report (S/2013/480) that SSR is pertinent
across the United Nations peacekeeping, human rights,
peacebuilding, conflict prevention and development
agendas.
At the same time, while much progress has been
made, the protracted conflicts, emerging threats and
complex crises witnessed in the world today certainly
require innovative and flexible responses from the
United Nations. To face those challenges, there is a need
to strengthen the role of the United Nations system in
supporting security sector reform as a key tool in the
prevention and management of conflict.
In Latin America, we have implemented
programmes for training and for sharing experiences
and good practices in legal reform by collaborating with
the creation of specialized prosecutorial offices and
by organizing seminars, courses and workshops that
address issues such as access to justice — especially
by vulnerable groups — medical-legal investigation
techniques, and the fight against human trafficking.
Since 2007, Spain has promoted and supported the
Central American Security Strategy through the
Central American Integration System in order to join
and harmonize the fight against organized crime.
In Arab countries, Spain implements the Masar
programme, which is designed to support democratic
governance processes and aligns with the needs
and priorities identified by national actors, and has
supported initiatives of public institutions and civil
society in the area of security, justice, penitentiary
institutions and human rights.
In conjunction with other States members of the
European Union, Spain has participated in civilian
crisis management missions within the framework
of the Common Security and Defence Policy of the
European Union. We are present in training operations
in Mali and Somalia and in EUCAP Nestor, EUCAP
Sahel and the European Union Operation Althea, which
seek to strengthen the security security. In this regard,
a Spanish General currently occupies the position of
Principal Adviser of the United Nations in the Republic
of Guinea and is helping to define the country’s security
model.
Our experience of cooperation with other countries
and extensive participation in peacekeeping operations
has taught us that strengthening the rule of law and
security sector reform is a critical pillar of conflict
prevention and the building and strengthening of peace.
Peace and security, human rights and development are
closely linked and are mutually reinforcing. Spain
will continue to actively participate in actions aimed
at providing support to the efforts of other countries
to establish trustworthy security capacities and
institutions that are subject to the law, with the aim of
helping to strengthen peace, security and development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): At the outset, I should
like to express to you, Mr. President, the appreciation
of Algeria for convening this important open debate
14-31349 17/19
28/04/2014 Maintenance of international peace and security S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): I thank you,
Sir, for facilitating the strategic discussions on
strengthening the approach of the United Nations to
security sector reform (SSR). I also express my warm
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his insightful
report (S/2013/480) and recommendations on the way
forward.
As a member of the Group of Friends of SSR,
Kazakhstan fully supports all efforts to enhance peace
and security, which in turn lead to stable and enduring
sustainable development.
SSR is gaining increasing importance for addressing
war-torn areas and for countries emerging from conflict
in Africa. It is therefore critical to understand the newer
forms, patterns and manifestations of conflicts and
insecurities. Immediate and medium- and long-term
plans can be based only on understanding the root causes
of conflicts — the accelerators, the triggers and their
impacts. Hence, planning for SSR must be based on the
current shift from State-centred security to citizen- or
people-oriented security; the shift from purely military
security to non-military centred security, such as food,
environment and socioeconomic security; and the shift
from State to non-State actors, with a larger number of
stakeholders.
Recent political developments, which are taking
a most tragic toll of human life, compel us to rethink
how secure environments can be achieved as essential
prerequisites for the protection of civilians, the rule
of law, justice and respect for human rights. Our task
becomes all the more challenging when United Nations
peacekeeping operations and missions withdraw.
Thus, far-sighted and comprehensive reform is headed,
providing the vital framework for peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development, which are closely
linked to the processes of demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration. In addition, all national security
policies and mechanisms must also be grounded in
regional frameworks due to the transnational nature of
security challenges.
No reform can take place without providing
adequate, modern training in the new concepts of
security and upgrading institutions of the military
and, especially, the police so that human rights, rule of
law and good governance can guide their operations.
Recruitment policies should incorporate regional
That being said, Algeria believes that there is still
a lot of work to be done in those areas by enhancing
system-wide coherence and coordination, including
through the collaborative efforts of the Task Force, and
by forging partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations. The African Union endeavour in its
African Peace and Security Architecture and capacity-
building efforts is, in this regard, the perfect example
that deserves to be taken into account in this area.
The role of the Security Council is crucial in
providing strategic guidance and in defining the
institutional priorities of the United Nations, in
particular due to the fact that security sector reform has
become a key component of Security Council mission
mandates. Furthermore, Security Council mandates are
increasing not only in number but also in complexity in
relation to the demands placed on support for security
sector reform. There is a need, therefore, to reflect on
how these increasing demands are to be met by current
United Nations capacities.
My delegation would like to emphasize the
importance of SSR among other important components
in the context of United Nations multidimensional
peacekeeping operations and post-conflict situations
that should be integrated into the broad framework of
United Nations rule-of-law activities, thereby ensuring
that SSR activities and structures are not duplicating the
work carried out in the rule of law area. Algeria believes
that the successful implementation of the many tasks
that peacekeeping operations could be mandated to
undertake in the area of SSR requires an understanding
of and action based on a perspective that takes fully
into account the fact that security and development are
intertwined. Equally, we stress the importance of the
mutually reinforcing nature of SSR and all the other
components of the peacekeeping operations when it is
mandated.
Lastly, we think that any development of a United
Nations approach to SSR must take place within the
General Assembly and in accordance with the principle
of national ownership, and that the formulation of SSR
strategies, including its scope and mandate, should be
carried out through the intergovernmental process and
must be context-specific. It is obvious that SSR should
be undertaken at the request of the country concerned,
and we underline the primary responsibility and the
sovereign right of the country concerned in determining
its national priorities in this regard.
18/19 14-31349
S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1) Maintenance of international peace and security 28/04/2014
and I would like to add the following remarks in our
national capacity.
We consider SSR to be a key step in the transition
from conflict to sustainable development. Successful
SSR is possible only by adhering to the principles of
national ownership and deepening cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations and civil
society. In this context, SSR emerged as a relevant
concept addressing the core deficiencies of the State
with the aim of improving not only State security but,
in a broader sense, human security — that is to say, the
security of every single human being within the society.
The Secretary-General’s report of August 2013
(S/2013/480) clearly outlines the progress within the
United Nations system on SSR, but it also shows that
there is need for further improvement. In our view, SSR
requires a holistic approach and all activities should be
dealt with in a coherent and comprehensive manner. It is
crucial to involve all parts of the United Nations system
in this area. We therefore we welcome the creation of
the inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task Force,
which covers all important departments of the United
Nations Secretariat and its programmes. We also note
other ways of deepening this cooperation by involving
specialized United Nations agencies in the Task Force.
In conclusion, I would like to stress the active
participation of the Czech Republic and Czech experts
in several Common Security and Defence Policy
missions, whose mandate included SSR — in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Afghanistan, the Horn of Africa and
Mali. My country is also undertaking particular efforts
to implement resolution 1325 (2000), on women, peace
and security, as well as resolution 1612 (2005), on
children affected by armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Republic of Tanzania.
Mr. Mwinyi (Tanzania): At the outset, allow me
to join other speakers in welcoming His Excellency
Mr. Aminu Wali, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Nigeria, to New York. I would also like to thank you,
Sir, for having convened this open debate. We extend
our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
briefing on this important matter and his reports on this
subject (S/2013/480).
This debate is extremely relevant to the work of the
Security Council, whose role is not merely to respond
to conflicts after they have unfolded but also to prevent
them. Security sector reform (SSR) is among the
quotas, ethnic/tribal balance and appropriate gender
mix, involving women and local communities. There
must also be a reorientation of correctional services,
customs and the judiciary, which are important
components of the security system.
These overall efforts call for strengthening the
capacity and political will of national authorities and
institutions, through political dialogue, with context-
specific policies, while also mobilizing the multiplicity
of actors. Special consideration must be given to
non-State actors, at the regional and international
levels alike, interacting with governmental authorities.
It is then obvious that new partnerships should be
explored, requiring collaboration and commitment
at all levels — from regional to international. At
the same time, there has to be national ownership of
security sector reform, which must be democratic and
representative, as this increases confidence in and the
legitimacy of security institutions, striking a balance
between national security concerns and local needs.
SSR must include research, lessons learned, monitoring,
oversight and accountability mechanisms, benchmarks
and indicators for thorough assessment.
In conclusion, Kazakhstan is determined to assist
and support United Nations efforts to evolve SSR as a
timely and effective to counteract numerous challenges,
and we support the draft resolution before the Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Czech Republic.
Mrs. Hrdá (Czech Republic): The Czech Republic
fully shares the views expressed in the concept note
(S/2014/238, annex) for today’s debate. We thank the
Nigerian presidency for having brought this critical
issue to the attention of the Security Council and hope
that the Security Council will continue to hold open
debates on security sector reform (SSR) on a regular
basis. We therefore welcome the draft resolution on
SSR and hope that it will be adopted today. The Czech
Republic would like to join others in announcing our
co-sponsorship of the draft.
We agree that it is the responsibility of the Security
Council as the body primarily responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security to
ensure that the necessary priority be afforded to this
critical role of the United Nations.
The Czech Republic fully aligns itself with the
statement delivered on behalf of the European Union,
14-31349 19/19
28/04/2014 Maintenance of international peace and security S/PV.7161 (Resumption 1)
we can offer to our neighbouring countries in terms
of knowledge and skills in the area of security sector
reform and others. After all, we aspire to the well-being
of their nations and peoples, which is paramount for
regional stability and development.
We note with great appreciation that such value
is fully acknowledged in the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, the full implementation of
which by all stakeholders is poised to restore peace and
stability in the Great Lakes region of Africa.
The President: Members of the Council have
before them document S/2014/302, which contains
the text of a draft resolution submitted by Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Chad, Chile, Croatia,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, Rwanda, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Chad, Chile, China, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, Republic
of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and United States of America
The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2151 (2014).
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.
many ways of safeguarding conflict-prone countries
and ensuring post-conflict societies do not relapse
into conflict, by building strong, transparent and
accountable security sector institutions. This debate
takes place hardly a week since Tanzania, Japan and
the Slovak Republic held a seminar on inclusivity in
rebuilding States, focusing on inclusivity in security
sector reform. Tanzania pioneered the establishment of
the Peacebuilding Commission and strongly maintains
its belief in the centrality of SSR in rebuilding post-
conflict societies.
We wish to reiterate some of the issues that we
deem absolutely important in advancing SSR, not only
in societies emerging from conflicts, but in developing
countries in general. First, let me address ownership.
It is important that the country in question, where
SSR is being undertaken, take full ownership of the
process. Ownership entails more than consent. It is also
about commitment and, most importantly, inclusivity.
To attain the requisite legitimacy, the security sector
reform process must involve all stakeholders, including
youth, women, traditional leaders, religious leaders and
civil society. It is also important that it involve former
combatants after peace talks have been exhausted,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration has
been accomplished and justice has been administered.
Secondly, on durability, it is of paramount
importance that security sector reform be undertaken
as an ongoing process rather than an event, particularly
when implemented under the mandate of the Council.
Post-conflict countries undertaking security sector
reform must be assisted until they attain the capability
to assist themselves. We also believe that sustainability
in the security sector reform process can only be
attained if the process is undertaken hand in hand with
the development of the concerned countries.
Thirdly, on the involvement of regional actors,
our involvement in peace processes over the past five
decades has clearly demonstrated the importance
of regional actors in conflict prevention, resolution,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We encourage the
international community and the countries concerned
to make effective use of the enormous resources that

