United Nations S/PV.7221
asdfSecurity Council
Sixty-ninth year
7221stmeeting
Monday, 21 July 2014, 3 p.m.
New York
Provisional
President: Mr. Gasana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Rwanda)
Members: Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Perceval
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Bishop
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Cherif
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Barros Melet
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Liu Jieyi
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Bertoux
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Naber
Lithuania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Baublys
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Asselborn
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Ogwu
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Oh Joon
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Churkin
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . Sir Mark Lyall Grant
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Power
Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).
*1447582*
14-47582 (E)
2/18 14-47582
S/PV.7221 Ukraine 21/07/2014
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2014/136)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Ministers present at today’s meeting. Their participation
is an affirmation of the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Belgium, Canada, Germany,
Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Malaysia, the Netherlands,
New Zealand, the Philippines, Ukraine and Viet Nam
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2014/510, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Canada,
Chad, Chile, France, Germany, Indonesia, Ireland,
Italy, Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, the Philippines,
the Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Ukraine, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United States of America and Viet Nam.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Chad, Chile, China, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, Republic
of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2166 (2014).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements after the
voting.
Ms. Bishop (Australia): The adoption of resolution
2166 (2014) is a decisive step by the Security Council.
It is an unambiguous response of the international
community to an utterly deplorable act — the shooting
down of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17, killing
all 298 passengers and crew on board, including
80 children. The passengers were citizens of Australia,
Belgium, Canada, Germany, Indonesia, Malaysia, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, the Philippines and the
United Kingdom. The Governments of those countries
have all co-sponsored this resolution today. For that
I am deeply grateful. A number of victims were dual
nationals of other countries. They were all innocent
people on a commercial aircraft. Their plane was shot
down over territory controlled by separatists in eastern
Ukraine. This is an absolute outrage.
Our nation is devastated by the loss of so many
Australians — 37 people who called Australia home.
They were travelling home from Europe — a couple,
both teachers, on holiday to celebrate their retirement;
a 25-year-old travelling in Europe, like so many young
Australians do. Yesterday, I spoke to a husband and wife
from Perth who had been on a family holiday in Europe.
They had decided to stay on for only a couple of days,
while their three children — aged 12, 10 and 8 — had
to return to school in Australia, so they went on ahead
with their grandfather on Flight MH-17. The parents
are inconsolable in their grief. Among the victims were
scientists — medical researchers and doctors who were
travelling to Melbourne for the International AIDS
Conference that began yesterday. These were people
who had dedicated their lives to helping others.
Our nation mourns the death of all the victims.
I cannot begin to fathom the pain and anguish their
families and friends are experiencing. But grief is
now accompanied by outrage as we witness grotesque
violations at the crash site. This demands a response.
That is why Australia has brought this resolution to
the Security Council. Today, the Security Council has
responded.
Our resolution demands that armed groups in
control of the crash site provide safe access immediately
to allow for the recovery of the bodies, and that these
armed groups stop any actions that compromise the
integrity of the crash site. That is imperative. There
must be a ceasefire in the immediate area around the
site. The victims must be treated with dignity, brought
back to their homes and laid to rest. All parties are
required to fully cooperate with these efforts. Russia
14-47582 3/18
21/07/2014 Ukraine S/PV.7221
able to reach a consensus on the resolution. That was
the least we could do to honour the memory of the 298
victims of this catastrophe — 298 lives lost to a crisis
for which they bore no responsibility whatsoever and
that has gone on for too long.
On behalf of the people and the Government of
Luxembourg, I would like to express our most sincere
condolences to the families and friends of the 298
individuals who were on board of Flight MH-17. Among
the victims was a family living in Luxembourg — an
Anglo-Dutch couple and two of their sons, aged 12 and
14. We share the grief of the people and Governments
of the Netherlands, Malaysia, Australia, Indonesia, the
United Kingdom, Germany, Belgium, the Philippines,
Canada, New Zealand, South Africa, the United States,
Ireland and Viet Nam. Allow me to express a special
thought for the Netherlands, a country with which
we have close ties and which has been struck in a
particularly cruel manner by this catastrophe. I salute
my colleague and friend, Minister of Foreign Affairs
Frans Timmermans, who is with us today, and I assure
him of our fraternal support in this difficult time.
Everything must now be done for the full
implementation of the resolution we have just adopted.
We must support the efforts being undertaken by
Ukraine — in coordination with the International
Civil Aviation Organization and international
experts, including representatives of States that have
lost nationals on board the aircraft — to institute an
international investigation into the downing of Flight
MH-17.
The behaviour of illegal armed groups present
on the scene of the disaster is unacceptable. Those
groups must comply with the demands of the Security
Council and immediately provide safe, secure,
full and unrestricted access to the crash site near
the village of Grabovo, in eastern Ukraine, to the
appropriate investigating authorities, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
special monitoring mission, and representatives of
other relevant international organizations. The illegal
armed groups must refrain from any further action
that could compromise the integrity of the crash site,
and immediately cease all military activities in the
immediate area surrounding it. We welcome in this
regard the decision by President Poroshenko to declare,
with immediate effect, a unilateral ceasefire in a radius
of 40 kilometres around the scene of the tragedy.
must use its influence over the separatists to ensure
this. Russia must also use its influence to bring the
conflict in Ukraine to an end.
Our resolution also demands a full, thorough and
independent international investigation into this act.
We must have answers. We must have justice. We owe
it to the victims and their families to determine what
happened and who was responsible. The resolution
acknowledges the investigations already under way. It
demands that safe, secure, full and unrestricted access
to the crash site be provided so that the investigating
authorities can carry out their work. It is despicable
that this access is not being provided. It is an affront
to the victims and their families. All States, armed
groups — everyone — must cooperate with the
investigation. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
offer of assistance to the investigation. The United
Nations will continue to have a crucial role to play.
The message from this Council to those who were
responsible for this atrocity is definitive. They will be
held to account for their actions. Australia will continue
to do everything we can to ensure that this barbaric act
is thoroughly investigated and that the perpetrators are
brought to justice. We have an overriding objective to
ensure dignity, respect and justice for those killed on
MH-17. We will not rest until this is done. We will not
rest until we bring them home.
Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2166 (2014). We commend Australia, and
more specifically my colleague Julie Bishop, for having
taken the initiative to prepare this important decision of
the Council.
Luxembourg voted in favour of the resolution and
co-sponsored it for three reasons: to condemn in the
strongest terms the downing of a civilian aircraft of
Malaysia Airlines above Donetsk oblast, Ukraine, on
17 July; to express our solidarity with the families and
friends of the victims who were on board of Flight
MH-17, as well as with their countries of origin; and
finally, to express our support for the ongoing efforts to
shed light on this catastrophe through a full, thorough
and independent international investigation in
accordance with international civil aviation guidelines.
Such an investigation is the only way to determine who
is responsible for this unspeakable act.
Despite everything that divides us on the crisis
concerning Ukraine, the Security Council was finally
4/18 14-47582
S/PV.7221 Ukraine 21/07/2014
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2166 (2014). I would like to warmly thank
Australia for its leadership in steering the resolution to
adoption. I would also like to acknowledge the presence
here today of the Foreign Ministers of Australia,
Luxembourg and the Netherlands.
Allow me to take this opportunity to reiterate our
deepest and most heartfelt condolences to the citizens
and Governments of all those countries that lost
nationals in the tragedy and are now in mourning. In
the United Kingdom, we, too, are in mourning for the
10 Britons who were killed.
We have all seen the images of the blackened earth
and the twisted metal. We have all seen those countless
wooden stakes, each tied with a piece of white cloth
fluttering in the cornfields of eastern Ukraine, marking
the place of a family member or loved one. We owe
it to the memory of those 298 victims to ensure that
their remains are treated with dignity and respect. We
owe it to them to find out exactly what happened on the
afternoon of 17 July. That is the purpose of resolution
2166 (2014). It is a united demand by the whole
international community for the dignified, respectful
and professional treatment and recovery of the bodies
of the victims.
What we have witessed over the past days has
been sickening and appalling beyond belief. We have
seen separatist thugs trampling over the site of the
crash, showing no respect for the bodies of the victims,
rifling through their belongings and even looting their
personal effects. They have shown complete disregard
for human dignity and have violated the established
procedures for dealing with an incident of that nature.
First, the resolution requires the pro-Russian
separatists in control of the crash site and the
surrounding area to allow the bodies of the victims to
be returned to their families as soon as possible. It is
inexcusable that that process has been obstructed for
the past four days.
Secondly, the resolution is about the investigation
into what happened. It supports a full, thorough and
independent international investigation and recognizes
the steps already taken by the Ukrainian authorities
and other international stakeholders, notably the
International Civil Aviation Organization, to set that in
motion. It demands that the separatists do not further
compromise the integrity of the crash site.
Resolution 2166 (2014) clearly underscores
that the bodies of the victims must be treated in a
dignified, respectful and professional manner. All
parties concerned must ensure that that requirement is
immediately observed.
We call on the Russian Federation to actively and
unremittingly use its influence on the illegal armed
groups so that they cease their actions and despicable
manoeuvres to prevent a genuine and appropriate
investigation. The Russian Federation must immediately
bring its full weight to bear on those groups so that
they cease to obstruct the investigation and to remove
compelling evidence, in particular the remains of the
missile used to bring down the plane. The bodies of the
victims must be returned to their families and the black
boxes must be handed over to the competent authorities.
The international investigation into the tragic
incident of 17 July must establish the facts and
responsibilities. In the resolution just adopted, the
Council rightly demands that those responsible for the
incident be held to account for that heinous act and that
all States fully cooperate with the efforts to establish
responsibility. The Security Council must remain
vigilant in that regard on the basis of the reports on the
investigation made to it by the Secretary-General. We
owe it to the victims and their families that justice be
done and that the perpetrators of that criminal act be
held accountable.
The deaths of 298 innocent human beings leave a
huge void. That disaster cruelly reminds us of the urgent
need to achieve a de-escalation of tensions in eastern
Ukraine. The crisis has lasted too long. Its toll in terms
of the loss of human lives is mounting every day. We
must step up diplomatic efforts to find a solution to the
crisis. The first priority is to establish a true and lasting
ceasefire that is observed by all parties in order to
create the necessary conditions for the implementation
of President Poroshenko’s peace plan.
In that regard, we welcome the efforts of France
and Germany, as well as the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, to promote dialogue
between Russia and Ukraine. It is high time that all
stakeholders, in particular the Russian Federation,
cooperate in good faith in order to put an end to the
crisis and so that 17 July appears in the history books
as a day marked not only by the tragic deaths of 298
innocent people but also as a decisive turning point in
settling the Ukrainian crisis.
14-47582 5/18
21/07/2014 Ukraine S/PV.7221
expertise to share with the parties involved in the
investigation.
No less significant is the question of accountability.
The Security Council has demanded that those responsible
for that heinous act be held accountable. We would
like to emphasize that it is the obligation of States to
cooperate fully in the efforts to find and to bring to
justice those responsible for this brazen act, which
violates not only international law but also the peace of
the human race.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): The Republic of
Korea welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution
2166 (2014), on the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-17 in eastern Ukraine. On behalf of the people and
the Government of the Republic of Korea, I once again
extend my most heartfelt condolences to all the affected
countries and bereaved families. We share their sorrow
during this difficult time.
We would like to welcome the Foreign Ministers of
Australia, Luxembourg and the Netherlands, to whom
we offer our solidarity.
We believe that the resolution we adopted today
is a firm and united response by the international
community to the heinous act of downing a civilian
aircraft. The most urgent task before us at this moment
is to establish the solid facts of what caused this tragedy
to occur and who is responsible for it, through a full,
thorough and independent international investigation.
We recognize in particular the role of the International
Civil Aviation Organization and the Ukrainian
Government in conducting such an international
investigation. We have full confidence in the supporting
role of the United Nations in that regard.
In order to shed full light on the tragedy, no less
pressing is the need to preserve the integrity of the crash
site and to secure immediate, safe and unrestricted
access to it by competent international investigators. It
is also vital that the bodies of the victims be recovered
without delay and treated in a dignified and respectful
manner. We very much hope that the resolution will
be instrumental in ensuring a credible international
investigation through its full implementation by all
parties concerned, particularly the separatist armed
groups.
The Security Council should remain vigilant as to
developments on the ground and respond further if what
is required by the resolution does not fully materialize.
We have all seen the images of cranes and other
heavy machinery disturbing the wreckage, and the
footage released yesterday that appears to show one of
the flight recorders being removed from the site. That
is completely unacceptable. The site must be preserved
and investigators must immeditely be granted safe,
secure, full and unrestricted access.
Finally, the Council is sending a strong message with
regard to accountability. Those who were responsible
and those who were complicit in the shooting down of
Flight MH-17 must be held accountable for their actions.
The resolution demands that all States cooperate fully
with those efforts.
The context of the tragedy is Russia’s attempt to
destabilize a sovereign State and to violate its territorial
integrity. The events of the past four days should serve
as a wake-up call in Moscow and prompt a profound
re-examination of Russia’s policy of supporting,
training and arming violent separatists in eastern
Ukraine.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): In our intervention last
Friday during the briefing on the downing of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17 over Ukraine on 17 July (see
S/PV.7219), we noted that the tragic and unfortunate
incident could potentially mark a new dimension in the
Ukrainian crisis that represented a grave threat to the
safety of international civil aviation. That new global
threat spurs us to consider what insecurity means to the
human race. For that reason, we not only voted in favour
of resolution 2166 (2014) but also sponsored it. Respect
for international law, to the extent that it prohibits acts
that threaten the safety of international civil aviation, is
our guiding principle in the matter.
In adopting the resolution, the Council has once
again demonstrated that, when it is united in purpose,
it is capable of speaking with one voice in sending a
strong message on matters of international peace and
security. The resolution takes into account the concerns
not only of members of the Security Council but also of
well-intentioned nations around the world, in particular
States that lost citizens in the crash. Principal among those
concerns is the need for a comprehensive, thorough and
independent international investigation in accordance
with international civil aviation guidelines. It is
crucially important for the outcome of the investigation
to be credible and unimpeachable. In that regard, we
welcome the involvement of the International Civil
Aviation Organization, which has the appropriate
6/18 14-47582
S/PV.7221 Ukraine 21/07/2014
students returning home from abroad, researchers
trying to eradicate a deadly disease. Those who were
killed deserve to be treated with dignity. Their families
are crying out, as we have heard, for closure.
We condemn the actions of the separatists who
control the site. Indeed, almost everyone has condemned
that grotesque behaviour. But there is one party from
which we have heard too little condemnation, and that
is Russia. Russia has been outspoken on other matters.
Russian officials have publicly insinuated that Ukraine
was behind the crash. On Friday, Russia blamed
Ukrainian air traffic controllers for the attack, rather
than condemning the criminals who shot down the
plane. Since then, Russia has begun to blame Ukraine
for the attack itself, although the missile came from
separatist territory that Russia knows full well Ukraine
has not yet reclaimed. But if Russia genuinely believed
that Ukraine was involved in the shooting down of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17, surely President Putin
would have told the separatists, many of whose leaders
are from Russia, to guard the evidence at all costs and
to maintain a forensically pure hermetically sealed
crime scene.
We welcome Russia’s support for today’s resolution.
But no resolution would have been necessary had Russia
used its leverage with the separatists on Thursday and
gotten them to lay down their arms and leave the site to
international experts — or on Friday, or on Saturday,
or even yesterday. It turns out that only this morning,
coincidentally the very morning Security Council was
meeting to discuss the investigation, did President
Putin finally issue a public call to ensure the security of
international experts. However — and this is critically
important — President Putin still did not direct his call
to the separatists, who have threatened those experts
and over whom he has enormous influence.
President Poroshenko, by contrast, has consistently
done everything within his power since the crash to
allow capable investigators full and unfettered access
to the crime scene. He has been willing to involve
the International Civil Aviation Organization, the
Netherlands and other international players, and has
hailed their independence. Russia’s muteness over the
dark days between Thursday and today sent a message
to the illegal armed groups it supports: “We have
your backs”. That is the message Russia has sent by
providing separatists with heavy weapons, by never
publicly calling on them to lay down those weapons
We once again stress that the perpetrators of the incident,
if it turns out to be the result of a deliberate attack, must
be brought to justice as promptly as possible.
Ms. Power (United States of America): Today’s
resolution 2166 (2014) calls for a full, through and
independent investigation into the horrific downing of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17. When 298 civilians
are killed, we agree that we must stop at nothing to
determine who is responsible and to bring them to
justice. As we take that step, we are joined by the Dutch
and Australian Ministers whose countries suffered an
immense and heart-wrenching loss on Thursday, one
that they are still grappling with, together with nine
other countries from where the victims came. We
extend our deepest condolences to those countries, the
families of the victims they represent and all of the
people who lost loved ones on that plane. Their presence
here today, along with representatives of the dozens of
other countries struck by this heinous crime, gives even
greater urgency to our calls for the dignified return of
the victims and to our pursuit of truth and justice.
As we reflect on the immeasurable loss suffered by
those families around the world, we are not only outraged
at the attack itself, we are horrified and enraged by what
has happened since — by the clear intention of some
to obstruct an investigation into how the passengers
and crew died. Even after adopting today’s resolution,
it is worth asking if there really is consensus that the
crime merits an immediate and impartial investigation.
Why did we still feel the need to meet today in order to
demand one? We came together because not everyone
has been supporting a real investigation into the crime.
If they were, international experts would have had
unimpeded access to the crime scene and all of the
wreckage would have been left where it had fallen.
That has not happened. Instead, armed thugs have
walked around the site with little regard for where they
step. We have literally heard the sound of debris, all of it
evidence that needs to be carefully preserved, crunching
beneath their feet. We have seen separatists moving
human remains around and carting away evidence from
the site. All around the world this weekend, people of
all cultures and faiths had similar reactions to seeing
the footage of the separatists damaging the site. “Stop,
those are people! Those are peoples’ lives!”, we all said.
The passengers aboard Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-17 had nothing to do with the conflict in eastern
Ukraine. They were families heading out on vacation,
14-47582 7/18
21/07/2014 Ukraine S/PV.7221
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 in eastern Ukraine,
which resulted in the loss of the 298 lives aboard. In
his recent statement while visiting Latin American
countries, Chinese President Xi Jinping expressed
shock at the crash, mourned the death of all the victims
and expressed condolences to the bereaved families.
He also stressed that an impartial and objective
investigation into this incident be undertaken so as to
establish the truth as soon as possible.
China supports an independent, impartial and
objective investigation into this incident. As a
specialized agency of the United Nations dealing with
international civil aviation affairs, the International
Civil Aviation Organization should play a crucial
role in an international investigation. China calls
on all the parties to collaborate and cooperate with
the international investigation. China believes that
our current focus should be on establishing the truth
of the crash. Pending that, all sides should not jump
to conclusions or engage in conjecture or mutual
recrimination. We believe that the unanimous action
by the Council today will help to enhance mutual trust
and cooperation among all sides and to facilitate swift
progress in the investigation.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Let
me begin by thanking the delegation of Australia for
preparing today’s resolution, as well as by welcoming
the flexibility shown by Member States in its
negotiation. The delegation of Chile sponsored and
voted in favour of resolution 2166 (2014), as we believe
that this is the appropriate response by the Council
and that it sends a clear message about the need for an
international investigation to be conducted that would
be full, exhaustive and independent to look into the
downing of Malaysia Airlines MH-17, in keeping with
international law.
By its unanimous adoption the resolution, the
Security Council has taken an important and necessary
step towards clarifying facts and guaranteeing that
those responsible for this incident be held accountable
for their actions. This type of act cannot go unpunished.
The families of the victims have the right to know the
truth. That is why we once again urge all States, in
keeping with their obligations under international law
and under the relevant resolutions of the Council, to
actively cooperate with the relevant authorities.
On behalf of my country, I would like to reiterate
our solidarity and our most heartfelt condolences to the
families of the victims and to the Governments whose
and by massing thousands of troops at the Ukrainian
border.
Today we have taken a step towards combating
impunity. The resolution we have adopted provides
clear directions to safeguard and uncover the facts,
however inconvenient those facts may prove to be. We
have adopted a resolution today, but we are not naive.
If Russia is not part of the solution, it will continue to
be part of the problem. For the past six months, Russia
has seized Ukrainian territory and ignored the repeated
requests of the international community to de-escalate,
all in an effort to preserve influence in Ukraine, a
country that has long made clear its desire to maintain
constructive ties with Moscow. Russia must recognize
that no move on the geopolitical chessboard and no
zero-sum game with the West can offset the pain being
felt by the passengers’ families worldwide, or the pain
that Ukrainians are experiencing daily as a result of
this needless conflict.
As we meet, we are seeing initial signs of the
separatists’ allowing greater access to crash site.
Today, three Dutch investigators accessed the site.
The separatists are attempting to hold that up as proof
of their openness and good faith. But let us be clear:
this is an extremely complex and time-sensitive crime
scene. In that context, a spigot approach, letting in a
few investigators here and a few more there, simply
will not cut it. Access must be immediate and it must be
full, period. A spigot, or a stage-managed, approach is
a form of obstruction.
Russia can help change that. Russia can
unequivocally condemn the separatists’ inhumane
treatment of the bodies at the site and use its influence
to ensure they stop tampering with evidence. Russia
can demand that the separatists immediately adopt a
ceasefire in the area around the crash site, as Ukraine
has done. Russia can press the illegal groups to sit down
with President Poroshenko, who has proposed a serious
and reasonable peace plan. Instead of continuing to
provide weapons to the separatists, Russia could take
back all of the surface-to-air missiles, tanks and other
heavy weaponry that it has delivered to them. Those
would not only be important steps towards achieving
accountability and achieving justice for the victims,
they would constitute a long overdue sign that Russia is
willing to take steps to end this deadly crisis.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
voted in favour of resolution 2166 (2014), which the
Council just adopted. China deplores the crash of
8/18 14-47582
S/PV.7221 Ukraine 21/07/2014
resolution 2166 (2014) must be pursued to its end.
France will ensure that this happens.
We will never forget the 298 innocent victims
struck down in the Ukrainian skies.
Mr. Naber (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf
of the Government and the people of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, allow me to extend my heartfelt
condolences to the Governments and families of the
victims of the Malaysian airliner downed over eastern
Ukraine as a result of a criminal act.
My delegation welcomes the Council’s unanimous
adoption of resolution 2166 (2014), which we sponsored
and voted for out of our deep belief in the importance
of unveiling the truth surrounding this incident by way
of a thorough independent international investigation,
with a view to holding the perpetrators of this crime
accountable and to attain justice.
In addition to the impact of bringing closure to the
victims’ families, we underscore the importance of all
the relevant parties cooperating in the implementation
of the resolution as soon as possible. The site of the
incident must be safeguarded and the investigators
must be granted unfettered access free of manipulation.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like respectfully to welcome the presence
of Ms. Julie Bishop, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Australia. On behalf of the Government and the people
of my country, I convey to her our sincere condolences.
I also extend the same to the families, the peoples and
the Governments of all the victims. I also acknowledge
the presence of the Foreign Ministers of Luxembourg
and of the Netherlands, to whom we express our most
heartfelt and profound solidarity.
Argentina would like to underscore the valuable
work undertaken by the Australian delegation in
facilitating the Council’s consensus adoption of a
timely and necessary resolution. Such consensus is
especially important given that the text put forward
by Australia takes into account various different
points of view and concerns on the part of members
of this body, thereby illustrating the ethic of collective
responsibility prevailing and the unambiguous priority
of contributing, based on the Council’s prerogatives, to
shedding light on this emotional event in order to arrive
at the truth of what occurred in a reliable, objective and
effective manner. That is what the victims and the entire
international community deserve. The international
citizens were among the victims of this event. We hope
that this terrible incident will serve as a reminder of
how this crisis affects countries and families beyond
the borders of Ukraine and of the need to resolve it.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): The
emotion that was upon us on Friday has not left us,
but today we have gathered to act. Resolution 2166
(2014), which we have just adopted at the initiative
of Australia, underscores the importance of quickly
conducting an investigation into the circumstances
of this abominable tragedy. We owe it to the families
of those who have perished, as the presence of many
nationalities represented here today shows. Once again,
we want to express our profound condolences and our
complete solidarity in this ordeal. In that regard, we
welcome the presence among us of the Ministers from
Australia, Luxembourg and the Netherlands.
In adopting this resolution, the international
community has taken a first step towards shedding
light on this tragedy, establishing responsibilities and
meeting the demands of justice. Resolution 2166 (2014)
bolsters the existing framework that should apply in
this matter. In keeping with the Chicago Convention on
International Civil Aviation, it is up to Ukraine, with
the assistance of all those impacted by the disaster,
especially experts from the International Civil Aviation
Organization, to lead the work of the international
investigation.
The resolution also demands that everything be
done to facilitate the rapid work of the investigators.
Henceforth, all parties and States in the region must
guarantee immediate and unfettered access to the site
of the disaster, to the remains of the victims and to
material elements necessary for the investigation.
We would like to express our grave alarm about
the fact that reports available to us continue to indicate
repeated obstruction by the separatists. We demand
that the disaster site no longer be profaned, that it not
be altered and that it not be manipulated. The revolting,
shameful and, ultimately, inhuman actions must stop.
The resolution asks the Secretary-General to
present options to the Security Council in order to
provide support to the investigation and give an account
of its developments.
The resolution also recalls that those responsible
for the disaster will have to answer for their heinous
acts. The investigation that we support today through
14-47582 9/18
21/07/2014 Ukraine S/PV.7221
Organization to develop. It also requests that he keep
the Council informed.
On 18 July Argentina said that we should be prudent
at this painful and difficult moment (see S/PV.7219),
including the members of the Council. We reiterate
that today, for now is not the time to profer opinions
or analyses of what happened based on geopolitical
disputes, nor to engage in pointless accusation. The
gravity and the pain resulting from this incident
require serenity and reflection and, by way of reliable
mechanisms, arriving at the full truth of the events and
determining who is responsible.
In conclusion, Argentina sponsored and voted in
favour of today’s resolution. We have joined in the call
for all States and actors in the region to fully cooperate
with the investigation and to ensure the respectful and
dignified treatment of the remains of the victims.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): On behalf of the Russian Federation, allow me
once again to convey our condolences to the families of
all of those who lost their lives and to the Governments
of those countries whose nationals were aboard the
plane that went down in Ukraine on 17 July.
There is the need for a full, impartial, independent
and open international investigation into the Malaysia
Airlines disaster. That is the aim of resolution 2166
(2014), which was prepared with our active participation
and which we support. Clarifying the context of this
event should take place with the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO) in a leading role, as
well as with the participation of all who stand ready
to shed light on the truth. All evidence, including the
black boxes, should be provided to ICAO to examine
under the framework of an international investigation.
Conditions must be created on the ground to facilitate
access for international teams of experts. Every
possible effort must be made to focus on guaranteeing
full security for international experts at the crash site
and on providing them with, as it were, humanitarian
corridors.
Representatives from Donbass, Donetsk, the
Ukrainian Ministry of Emergencies and experts from
interested countries are already present on the ground.
But that is not enough. A full team of experts must be at
the crash site, under ICAO and a relevant international
commission. For its part, Russia stands ready to provide
all the assistance necessary to organize and conduct
impartial international investigations. In that context,
community has a right to safe aviation without being
subjected to acts that possibly violate international law.
It should be fundamentally so as well as under the most
basic elements of respect for the dignity of human life.
Given the reports received in the past few
days about the limited access to the disaster site in
Ukraine encountered by the authorities responsible
for the investigation, the special monitoring mission
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and representatives of other international
organizations, the Security Council could not remain
silent or indifferent. It thus became as essential to
express our heartfelt concern over the possible obstacles
encountered by those responsible for the investigation,
as to demand that immediate safe, full and unimpeded
access be guaranteed to the site of the incident, while
preventing any action that might compromise the site’s
integrity.
Although the Security Council underscored that
need clearly in its press communiqué of 18 July, today
we find ourselves morally and institutionally compelled
to demand the same. This continues to be the sole and
the unanimous demand not just of the Council but of the
entire world: that an immediate international inquiry be
carried out under international civil aviation guidelines,
leading to a thorough and effective independent
investigation into the incident to determine objectively
and unequivocally what occurred, and, based on the
evidence gathered thereby, urging that the legal bodies
with jurisdiction hold the perpetrators to account before
justice for their acts.
Just as clearly and forcefully, we demand that any
investigation be conducted free of any obstacles and
based on the norms, principles and procedures set forth
by the International Civil Aviation Organization and
other international procedures on civil aviation.
By resolution 2166 (2014), the Council demands
that all military activities cease around the area of the
incident and that a safe environment be established in
the area to provide access to investigators.
Argentina welcomes all the efforts being made
by various States and organizations with a view to
coordinating the various steps required for an impartial
and coherent international investigation process.
We would also like to highlight the cooperation
offered by the Secretary-General. In the resolution, the
Council calls on him to identify possible options for the
10/18 14-47582
S/PV.7221 Ukraine 21/07/2014
Ukranian territory and thus could not have been under
rebel control.
Let us not forget that an armed clash in the area of
the crash site was the reason for the 17 July incident.
Today’s priority is to put a swift end to clashes and
violence and to establish peaceful negotiations on the
basis of the 17 April Geneva declaration and the 2 July
Berlin statement. We continue to fully participate in
that effort.
I was going to conclude there, but I have an
additional comment to make.
I had thought that today’s meeting would not have
been controversial. However, the representative of
the United States opted for a literary track. Perhaps
Washington does not know about the efforts that Russia
has made in the context of the contact group, among
others, to ensure that international experts can go to
the area of the crash as soon as possible. If that is so,
then the American Embassy should be better informed.
Indeed, there is no need to turn the discussion of this
tragedy into a farce.
Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): The international
community has been in painful shock since the downing
of Malaysian Airlines Flight 17 in the Donetsk oblast
of Ukraine on Thursday. Having heard the statements
today, I believe all of us are still in a state of disbelief.
Ukrainian and international investigators and
observers of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) have been impeded
by illegal armed groups from securing, investigating
and collecting evidence at the crash site. Black boxes
apparently remain in the hands of armed terrorists.
Inexplicably, tampering with evidence has been taking
place. Only today, after sustained pressure on the
Russian authorities, were OSCE observers allowed
access to the site.
By depriving 298 loved ones, including 80 children,
of the right to live, this tragedy has touched us all. The
Government of Lithuania extends its deepest sympathy
and condolences and shares the grief of all those
families in this time of bereavement.
The remains of the victims must be treated with
dignity and be returned to the families as soon as
possible.
In the face of this unjustifiable incident, we look
forward to a thorough and independent international
Russian military personnel and civilian bodies have
already received the necessary instructions. We are
ready to provide experts to participate and carry out
investigations.
However, it is not the time for snap conclusions
or political statements. What is happening today is
absolutely inadmissible. It seems that Kyiv is attempting
to draw on the shock of the international community in
the light of the downing of Flight MH-17 in order to
step up its punitive operations in the eastern part of
the country. Indiscriminate artillery and air strikes
are targeting cities and killing civilians. We would
like to ask those Council members that affirmed in
this Chamber that Kyiv would act with “restraint” to
explain the strange meaning they assign to that word.
We understand how the people who lost family
and friends feel. Russia found itself in a similar
tragic situation in October 2001 when, in the skies
over the Black Sea, an anti-aircraft missile downed
a Russian passenger flight flying from Tel Aviv to
Novosibirsk. Seventy-eight people aboard were killed.
The circumstances became clear immediately after
the accident and were confirmed by independent
international experts. However, to this day Ukraine
rejects its legal responsibility in that regard. Given that
record, it would be quite reckless to give Kyiv a leading
role in conducting an international investigation into
the 17 July incident.
In the course of the investigation, Ukraine will
have to answer several questions with regard to the
activities of its air traffic controllers and the reason that
a Ukrainian Buk missile system was in the area directly
controlled by rebels. Why was it that, immediately
following the downing of the flight, that missile
battery was hastily removed from the area? Why was
Ukrainian anti-aircraft radar working at maximum
capacity on 17 July? Those are some of the questions
raised by Russia’s Ministry of Defence, about which
international investigators will have to be informed.
Up to now, Kyiv has provided doctored evidence to
the Security Council — for example, the controversial
recordings of the radio communications involving rebel
commanders, which seem to have been altered to refer
to negotiations that took place before 17 July. Ukraine’s
Minister for Internal Affairs put forward a video
that somehow showed a surface-to-air Buk system
on Russian territory, but which was in fact filmed on
14-47582 11/18
21/07/2014 Ukraine S/PV.7221
Chad commends Australia on its initiative. We
also welcome the consensus among all the members
of the Security Council with regard to resolution 2166
(2014), which we have just adopted. We also welcome
the commitment and resolute determination of the
Council to give an effective and appropriate response
commensurate with this tragedy.
By sponsoring and voting in favour of this
resolution, Chad hopes that full light will be shed on
this heinous crime, which has taken nearly 300 innocent
lives. In that connection, Chad demands guaranteed
unhindered access to the crash and for the security of
the international experts on the ground, so that they can
fully independently and with complete transparency
carry out the investigation under the authority of the
Government of Ukraine, the International Civil Aviation
Organization, the Netherlands and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. We underscore
the need to safeguard the integrity of the crash site, so
as to make it possible for the investigation to deliver the
results expected of it.
The perpetrators of this tragedy must be identified
and brought to justice. All the States Members of the
United Nations must cooperate in establishing the facts
and ascribing responsibility.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Rwanda.
First of all, I would like to thank Australia for
introducing resolution 2166 (2014), on the shooting
down of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17. I would
also like to take this opportunity to acknowledge the
presence among us of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Australia, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
European Affairs of Luxembourg and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands. There is no doubt
that this incident has shocked the world and taxed us
all, in particular the families and nations grieving
their loved ones. I take this opportunity to once again
offer the deepest sympathies and condolences of the
President and the people of Rwanda to the families and
to the Governments and compatriots of the 298 victims.
Rwanda co-sponsored and voted in favour of
resolution 2166 (2014) primarily because, as a matter
of principle, the deceased and their families must be
accorded the utmost respect and the dignity that they
deserve. We believe also that it is important that
the facts surrounding the downing of this plane be
investigation in accordance with international civil
aviation guidelines. The perpetrators of this despicable
crime must be brought to justice. Impunity will not go
unpunished.
We welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2166 (2014) today. Thirteen Council members, including
Lithuania, sponsored the resolution. The resolution
requests the Secretary-General to report to the Council
on the relevant developments and to identify options for
providing United Nations support to the investigation.
We ask the Secretary-General to do that as soon as
possible.
We commend Ukraine for its enormous efforts to
convene an objective, transparent and full investigation.
We commend the announcement by Ukrainian President
Petro Poroshenko of an immediate ceasefire within a
40-kilometre radius around the crash site. Do we expect
a similar announcement from illegally armed groups
and their backers?
The responsibility for the downing of Flight
MH-17 lies with those who have been orchestrating the
increasing flow of foreign fighters, arms and heavy
military equipment to the east of Ukraine. That is part
of the armed aggression.
Lithuania urges Russia to unequivocally distance
itself from any kind of direct or indirect support to
terrorists, separatists and foreign fighters in eastern
Ukraine.
The ongoing illegal criminal activities by the so-
called Luhansk People’s Republic and Donetsk People’s
Republic are appalling. The numbers of civilians killed,
injured or evicted increase every day. Armed gangs do
not care about civilians in Donetsk and Luhansk, their
human rights or their welfare. Both groups are headed
for the terror list.
Tomorrow the Foreign Ministers of European Union
will consider additional measures against those stoking
the conflict in Ukraine. We urge States to stop military
cooperation with Russia until Russia unequivocally
commits to the peace, security and stability of its
neighbours, including Ukraine.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I welcome the
presence among us of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of Australia, Luxembourg and the Netherlands.
Chad reiterates its deepest condolences to the
families of the 298 victims and to the States that lost
citizens in the crash.
12/18 14-47582
S/PV.7221 Ukraine 21/07/2014
The demise of almost 200 of my compatriots has
left a hole in the heart of the Dutch nation, and it has
caused grief, anger and despair — grief at the loss of
loved ones, anger at the outrage of the downing of a
civilian airplane, and despair after witnessing the
excruciatingly slow process of securing the crash site
and recovering the remains of the victims.
It is fitting that the Council should take a position
on this matter, and I welcome the adoption of today’s
resolution 2166 (2014), which was submitted by
Australia and which the Netherlands co-sponsored. I
thank the countries that expressed support for it, and
I particularly want to thank Julie Bishop personally.
Julie, we are in this together.
For the Netherlands, one priority clearly stands
out above all others: bring the victims’ remains home.
It is a matter of human decency that remains should
be treated with respect and that recovering victims’
remains should be done without any delay.
In the last couple of days, we have received very
disturbing reports of bodies being moved about and
looted for their possessions. Just for one minute — and
hereIaddressyounotasrepresentativesofyourcountries
but as husbands and wives, fathers and mothers — just
imagine that you first get the news that your husband
was killed, and then within two or three days you see
images of some thug removing the wedding band from
his hand. Just imagine that this could be your spouse.
To my dying day I will not be able to understand how it
could have taken so much time for the rescue workers
to be allowed to do their difficult jobs and how human
remains could have been used in a political game. If
someone here around the table talks about a political
game, this is a political game that has been played with
human remains, and it is despicable. I hope that the
world will not have to witness this again any time in
future.
Images of children’s toys being tossed around,
luggage being opened and passports — including
children’s passports — being shown on television are
turning the grief and mourning of a whole nation into
anger. We demand unimpeded access to the terrain.
We demand respectful treatment of the crash site. We
demand dignity for the victims and the multitudes who
mourn their loss.
I call on the international community, on the
Security Council, on anyone with influence on the
situation on the ground: allow us to bring the victims’
established and that the perpetrators of this heinous
crime be identified and brought to justice.
We were extremely troubled at the fact that separatist
groups in eastern Ukraine have been obstructing
and denying access to the crash site, not to mention
removing bodies and the material elements necessary
for the investigation. We condemn this behaviour in the
strongest terms.
Let me recall that resolution 2166 (2014), which
we just adopted, supports efforts to establish a full,
thorough and independent international investigation
into the incident, in accordance with international civil
aviation guidelines. The resolution further demands
that the armed groups in control of the crash site and
the surrounding area refrain from any actions that may
compromise the integrity of the site. In that regard, we
urge the separatists to fully implement, without excuses
or preconditions, their commitment made on 17 July in
a videoconference with the Trilateral Contact Group.
Finally, Rwanda reiterates its call on the separatist
groups in eastern Ukraine to respect the unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine, to
adhere to a sustainable ceasefire, as requested by the
2 July joint declaration by the Foreign Ministers of
Ukraine, the Russian Federation, France and Germany,
and to engage in a political dialogue with the Ukrainian
Government based on President Poroshenko’s peace
plan.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Minister
Franciscus Timmermans, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
Mr. Timmermans (Netherlands): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for allowing me to speak here today.
We are here to discuss a tragedy: the downing of a
commercialairlinerandthedeathof298innocentpeople.
Men, women and a staggering number of children lost
their lives on their way to their holiday destinations,
homes, loved ones or international obligations such as
the important HIV/AIDS conference in Australia. Since
Thursday, I have been thinking how horrible must have
been the final moments of their lives, when they knew
the plane was going down. Did they lock hands with
their loved ones, did they hold their children close to
their hearts, did they look each other in the eyes, one
final time, in a wordless goodbye? We will never know.
14-47582 13/18
21/07/2014 Ukraine S/PV.7221
taken by the international community, in particular the
United Nations system and its mechanisms, towards
addressing the many questions raised by the downing
of Flight MH-17. I wish to underscore that no number of
measures will ever compensate or assuage the grief and
suffering of the families and loved ones of the victims
who were on board Flight MH-17. It is incumbent
upon us, as members of the United Nations family, to
honour the victims by undertaking a full, thorough and
independent investigation into the downing of Flight
MH-17.
Last Friday, during the Council’s emergency
meeting on Ukraine (see S/PV.7219), I informed the
Council that Malaysia would immediately dispatch a
team to Kyiv with a view to assisting in the investigation
of Flight MH-17. That team arrived in Kyiv on Saturday,
19 July. The Malaysian team in Kyiv has joined other
national teams from the Netherlands, the United
Kingdom and the United States in what is known as the
joint international investigation team.
Malaysia regrets to note that, as of today, the joint
international investigation team has yet to be given
full access to the crash site. Malaysia finds that lack
of full access unacceptable and reiterates its call on all
States and actors in the region to cooperate fully in the
conduct of the international investigation, including by
being given immediate and unrestricted access to the
crash site. It also calls for full guarantees to be provided
for the safety and security of the investigation teams.
At the same time, all parties must exert all efforts
to preserve the integrity of the crash site with a view
to facilitating the work of the investigation teams.
Such guarantees must also extend to the dignified and
respectful treatment of the bodies and remains of the
victims. For Malaysia, one of the key mission priorities
of our investigation team is the recovery, identification
and repatriation of the bodies and remains of the
victims. That is to ensure that their families and loved
ones can have closure and that the victims are accorded
the dignity of a proper burial.
Flight MH-I7 was a civilian airliner. If it is
subsequently established that the plane was indeed shot
down, we demand that those responsible for downing
the plane be held to account and be swiftly brought to
justice. We believe that the current resolution paves the
way for such efforts and, as such, we firmly supported
it by co-sponsoring resolution 2166 (2014). We now
look forward to its full implementation by all concerned
parties.
remains home to their loved ones without any further
delay. They deserve to be home.
As we are currently taking the lead in the forensic
examination of the human remains, I pledge that the
Netherlands will do its utmost to make sure that all
remains will be identified and returned home, wherever
that home may be. We will work intensively with all
countries and international organizations involved to
make this happen as soon as possible.
I also welcome the setting up of a proper
investigation into the cause of the tragedy of MH-17,
as envisaged in today’s resolution. The Netherlands
has agreed to assume a leading role in such an
investigation, in close cooperation with the relevant
countries, the United Nations and the International
Civil Aviation Organization. I am fully aware of the
great responsibility we now take upon ourselves, and
I give my personal commitment that we will discharge
this responsibility to the best of our abilities.
As far as the safety and security of the site and the
international investigators is concerned, I underline the
responsibility that the Security Council took upon itself
with today’s resolution to take additional measures if
circumstances so require.
Once the investigation ascertains who was
responsible for the downing of Flight MH-17,
accountability and justice must be pursued and
delivered. We owe it to the victims; we owe it to justice;
we owe it to humanity. Please, provide full cooperation
so that justice can be served. We will not rest until all
facts are known and justice has been served.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I wish to acknowledge
the presence of the Foreign Minsiters of Australia,
Luxembourg and the Netherlands.
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for giving my
delegation the opportunity to address the Council
at this point in time. I also wish to thank all Council
members, in particular the delegation of Australia, for
their efforts in coordinating and presenting resolution
2166 (2014). We welcome its unanimous adoption by
the Security Council today.
As one of the countries most severely affected by
the tragedy of Flight MH-17, Malaysia attaches great
importance to the resolution. For my delegation, the
resolution lays the groundwork for the approach to be
14/18 14-47582
S/PV.7221 Ukraine 21/07/2014
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): I thank the Council for
having convened this meeting. I would like to reiterate
our deeepest condolences to the families and friends
of those who were killed. Today, all of Ukraine is
mourning. Ukraine is approaching the embassies of
the Netherlands, Malaysia. Australia, Indonesia, the
United Kingdom, Germany, Belgium, the Philippines
and Canada in order to lay flowers and to express its
sorrow.
We would like to thank the delegation of Australia
for having proposed resolution 2166 (2014) on the
investigation of the downing of the civilian aircraft
on an international flight, Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-17, in the Donetsk region of Ukraine, which the
delegation of Ukraine co-sponsored. We believe that
the resolution will help to facilitate a full, thorough
and independent international investigation into the
incident in accordance with international civil aviation
guidelines.
Having shown our utmost openness, the same
day, immediately following the crash, Ukraine
invited the International Civil Aviation Organization,
INTERPOL and representatives of all countries that
lost their nationals in the tragedy, as well as the Russian
Federation, to participate in the investigation. Some of
them have already arrived in Ukraine and started their
work in Kharkiv.
President Poroshenko gave the order that all military
activities immediately cease in the 40 kilometre zone
surrounding the crash site to allow for the security and
safety of the international investigation. We therefore
call on the Russian Federation to use all its influence
on the pro-Russian armed groups operating illegally in
the Donetsk region in order to stop military activities
on their side and ensure secure access to the crash site.
We assume that the investigation should be allowed to
establish not only the technical cause of the crash but
also the other important circumstances, namely, who
had actually fired the missile and how the high-precision
long-range weapons got into the hands of illegal armed
groups. Where did the weapons come from?
In accordance with the Chicago Convention on
International Civil Aviation, as was mentioned in the
statement by the representative of France, Ukraine has
a right to head the investigation procedure. It is also
our right to share that leadership. The Prime Minister
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): The tragedy of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17 has left us all shocked and in
deep sadness. We are all in mourning. However, the
grief is even greater for the families and friends who
are dealing with the loss of their loved ones. As the
struggle to understand the loss of so many innocent
lives in the crash of Flight MH-17 continues, witnessing
the current situation, especially for the families of the
victims, is deeply painful. We share their pain and their
sorrow.
Since the incident, we have seen various initiatives
and efforts undertaken by many countries to investigate
the incident, which we greatly welcome. Indonesia
wishes to emphasize that, even when it comes to
humanitarian tragedies, all parties must cooperate.
In that regard, they should collaborate and assist the
peoples and Governments of the victims’ countries of
origin. We therefore welcome the adoption of resolution
2166 (2014), which Indonesia co-sponsored, on this
particular issue. In that regard, we also commend
Australia for taking the initiative.
Our delegation is pleased that the Council, through
the resolution, demands full and unrestricted access to
the crash site and surrounding area for the appropriate
parties and supports a full, thorough and independent
international investigation into the incident. For
Indonesia, as well as the rest of the international
community, it is also important for the evacuation
of the victims’ bodies to be treated in a dignified,
respectful and professional manner and to ensure that
the process begins immediately. We also underscore
that the victims’ bodies must be returned home without
any further delay.
Indonesia reiterates its strong support and assistance
for the investigation process, including by joining the
mission to help identify the victims of Flight MH-17.
As the tragic and wanton loss of life is felt around the
world, we also demand that those responsible for that
inhuman incident be held accountable for their heinous
crime. We are aware that such a process will not bring
back the daughters, sons, mothers, fathers, sisters,
brothers or friends of the families who are struggling
to cope with their immeasurable loss. However, justice
must be served and we urge all concerned countries and
entities to fully play their role to ensure that that, along
with the other requirements stated in the resolution,
happens.
14-47582 15/18
21/07/2014 Ukraine S/PV.7221
Ukraine and the international community to stop.
Although officials in Moscow have constantly and
tirelessly insisted that they were not involved in the
situation in Donbass region, the irrefutable facts clearly
indicate the opposite.
Russian citizens are members of the leadership of
the terrorist groups. Heavy armaments and ammunition
continues to be supplied from the Russian side of
the State border. Just yesterday, a column of heavy
armoured battle vehicles attempted to break into
Ukraine through the border with the Russian territory
at border checkpoint Izvarino. Russia is financing the
terrorists. Numerous provocations are happening on the
Russian-Ukrainian border.
What Russia is declaring thus does not square with
its actions. Ukraine demands that the Russian side
immediately cease provocations on the State border
with Ukraine, stop hindering efforts of the Ukrainian
side and the international community to put an end to
terrorism and other violence in Donetsk and Luhansk,
which are Oblasts of Ukraine, return to President
Poroshenko’s peace plan, withdraw its forces from
the Ukrainian border and stop threatening peace and
security in our country, the region and the world as
whole.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Buffin (Belgium): Mr. President, I thank you
for giving me the floor and for allowing me to explain
the position of the Belgian Government with regard to
resolution 2166 (20140, which was adopted today and
which Belgium decided to co-sponsor. Last Friday,
before the Security Council, Belgium supported the
Australian proposal for a Security Council resolution.
We are grateful to Australia for preparing the text that
was adopted today and would like to thank all countries
that expressed support for it.
Belgium has condemned in the strongest terms the
downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17. Belgium
reiterates its call of last Friday for an immediate, full,
thorough and independent international investigation,
led by Ukraine in close cooperation with the
International Civil Aviation Organization. Despite
some recent positive developments, Belgium remains
very concerned about the continued lack of full
access to the crash site. Belgium is deeply disturbed
about the reports of representatives of armed groups
meddling with wreckage, equipment, debris, personal
of Ukraine, Mr. Arseniy Yatsenyuk, stated today in
an address that Ukraine is ready to transfer the role of
coordinator in investigating the crash of the Malaysia
Airlines Boeing 777 to the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
at that country’s request. In his remarks, Prime Minister
Yatsenyuk said,
“as the side that suffered the most, the Netherlands
may lead the investigation in close coordination and
cooperation with all other parties. All Ukrainian
law enforcement bodies and international
partners are already involved in conducting an
all-encompassing, transparent and full-fledged
international investigation of the tragedy”.
We particularly strongly condemn the morally
repulsive acts committed by illegal armed groups
controlling the crash site. According to the reports
of local citizens of Alchevsk, in the Luhansk region,
valuables belonging to the victims of the plane crash
were brought by terrorists in a previously stolen
ambulance to the city, where they boasted about their
trophies — children’s bags, suitcases and foreign
currency that they managed to collect and steal
from the crash site. That demonstrates the lack of
humanity of those who call themselves “the People’s
Republic”. The fact that during the last three days the
illegal armed groups were impeding the appropriate
investigating authorities, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and others from gaining
safe, secure and unrestricted access to the crash site
and the surrounding area is proof that they are trying to
hide evidence from the international community.
Let me quote the President of Ukraine:
“Having shot down the aircraft, militants
committed three crimes — the terrorist act of
firing a missile at a civilian aircraft; offensive
mistreatment of dead bodies, particularly their
removal; and the destruction of evidence and the
hindering of the work not only of the Ukrainian
Commission of Inquiry but also of the international
experts of the International Civil Aviation
Organization Commission”.
The so-called Luhansk and Donetsk Republics must
be recognized as terrorist organizations, not only in
Ukraine, but throughout the world. Cooperation with
them must be considered a support for terrorism.
The persistence of illegal terrorist military activity
has been possible only with the Russian Federation’s
direct and overt support, despite continued calls by
16/18 14-47582
S/PV.7221 Ukraine 21/07/2014
and international law, and those responsible must be
brought to account. We specifically call on all countries
involved to act in accordance with their international
legal obligations. That means that the crash site is a
crime scene, but reports indicate that access has been
denied by local separatists and that they have removed
evidence, including the black boxes that are so critical
to air accident investigations. Now it appears that they
have been handed over, but they should never have been
touched by unauthorized personnel. Even worse has
been the removal of the bodies of victims.
We call on those people to cooperate with
international authorities immediately and unreservedly,
particularly to allow a full, safe and unfettered corridor
of access to the site. We also call on Russia to use its
influence with those groups to ensure that progress is
made, and that it is made immediately. The integrity
of the crash site must be preserved, and bodies must
be accorded proper respect, as must personal effects,
including passports. Those who loot bodies or who
play with the toys that have fallen from the hands
of children are beneath contempt. The victims are
not being treated with appropriate dignity. Such
callousness is insulting to the victims and brings
further and unnecessary suffering to grieving families.
It is utterly unacceptable. Reports that bodies are now
being removed to Amsterdam are welcome, but that is
the dignified treatment they merited days ago, not just
now.
Resolution 2166 (2014) demonstrates the
international community’s resolve that things need
to move and they need to move now. The relevant
authorities must be allowed to go about their appointed
tasks unfettered and without any interference. This
Security Council must pay close and continuing
attention to the crisis, and it must ensure that progress
is swiftly made, that human dignity is respected and
that the perpetrators of this violent criminal act are
brought to justice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): In the ill-fated
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17, the Philippines lost a
mother and her two children. The Philippines expresses
once again its most sincere condolences to the families
that lost their loved ones and to the Governments of
the victims: Australia, Belgium, Canada, Germany,
belongings and remains. Our first priority now must be
the identification and repatriation of the bodies of the
victims. We demand that this be done in a dignified,
respectful and professional manner. Belgium stands
ready to support all efforts in that regard.
We call on all parties, especially those in the region,
to use their influence on the actors on the ground to allow
for immediate access and the start of the international
investigation. The adoption by consensus of resolution
2166 (2014) today should contribute to that. We also
call for international and regional cooperation and
commend, in particular, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe for the constructive role it
has played so far.
Today is Belgian National Day, but our nation is
still in mourning for the six Belgians who lost their
lives in this terrible incident and for all the victims,
wherever it was they called home. Our special thoughts
and sympathy go to the families and friends of the 193
victims of the Netherlands, a country that is particularly
close and dear to us.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2166
(2014) by the Security Council. We were pleased to
have been a sponsor and compliment Australia on the
leadership it has shown on the issue. It was imperative
that the Council send a strong and united message that
the international investigation into the downing of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 must proceed without
delay, that the integrity of the crash site be preserved
and that respect and dignity be accorded to those who
have died. It is, as Foreign Minister Bishop has said, a
decisive step.
New Zealand strongly supports the resolution’s
call for an independent investigation led by Ukraine
in close coordination with International Civil Aviation
Organization experts and other international experts,
not least the Netherlands in the role that was outlined for
us a short time ago by Foreign Minister Timmermans.
We now appear to be in a situation where some of that
cooperation is now at hand. But we must still wait to see
the extent to which it eventuates.
There is increasing evidence that the crash of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 was not an accident,
that it was a criminal act, punishable under national
14-47582 17/18
21/07/2014 Ukraine S/PV.7221
hundred and ninety-eight lives have been tragically lost.
We are mourning the loss of four of our citizens. My
Government is profoundly grateful for the condolences
offered by so many delegations during the past few
days.
Germany is shocked over increasing evidence that
the airliner was, indeed, shot down. This would be an
outrageous crime. What is happening currently at the
crash site is unacceptable and shameful. The world
is horrified to witness the abominable circumstances
prevailing there.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 2166 (2014)
and we call on all actors to ensure that unhindered
access and security for Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe monitors and international
experts are guaranteed; that there are no further
impediments to the recovery of the bodies of victims
and their transport to Kharkiv, as proposed by the
Netherlands; that any further tampering with possible
evidence is ruled out; and that an international
investigation is started as soon as possible, leading to a
full and thorough examination. We welcome the efforts
undertaken by the Government of Ukraine to this
effect so far. We also applaud President Poroshenko’s
announcement today of a unilateral ceasefire around
the crash site — a step that must be reciprocated
immediately by the separatists.
The downing of MH-17 has added a global
dimension to the conflict in eastern Ukraine. It renders
a peaceful and negotiated resolution of the crisis even
more urgent. The conflict in eastern Ukraine must be
brought to an end. We urgently need a bilateral ceasefire
and the beginning of real negotiations. Germany
has constantly worked to further such a peaceful
solution, as demonstrated by innumerable talks and
meetings between Chancellor Merkel, Foreign Minister
Steinmeier and other senior leaders.
Unfortunately, the Russian leadership has so far
failed to discourage the separatists from their illegal
acts and to stop the infiltration of weapons, fighters
and ammunition. We expect Russia to finally bring its
influence to bear on the separatists, to prevent Russian
citizens from joining them, and to immediately take all
necessary measures to ensure effective control of the
Russian-Ukrainian border. We also expect Russia to
fully support the investigation concerning the causes
of the crash, particularly by exerting the necessary
pressure on the separatists to immediately stop
Indonesia, Malaysia, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
the United Kingdom, the United States and Viet Nam.
My delegation reiterates its condemnation of this
incident in the strongest possible terms. The Philippines
unequivocally supports calls for a full, thorough and
independent international investigation — calls that
have already been made by the Council and Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon. The investigation should
shed more light and definitive information into the
circumstances surrounding this regrettable incident so
that the perpetrators of this most offensive of acts will
be held fully accountable.
The Philippines is concerned that the integrity of
the crash site has been compromised, and in this regard
urgently calls on the parties involved to secure the
site of the crash and to grant investigators immediate
and unfettered access to the crash site so that the
investigation can commence without further delay.
The remains of the victims need to be fully recovered,
accounted for and given proper burial. We need to bring
our loved ones home. We owe it to their memories and
to their families. The perpetrators need to be identified
and held fully accountable for this most revolting of
acts. We must be united in ensuring that all necessary
actions are undertaken so that justice is finally served.
My delegation is most grateful to Foreign Minister
Julie Bishop of Australia for her leadership in preparing
a draft resolution which later, with all her contributions
and support, commanded a unanimous action by
the Council. Resolution 2166 (2014) is an important
action-oriented step towards achieving our common
goal. The Philippines fully supports the resolution.
We have co-sponsored the resolution. Indeed, we
will support all efforts to secure justice for all and to
honour the memory of the 298 irreplaceable lives in the
downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17.
We really hope that resolution 2166 (2014) will find
its fullest implementation. This unspeakable tragedy
demands complete closure.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Thoms (Germany): Let me first of all express
my sincere condolences and heartfelt sympathies to
Foreign Minister Timmermans and the people of the
Netherlands, to Foreign Minister Bishop and the people
of Australia, and to all others who had nationals,
relatives, family or friends on Flight MH-17. Two
18/18 14-47582
S/PV.7221 Ukraine 21/07/2014
and as host State to ICAO, stands ready to provide
whatever support it can towards those ends. There must
be justice. And to have justice, there must be truth.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam): I wish to
acknowledge the participation of the Foreign Ministers
of Australia, Luxembourg and the Netherlands.
I would now like to make a statement in my national
capacity that reflects the viewpoint of the Foreign
Ministers of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), as stated on 19 July.
“ASEAN member States strongly condemn
the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 in
eastern Ukraine on 17 July 2014. We express shock
at the tragic deaths of the 298 people of multiple
nationalities on board the airline.
“Flight MH-17 was flying over non-restricted
airspace, and following a flight path which had been
declared safe by the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO). It is a flight route that is
utilized by many international airlines plying the
Asia-Europe route.
“ASEAN member States underline that it is
imperative that we find out precisely what happened
to Flight MH-17. We call for a full, independent and
transparent investigation into the catastrophe. We
emphasize that investigations must not be hindered.
“ASEAN member States hereby convey our
profound sorrow and condolences to the families
and loved ones of those on board Flight MH-17.”
The President: There are no more names on the
list of speakers. Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.
destroying evidence and to give full and unfettered
access to Ukrainian and international investigators.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada): Canada mourns the
terrible loss of lives of those aboard Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17 and wholeheartedly joins the co-sponsors
of resolution 2166 (2014), which strongly condemns
the atrocity. We urge an immediate, comprehensive,
credible and unimpeded international investigation
into the event, in accordance with the guidelines set
up by the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO). Time is of the essence, and it is vital that the
pro-Russian groups currently in control of the crash
site impede neither the work of investigative teams
nor efforts to recover and repatriate the remains of the
victims.
(spoke in French)
Canada welcomes the statement issued on 17 July
by the trilateral contact group. However, declarations
are not enough. Russia and the pro-Russia militants
must match words with deeds and cooperate fully with
the investigation. The conflict in eastern Ukraine has
been both generated by and perpetrated by the Putin
regime. Evidence of Russian financial and material
support to illegal armed groups in eastern Ukraine
is both clear and compelling, and President Putin’s
continued support for those groups constitutes a threat
to international peace and security. President Putin has
the ability to end this war. He can do so by ending his
support to pro-Russian forces, ending the build-up of
troops on the Ukrainian border, withdrawing his troops
from Crimea and using Russia’s considerable influence
to broker a ceasefire.
(spoke in English)
The need for answers, for justice and for respect
for the victims’ grieving friends and family members
should unite all of us here today. Canada, as a nation
